IDEAS

FameText 1.0 (early March)
. ::gems: creating gems from the Bible and TheSuzy Trilogy
. ::data::abstract: increasingly powerful context viewer
. ::home::account: change password, customize UI
. ::home::actions pivot table of the user's actions
. export gems (via the ::home::account tab)
. delete gems (via the ::home::archive tab)
. placeholders for FameText 2.0 features
. . ::data::profile: currate the user's gems|stars 
. . ::data::library: tree view of texts added by the admin
. . creating gems from collections of gems|stars (via ::cart)
. . creating gems from existing questions or answers (via [gemcopy])
. . creating keyword search queries that show up in your ::data::profile
. . creating gems that links chunks of text to queries (via search result UI)
. . user dashboard for interacting with the admins; unsubscribing, etc.
. . adding verified email, changing username, etc. (via ::home)
. . UI for selling gemopts with standardized closing procedures
. . requesting to receive transfer of gemopts (via ::places::store)
. . viewing your gemops in the data::profile and making them public
. . dashboard for viewing internal currency balances and making trades
. . buying ad space, initially just for inviting people to follow gemops
. . paying royalties (in virtual currency to our gemopt sources of new gems)
. . affiliate program for FameText instances that sell TheSuzy Trilogy artifacts

Intermission (early April)
. LeftList and Portal views
. reverse Coins and Space tabs
. and then Action and Coins tabs too
. refactor and restructure the code base

FameText 2.0 (early June)
. fill in all the empty place holders from FaTe 1.0
. import a full library of texts from public domain sources
. make saved query results persistent (refresh results on page load)
. user bios, profile pics, and invite system (fake names allowed?)
. follow users and public facing gems|stars and gemopt content
. feed and notifications about updates and recommendations, etc.
. internal moderation dashboard (for "Suzy's" growing security team!)
. . scanning questions and answers for personally identifiable information
. . reporting public facing gemopts that include unauthorized artifacts
. . blocking and rate limiting problematic gem creation behavior
. . user story and funnel analysis; growth hacking _______!

TheSuzy Trilogy (early September)
. prepare TheSuzy photobook (of the 200 photos that make up the cover)
. weekly meeting to discuss read throughs and gem production goals
. keep updating the text and version number of the printed books
. experiment with platforms for selling printed copies
. post ebooks on Amazon, Apple, etc.
. attend art book fairs
. licensing deals
