The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of Cesare Borgia, by Raphael Sabatini

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Life of Cesare Borgia

Author: Raphael Sabatini

Posting Date: February 9, 2009 [EBook #3467]
Release Date: October, 2002
Last Updated: October 13, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CESARE BORGIA ***




Produced by John Stuart Middleton





THE LIFE OF CESARE BORGIA

Of France, Duke of Valentinois and Romagna, Prince of Andria and Venafri
Count of Dyois, Lord of Piombino, Camerino and Urbino, Gonfalonier and
Captain-General of Holy Church

A History and Some Criticisms


By Raphael Sabatini




PREFACE

This is no Chronicle of Saints. Nor yet is it a History of Devils. It is
a record of certain very human, strenuous men in a very human, strenuous
age; a lustful, flamboyant age; an age red with blood and pale with
passion at white-heat; an age of steel and velvet, of vivid colour,
dazzling light and impenetrable shadow; an age of swift movement,
pitiless violence and high endeavour, of sharp antitheses and amazing
contrasts.

To judge it from the standpoint of this calm, deliberate, and correct
century--as we conceive our own to be--is for sedate middle-age to judge
from its own standpoint the reckless, hot, passionate, lustful humours
of youth, of youth that errs grievously and achieves greatly.

So to judge that epoch collectively is manifestly wrong, a hopeless
procedure if it be our aim to understand it and to be in sympathy with
it, as it becomes broad-minded age to be tolerantly in sympathy with the
youth whose follies it perceives. Life is an ephemeral business, and
we waste too much of it in judging where it would beseem us better to
accept, that we ourselves may come to be accepted by such future ages as
may pursue the study of us.

But if it be wrong to judge a past epoch collectively by the standards
of our own time, how much more is it not wrong to single out individuals
for judgement by those same standards, after detaching them for the
purpose from the environment in which they had their being? How false
must be the conception of them thus obtained! We view the individuals so
selected through a microscope of modern focus. They appear monstrous
and abnormal, and we straight-way assume them to be monsters and
abnormalities, never considering that the fault is in the adjustment
of the instrument through which we inspect them, and that until that is
corrected others of that same past age, if similarly viewed, must appear
similarly distorted.

Hence it follows that some study of an age must ever prelude and
accompany the study of its individuals, if comprehension is to wait upon
our labours. To proceed otherwise is to judge an individual Hottentot or
South Sea Islander by the code of manners that obtains in Belgravia or
Mayfair.

Mind being the seat of the soul, and literature being the expression of
the mind, literature, it follows, is the soul of an age, the surviving
and immortal part of it; and in the literature of the Cinquecento you
shall behold for the looking the ardent, unmoral, naïve soul of this
Renaissance that was sprawling in its lusty, naked infancy and bellowing
hungrily for the pap of knowledge, and for other things. You shall
infer something of the passionate mettle of this infant: his
tempestuous mirth, his fierce rages, his simplicity, his naïveté, his
inquisitiveness, his cunning, his deceit, his cruelty, his love of
sunshine and bright gewgaws.

To realize him as he was, you need but to bethink you that this was
the age in which the Decamerone of Giovanni Boccaccio, the Facetiae of
Poggio, the Satires of Filelfo, and the Hermaphroditus of Panormitano
afforded reading-matter to both sexes. This was the age in which the
learned and erudite Lorenzo Valla--of whom more anon--wrote his famous
indictment of virginity, condemning it as against nature with arguments
of a most insidious logic. This was the age in which Casa, Archbishop
of Benevento, wrote a most singular work of erotic philosophy, which,
coming from a churchman’s pen, will leave you cold with horror should
you chance to turn its pages. This was the age of the Discovery of Man;
the pagan age which stripped Christ of His divinity to bestow it upon
Plato, so that Marsilio Ficino actually burnt an altar-lamp before an
image of the Greek by whose teachings--in common with so many scholars
of his day--he sought to inform himself.

It was an age that had become unable to discriminate between the merits
of the Saints of the Church and the Harlots of the Town. Therefore it
honoured both alike, extolled the carnal merits of the one in much the
same terms as were employed to extol the spiritual merits of the other.
Thus when a famous Roman courtesan departed this life in the year 1511,
at the early age of twenty-six, she was accorded a splendid funeral and
an imposing tomb in the Chapel Santa Gregoria with a tablet bearing the
following inscription:

“IMPERIA CORTISANA ROMANA QUAE DIGNA TANTO NOMINE, RARAE INTER MORTALES
FORMAE SPECIMEN DEDIT.”

It was, in short, an age so universally immoral as scarcely to be termed
immoral, since immorality may be defined as a departure from the morals
that obtain a given time and in a given place. So that whilst from
our own standpoint the Cinquecento, taken collectively, is an age of
grossest licence and immorality, from the standpoint of the Cinquecento
itself few of its individuals might with justice be branded immoral.

For the rest, it was an epoch of reaction from the Age of Chivalry:
an epoch of unbounded luxury, of the cult and worship of the beautiful
externally; an epoch that set no store by any inward virtue, by truth
or honour; an epoch that laid it down as a maxim that no inconvenient
engagement should be kept if opportunity offered to evade it.

The history of the Cinquecento is a history developed in broken pledges,
trusts dishonoured and basest treacheries, as you shall come to conclude
before you have read far in the story that is here to be set down.

In a profligate age what can you look for but profligates? Is it just,
is it reasonable, or is it even honest to take a man or a family from
such an environment, for judgement by the canons of a later epoch? Yet
is it not the method that has been most frequently adopted in dealing
with the vast subject of the Borgias?

To avoid the dangers that must wait upon that error, the history of that
House shall here be taken up with the elevation of Calixtus III to the
Papal Throne; and the reign of the four Popes immediately preceding
Roderigo Borgia--who reigned as Alexander VI--shall briefly be surveyed
that a standard may be set by which to judge the man and the family that
form the real subject of this work.

The history of this amazing Pope Alexander is yet to be written. No
attempt has been made to exhaust it here. Yet of necessity he bulks
large in these pages; for the history of his dazzling, meteoric son is
so closely interwoven with his own that it is impossible to present the
one without dealing at considerable length with the other.

The sources from which the history of the House of Borgia has been
culled are not to be examined in a preface. They are too numerous,
and they require too minute and individual a consideration that their
precise value and degree of credibility may be ascertained. Abundantly
shall such examination be made in the course of this history, and in
a measure as the need arises to cite evidence for one side or for the
other shall that evidence be sifted.

Never, perhaps, has anything more true been written of the Borgias and
their history than the matter contained in the following lines of Rawdon
Brown in his Ragguagli sulla Vita e sulle Opere di Marino Sanuto: “It
seems to me that history has made use of the House of Borgia as of
a canvas upon which to depict the turpitudes of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries.”

Materials for the work were very ready to the hand; and although they
do not signally differ from the materials out of which the histories
of half a dozen Popes of the same epoch might be compiled, they are far
more abundant in the case of the Borgia Pope, for the excellent reason
that the Borgia Pope detaches from the background of the Renaissance far
more than any of his compeers by virtue of his importance as a political
force.

In this was reason to spare for his being libelled and lampooned even
beyond the usual extravagant wont. Slanders concerning him and his son
Cesare were readily circulated, and they will generally be found
to spring from those States which had most cause for jealousy and
resentment of the Borgia might--Venice, Florence, and Milan, amongst
others.

No rancour is so bitter as political rancour--save, perhaps, religious
rancour, which we shall also trace; no warfare more unscrupulous or more
prone to use the insidious weapons of slander than political warfare.
Of this such striking instances abound in our own time that there can
scarce be the need to labour the point. And from the form taken by such
slanders as are circulated in our own sedate and moderate epoch may be
conceived what might be said by political opponents in a fierce age that
knew no pudency and no restraint. All this in its proper place shall be
more closely examined.

For many of the charges brought against the House of Borgia some
testimony exists; for many others--and these are the more lurid,
sensational, and appalling covering as they do rape and murder,
adultery, incest, and the sin of the Cities of the Plain--no single
grain of real evidence is forthcoming. Indeed, at this time of day
evidence is no longer called for where the sins of the Borgias
are concerned. Oft-reiterated assertion has usurped the place of
evidence--for a lie sufficiently repeated comes to be credited by its
very utterer. And meanwhile the calumny has sped from tongue to tongue,
from pen to pen, gathering matter as it goes. The world absorbs the
stories; it devours them greedily so they be sensational, and writers
well aware of this have been pandering to that morbid appetite for some
centuries now with this subject of the Borgias. A salted, piquant tale
of vice, a ghastly story of moral turpitude and physical corruption,
a hair-raising narrative of horrors and abominations--these are the
stock-in-trade of the sensation-monger. With the authenticity of the
matters he retails such a one has no concern. “Se non é vero é ben
trovato,” is his motto, and in his heart the sensation-monger--of
whatsoever age--rather hopes the thing be true. He will certainly
make his public so believe it; for to discredit it would be to lose
nine-tenths of its sensational value. So he trims and adjusts his wares,
adds a touch or two of colour and what else he accounts necessary
to heighten their air of authenticity, to dissemble any peeping
spuriousness.

A form of hypnosis accompanies your study of the subject--a suggestion
that what is so positively and repeatedly stated must of necessity be
true, must of necessity have been proved by irrefutable evidence at some
time or other. So much you take for granted--for matters which began
their existence perhaps as tentative hypotheses have imperceptibly
developed into established facts.

Occasionally it happens that we find some such sentence as the following
summing up this deed or that one in the Borgia histories: “A deal of
mystery remains to be cleared up, but the Verdict of History assigns the
guilt to Cesare Borgia.”

Behold how easy it is to dispense with evidence. So that your tale
be well-salted and well-spiced, a fico for evidence! If it hangs not
overwell together in places, if there be contradictions, lacunae, or
openings for doubt, fling the Verdict of History into the gap, and so
strike any questioner into silence.

So far have matters gone in this connection that who undertakes to set
down to-day the history of Cesare Borgia, with intent to do just and
honest work, must find it impossible to tell a plain and straightforward
tale--to present him not as a villain of melodrama, not a monster,
ludicrous, grotesque, impossible, but as human being, a cold, relentless
egotist, it is true, using men for his own ends, terrible and even
treacherous in his reprisals, swift as a panther and as cruel where his
anger was aroused, yet with certain elements of greatness: a splendid
soldier, an unrivalled administrator, a man pre-eminently just, if
merciless in that same justice.

To present Cesare Borgia thus in a plain straightforward tale at this
time of day, would be to provoke the scorn and derision of those who
have made his acquaintance in the pages of that eminent German scholar,
Ferdinand Gregorovius, and of some other writers not quite so eminent
yet eminent enough to serve serious consideration. Hence has it been
necessary to examine at close quarters the findings of these great ones,
and to present certain criticisms of those same findings. The author is
overwhelmingly conscious of the invidious quality of that task; but he
is no less conscious of its inevitability if this tale is to be told at
all.

Whilst the actual sources of historical evidence shall be examined in
the course of this narrative, it may be well to examine at this stage
the sources of the popular conceptions of the Borgias, since there will
be no occasion later to allude to them.

Without entering here into a dissertation upon the historical romance,
it may be said that in proper hands it has been and should continue to
be one of the most valued and valuable expressions of the literary art.
To render and maintain it so, however, it is necessary that certain
well-defined limits should be set upon the licence which its writers
are to enjoy; it is necessary that the work should be honest work; that
preparation for it should be made by a sound, painstaking study of the
period to be represented, to the end that a true impression may first be
formed and then conveyed. Thus, considering how much more far-reaching
is the novel than any other form of literature, the good results that
must wait upon such endeavours are beyond question. The neglect of
them--the distortion of character to suit the romancer’s ends, the like
distortion of historical facts, the gross anachronisms arising out of
a lack of study, have done much to bring the historical romance into
disrepute. Many writers frankly make no pretence--leastways none that
can be discerned--of aiming at historical precision; others, however,
invest their work with a spurious scholarliness, go the length of citing
authorities to support the point of view which they have taken, and
which they lay before you as the fruit of strenuous lucubrations.

These are the dangerous ones, and of this type is Victor Hugo’s famous
tragedy Lucrezia Borgia, a work to which perhaps more than to any other
(not excepting Les Borgias in Crimes Célèbres of Alexandre Dumas) is due
the popular conception that prevails to-day of Cesare Borgia’s sister.

It is questionable whether anything has ever flowed from a distinguished
pen in which so many licences have been taken with the history of
individuals and of an epoch; in which there is so rich a crop of crude,
transpontine absurdities and flagrant, impossible anachronisms. Victor
Hugo was a writer of rare gifts, a fertile romancer and a great poet,
and it may be unjust to censure him for having taken the fullest
advantages of the licences conceded to both. But it would be difficult
to censure him too harshly for having--in his Lucrezia Borgia--struck a
pose of scholarliness, for having pretended and maintained that his work
was honest work founded upon the study of historical evidences. With
that piece of charlatanism he deceived the great mass of the unlettered
of France and of all Europe into believing that in his tragedy he
presented the true Lucrezia Borgia.

“If you do not believe me,” he declared, “read Tommaso Tommasi, read the
Diary of Burchard.”

Read, then, that Diary, extending over a period of twenty-three years,
from 1483 to 1506, of the Master of Ceremonies of the Vatican (which
largely contributes the groundwork of the present history), and the one
conclusion to which you will be forced is that Victor Hugo himself had
never read it, else he would have hesitated to bid you refer to a work
which does not support a single line that he has written.

As for Tommaso Tommasi--oh, the danger of a little learning! Into what
quagmires does it not lead those who flaunt it to impress you!

Tommasi’s place among historians is on precisely the same plane as
Alexandre Dumas’s. His Vita di Cesare Borgia is on the same historical
level as Les Borgias, much of which it supplied. Like Crimes Célèbres,
Tommasi’s book is invested with a certain air of being a narrative of
sober fact; but like Crimes Célèbres, it is none the less a work of
fiction.

This Tommaso Tommasi, whose real name was Gregorio Leti--and it is under
this that such works of his as are reprinted are published nowadays--was
a most prolific author of the seventeenth century, who, having turned
Calvinist, vented in his writings a mordacious hatred of the Papacy and
of the religion from which he had seceded. His Life of Cesare Borgia was
published in 1670. It enjoyed a considerable vogue, was translated into
French, and has been the chief source from which many writers of fiction
and some writers of “fact” have drawn for subsequent work to carry
forward the ceaseless defamation of the Borgias.

History should be as inexorable as Divine Justice. Before we admit
facts, not only should we call for evidence and analyse it when it is
forthcoming, but the very sources of such evidence should be examined,
that, as far as possible, we may ascertain what degree of credit they
deserve. In the study of the history of the Borgias, we repeat, there
has been too much acceptance without question, too much taking
for granted of matters whose incredibility frequently touches and
occasionally oversteps the confines of the impossible.

One man knew Cesare Borgia better, perhaps, than did any other
contemporary, of the many who have left more or less valuable records;
for the mind of that man was the acutest of its age, one of the acutest
Italy and the world have ever known. That man was Niccolô Macchiavelli,
Secretary of State to the Signory of Florence. He owed no benefits to
Cesare; he was the ambassador of a power that was ever inimical to the
Borgias; so that it is not to be dreamt that his judgement suffered from
any bias in Cesare’s favour. Yet he accounted Cesare Borgia--as we shall
see--the incarnation of an ideal conqueror and ruler; he took Cesare
Borgia as the model for his famous work The Prince, written as a grammar
of statecraft for the instruction in the art of government of that
weakling Giuliano de’Medici.

Macchiavelli pronounces upon Cesare Borgia the following verdict:

“If all the actions of the duke are taken into consideration, it will
be seen how great were the foundations he had laid to future power. Upon
these I do not think it superfluous to discourse, because I should not
know what better precept to lay before a new prince than the example of
his actions; and if success did not wait upon what dispositions he
had made, that was through no fault of his own, but the result of an
extraordinary and extreme malignity of fortune.”

In its proper place shall be considered what else Macchiavelli had to
say of Cesare Borgia and what to report of events that he witnessed
connected with Cesare Borgia’s career.

Meanwhile, the above summary of Macchiavelli’s judgement is put forward
as a justification for the writing of this book, which has for scope to
present to you the Cesare Borgia who served as the model for The Prince.

Before doing so, however, there is the rise of the House of Borgia to be
traced, and in the first two of the four books into which this history
will be divided it is Alexander VI, rather than his son, who will hold
the centre of the stage.

If the author has a mercy to crave of his critics, it is that they
will not impute it to him that he has set out with the express aim of
“whitewashing”--as the term goes--the family of Borgia. To whitewash is
to overlay, to mask the original fabric under a superadded surface. Too
much superadding has there been here already. By your leave, all
shall be stripped away. The grime shall be removed and the foulness of
inference, of surmise, of deliberate and cold-blooded malice, with which
centuries of scribblers, idle, fantastic, sensational, or venal, have
coated the substance of known facts.

But the grime shall be preserved and analysed side by side with the
actual substance, that you may judge if out of zeal to remove the former
any of the latter shall have been included in the scraping.

The author expresses his indebtedness to the following works which,
amongst others, have been studied for the purposes of the present
history:

  Alvisi, Odoardo, Cesare Borgia, Duca di Romagna.  Imola, 1878.
  Auton, Jean d’, Chroniques de Louis XII (Soc. de l’Hist. de France).
      Paris, 1889.
  Baldi, Bernardino, Della Vita e Fatti di Guidobaldo.  Milano, 1821.
  Barthélemy, Charles, Erreurs et Mensonges Historiques.  Paris, 1873.
  Bernardi, Andrea, Cronache Forlivese, 1476-1517.  Bologna, 1897.
  Bonnaffé, Edmond, Inventaire de la Duchesse de Valentinois, Paris,
      1878.
  Bonoli, Paolo, Istorie della Città di Forli.  Forli, 1661.
  Bourdeilles, Pierre, Vie des Hommes Illustres.  Leyde, 1666.
  Brown, Rawdon, Ragguagli Sulla Vita e sulle Opere di Marino Sanuto.
      Venezia, 1837.
  Buonaccorsi, Biagio, Diario.  Firenze, 1568.
  Burchard, Joannes, Diarium, sive Rerum Urbanarum Commentarii.
     (Edited by L. Thuasne.) Paris, 1885.
  Burckhardt, Jacob, Der Cultur der Renaissance in Italien.  Basel, 1860.
  Castiglione, Baldassare, Il Cortigiano.  Firenze, 1885.
  Chapelles, Grillon des, Esquisses Biographiques.  Paris, 1862.
  Cerri, Domenico, Borgia.  Tonino, 1857.
  Clementini, Cesare, Raccolto Istorico delle Fondatione di Rimino.
      Rimini, 1617.
  Corio, Bernardino, Storia di Milano.  Milano, 1885.
  Corvo, Baron, Chronicles of the House of Borgia.  London, 1901.
  Espinois, Henri de l’, Le Pape Alexandre VI (in the Revue des Questions
      Historiques, Vol. XXIX).  Paris, 1881.
  Giovio, Paolo, La Vita di Dicenove Uomini Illustri.  Venetia, 1561.
  Giovio, Paolo, Delle Istorie del Suo Tempo.  Venetia, 1608.
  Giustiniani, Antonio, Dispacci, 1502-1505.  (Edited by Pasquale Villari.)
      Firenze, 1876.
  Granata, F., Storia Civile di Capua.  1752.
  Gregorovius, Ferdinand, Geschichte der Stadt Rom im Mittelalter.
      Stuttgart, 1889.
  Gregorovius, Ferdinand, Lacrezia Borgia (Italian translation).  Firenze,
      1855.
  Guicciardini, Francesco, Istoria d’Italia.  Milan, 1803.
  Guingené, P. L., Histoire Littéraire d’Italie.  Milano, 1820.
  Infessura, Stefano, Diarum Rerum Romanum.  (Edited by 0. Tommassini.)
      Roma, 1887.
  Leonetti, A., Papa Alessandro VI.  Bologna, 1880.
  Leti, Gregorio (“Tommaso Tommasi”), Vita di Cesare Borgia, Milano, 1851.
  Lucaire, Achille, Alain le Grand, Sire d’Albret.  Paris, 1877.
  Macchiavelli, Niccolô, Il Principe.  Torino, 1853.
  Macchiavelli, Niccolô, Le Istorie Fiorentine.  Firenze, 1848.
  Macchiavelli, Niccolô, Opere Minori.  Firenze, 1852.
  Matarazzo, Francesco, Cronaca della Città di Perugia, 1492-1503.
      (Edited by F. Bonaini and F. Polidori.) In Archivio Storico
      Italiano, Firenze, 1851.
  Panvinio, Onofrio, Le Vite dei Pontefici.  Venezia, 1730.
  Pascale, Aq., Racconto del Sacco di Capova.  Napoli, 1632.
  Righi, B., Annali di Faenza.  Faenza, 1841.
  Sanazzaro, Opere.  Padua, 1723.
  Sanuto Marino, Diarii, Vols. I to V. (Edited by F. Stefani.) Venice,
      1879.
  Tartt, W. M., Pandolfo Collenuccio, Memoirs connected with his life.
      1868.
  “Tommaso Tommasi” (Gregorio Leti), Vita di Cesare Borgia.  1789.
  Varchi, Benedetto, Storia Fiorentina.  Florence, 1858.
  Visari, Gustavo, Vita degli Artefici.
  Villari, Pasquale, La Storia di Girolamo Savonarola, etc.  Florence,
      1861.
  Villari, Pasquale, Niccolò Machiavelli e I suoi Tempi.  Milano, 1895.
  Yriarte, Charles, La Vie de César Borgia.  Paris, 1889.
  Yriarte, Charles, Autour des Borgia.  Paris, 1891.
  Zurita, Geronimo, Historia del Rey Don Hernando el Catolico (in Anales).
      Çaragoça, 1610.



CONTENTS



BOOK I

THE HOUSE OF THE BULL


CHAPTER

    I.  THE RISE OF THE HOUSE OF BORGIA

   II.  THE REIGNS OF SIXTUS IV AND INNOCENT VIII

  III.  ALEXANDER VI

   IV.  BORGIA ALLIANCES



BOOK II

THE BULL PASCANT

    I.  THE FRENCH INVASION

   II.  THE POPE AND THE SUPERNATURAL

  III.  THE ROMAN BARONS

   IV.  THE MURDER OF THE DUKE OF GANDIA

    V.  THE RENUNCIATION OF THE PURPLE



BOOK III

THE BULL RAMPANT

    I.  THE DUCHESS OF VALENTINOIS

   II.  THE KNELL OF THE TYRANTS

  III.  IMOLA AND FORLI

   IV.  GONFALONIER OF THE CHURCH

    V.  THE MURDER OF ALFONSO OF ARAGON

   VI.  RIMINI AND PESARO

  VII.  THE SIEGE OF FAENZA

 VIII.  ASTORRE MANFREDI

   IX.  CASTEL BOLOGNESE AND PIOMBINO

    X.  THE END OF THE HOUSE OF ARAGON

   XI.  THE LETTER TO SILVIO SAVELLI

  XII.  LUCREZIA’S THIRD MARRIAGE

 XIII.  URBINO AND CAMERINO

  XIV.  THE REVOLT OF THE CONDOTTIERI

   XV.  MACCHIAVELLI’S LEGATION

  XVI.  RAMIRO DE LORQUA

 XVII.  “THE BEAUTIFUL STRATAGEM”

 VIII.  THE ZENITH



BOOK IV

THE BULL CADENT

    I.  THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER VI

   II.  PIUS III

  III.  JULIUS II

   IV.  ATROPOS




BOOK I

THE HOUSE OF THE BULL

“Borgia stirps: BOS: atque Ceres transcendit Olympo, Cantabat nomen
saecula cuncta suum.”

Michele Ferno




CHAPTER I. THE RISE OF THE HOUSE OF BORGIA


Although the House of Borgia, which gave to the Church of Rome two popes
and at least one saint,(1) is to be traced back to the eleventh century,
claiming as it does to have its source in the Kings of Aragon, we shall
take up its history for our purposes with the birth at the city of
Xativa, in the kingdom of Valencia, on December 30, 1378, of Alonso de
Borja, the son of Don Juan Domingo de Borja and his wife Doña Francisca.

     1  St. Francisco Borgia, S.J.--great-grandson of Pope
     Alexander VI, born at Gandia, in Spain, in 1510.


To this Don Alonso de Borja is due the rise of his family to its
stupendous eminence. An able, upright, vigorous-minded man, he became a
Professor and Doctor of Jurisprudence at the University of Lerida,
and afterwards served Alfonso I of Aragon, King of Naples and the Two
Sicilies, in the capacity of secretary. This office he filled with the
distinction that was to be expected from one so peculiarly fitted for it
by the character of the studies he had pursued.

He was made Bishop of Valencia, created Cardinal in 1444, and
finally--in 1455--ascended the throne of St. Peter as Calixtus III, an
old man, enfeebled in body, but with his extraordinary vigour of mind
all unimpaired.

Calixtus proved himself as much a nepotist as many another Pope before
and since. This needs not to be dilated upon here; suffice it that
in February of 1456 he gave the scarlet hat of Cardinal-Deacon of San
Niccoló, in Carcere Tulliano, to his nephew Don Roderigo de Lanzol y
Borja.

Born in 1431 at Xativa, the son of Juana de Borja (sister of Calixtus)
and her husband Don Jofrè de Lanzol, Roderigo was in his twenty-fifth
year at the time of his being raised to the purple, and in the following
year he was further created Vice-Chancellor of Holy Church with an
annual stipend of eight thousand florins. Like his uncle he had studied
jurisprudence--at the University of Bologna--and mentally and physically
he was extraordinarily endowed.

From the pen-portraits left of him by Gasparino of Verona, and Girolamo
Porzio, we know him for a tall, handsome man with black eyes and full
lips, elegant, courtly, joyous, and choicely eloquent, of such health
and vigour and endurance that he was insensible to any fatigue. Giasone
Maino of Milan refers to his “elegant appearance, serene brow, royal
glance, a countenance that at once expresses generosity and majesty, and
the genial and heroic air with which his whole personality is invested.”
 To a similar description of him Gasparino adds that “all women upon whom
he so much as casts his eyes he moves to love him; attracting them as
the lodestone attracts iron;” which is, it must be admitted, a most
undesirable reputation in a churchman.

A modern historian(1) who uses little restraint when writing of Roderigo
Borgia says of him that “he was a man of neither much energy nor
determined will,” and further that “the firmness and energy wanting to
his character were, however, often replaced by the constancy of his evil
passions, by which he was almost blinded.” How the constancy of evil
passions can replace firmness and energy as factors of worldly success
is not readily discernible, particularly if their possessor is blinded
by them. The historical worth of the stricture may safely be left to be
measured by its logical value. For the rest, to say that Roderigo Borgia
was wanting in energy and in will is to say something to which his
whole career gives the loud and derisive lie, as will--to some extent at
least--be seen in the course of this work.

     1  Pasquale Villari in his Machiavelli i suoi Tempi


His honours as Cardinal-Deacon and Vice-Chancellor of the Holy See he
owed to his uncle; but that he maintained and constantly improved his
position--and he a foreigner, be it remembered--under the reigns of
the four succeeding Popes--Pius II, Paul II, Sixtus IV, and Innocent
VIII--until finally, six-and-twenty years after the death of Calixtus
III, he ascended, himself, the Papal Throne, can be due only to the
unconquerable energy and stupendous talents which have placed him where
he stands in history--one of the greatest forces, for good or ill, that
ever occupied St. Peter’s Chair.

Say of him that he was ambitious, worldly, greedy of power, and a prey
to carnal lusts. All these he was. But for very sanity’s sake do not let
it be said that he was wanting either in energy or in will, for he was
energy and will incarnate.

Consider that with Calixtus III’s assumption of the Tiara Rome became
the Spaniard’s happy hunting-ground, and that into the Eternal City
streamed in their hundreds the Catalan adventurers--priests, clerks,
captains of fortune, and others--who came to seek advancement at the
hands of a Catalan Pope. This Spanish invasion Rome resented. She grew
restive under it.

Roderigo’s elder brother, Don Pedro Luis de Lanzol y Borja, was made
Gonfalonier of the Church, Castellan of all pontifical fortresses
and Governor of the Patrimony of St. Peter, with the title of Duke of
Spoleto and, later, Prefect of Rome, to the displacement of an Orsini
from that office. Calixtus invested this nephew with all temporal power
that it was in the Church’s privilege to bestow, to the end that he
might use it as a basis to overset the petty tyrannies of Romagna, and
to establish a feudal claim on the Kingdom of Naples.

Here already we see more than a hint of that Borgia ambition which was
to become a byword, and the first attempt of this family to found a
dynasty for itself and a State that should endure beyond the transient
tenure of the Pontificate, an aim that was later to be carried into
actual--if ephemeral--fulfilment by Cesare Borgia.

The Italians watched this growth of Spanish power with jealous, angry
eyes. The mighty House of Orsini, angered by the supplanting of one of
its members in the Prefecture of Rome, kept its resentment warm, and
waited. When in August of 1458 Calixtus III lay dying, the Orsini seized
the chance: they incited the city to ready insurgence, and with fire and
sword they drove the Spaniards out.

Don Pedro Luis made haste to depart, contrived to avoid the Orsini, who
had made him their special quarry, and getting a boat slipped down the
Tiber to Civita Vecchia, where he died suddenly some six weeks later,
thereby considerably increasing the wealth of Roderigo, his brother and
his heir.

Roderigo’s cousin, Don Luis Juan, Cardinal-Presbyter of Santi Quattro
Coronati, another member of the family who owed his advancement to his
uncle Calixtus, thought it also expedient to withdraw from that zone of
danger to men of his nationality and name.

Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja alone remained--leastways, the only prominent
member of his house--boldly to face the enmity of the majority of the
Sacred College, which had looked with grim disfavour upon his uncle’s
nepotism. Unintimidated, he entered the Conclave for the election of a
successor to Calixtus, and there the chance which so often prefers to
bestow its favours upon him who knows how to profit by them, gave him
the opportunity to establish himself as firmly as ever at the Vatican,
and further to advance his interests.

It fell out that when the scrutiny was taken, two cardinals stood
well in votes--the brilliant, cultured Enea Silvio Bartolomeo
de’ Piccolomini, Cardinal of Siena, and the French Cardinal
d’Estouteville--though neither had attained the minimum majority
demanded. Of these two, the lead in number of votes lay with the
Cardinal of Siena, and his election therefore might be completed
by Accession--that is, by the voices of such cardinals as had not
originally voted for him--until the minimum majority, which must exceed
two-thirds, should be made up.

The Cardinal Vice-Chancellor Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja led this
accession, with the result that the Cardinal of Siena became Pontiff--as
Pius II--and was naturally enough disposed to advance the interests of
the man who had been instrumental in helping him to that eminence. Thus,
his position at the Vatican, in the very face of all hostility, became
stronger and more prominent than ever.

A letter written two years later from the Baths at Petriolo by Pius II
to Roderigo when the latter was in Siena--whither he had been sent
by his Holiness to superintend the building of the Cathedral and
the Episcopal and Piccolomini palaces--is frequently cited by way of
establishing the young prelate’s dissolute ways. It is a letter at once
stern and affectionate, and it certainly leaves no doubt as to what
manner of man was the Cardinal Vice-Chancellor in his private life, and
to what manner of unecciesiastical pursuits he inclined. It is difficult
to discover in it any grounds upon which an apologist may build.


“BELOVED SON,

“When four days ago, in the gardens of Giovanni de Bichis, were
assembled several women of Siena addicted to worldly vanity, your
worthiness, as we have learnt, little remembering the office which you
fill, was entertained by them from the seventeenth to the twenty-second
hour. For companion you had one of your colleagues, one whom his years
if not the honour of the Holy See should have reminded of his duty. From
what we have heard, dancing was unrestrainedly indulged, and not one of
love’s attractions was absent, whilst your behaviour was no different
from that which might have been looked for in any worldly youth.
Touching what happened there, modesty imposes silence. Not only the
circumstance itself, but the very name of it is unworthy in one of your
rank. The husbands, parents, brothers, and relations of these young
women were excluded, in order that your amusements should be the more
unbridled. You with a few servants undertook to direct and lead those
dances. It is said that nothing is now talked of in Siena but your
frivolity. Certain it is that here at the baths, where the concourse
of ecclesiastics and laity is great, you are the topic of the day. Our
displeasure is unutterable, since all this reflects dishonourably upon
the sacerdotal estate and office. It will be said of us that we are
enriched and promoted not to the end that we may lead blameless lives,
but that we may procure the means to indulge our pleasures. Hence the
contempt of us entertained by temporal princes and powers and the daily
sarcasms of the laity. Hence also the reproof of our own mode of life
when we attempt to reprove others. The very Vicar of Christ is involved
in this contempt, since he appears to countenance such things. You,
beloved son, have charge of the Bishopric of Valencia, the first of
Spain; you are also Vice-Chancellor of the Church; and what renders your
conduct still more blameworthy is that you are among the cardinals, with
the Pope, one of the counsellors of the Holy See. We submit it to your
own judgement whether it becomes your dignity to court young women, to
send fruit and wine to her you love, and to have no thought for anything
but pleasure. We are censured on your account; the blessed memory of
your uncle Calixtus is vituperated, since in the judgement of many
he was wrong to have conferred so many honours upon you. If you seek
excuses in your youth, you are no longer so young that you cannot
understand what duties are imposed upon you by your dignity. A cardinal
should be irreproachable, a model of moral conduct to all. And what just
cause have we for resentment when temporal princes bestow upon us titles
that are little honourable, dispute with us our possessions, and attempt
to bend us to their will? In truth it is we who inflict these wounds
upon ourselves, and it is we who occasion ourselves these troubles,
undermining more and more each day by our deeds the authority of the
Church. Our guerdon is shame in this world and condign punishment in the
next. May your prudence therefore set a restraint upon these vanities
and keep you mindful of your dignity, and prevent that you be known for
a gallant among married and unmarried women. But should similar facts
recur, we shall be compelled to signify that they have happened against
our will and to our sorrow, and our censure must be attended by your
shame. We have always loved you, and we have held you worthy of our
favour as a man of upright and honest nature. Act therefore in such
a manner that we may maintain such an opinion of you, and nothing can
better conduce to this than that you should lead a well-ordered life.
Your age, which is such as still to promise improvement, admits that we
should admonish you paternally.”

“PETRIOLO, June 11, 1460.”


Such a letter is calculated to shock us in our modern notions of a
churchman. To us this conduct on the part of a prelate is scandalous
beyond words; that it was scandalous even then is obvious from the
Pontiff’s letter; but that it was scandalous in an infinitely lesser
degree is no less obvious from the very fact that the Pontiff wrote
that letter (and in such terms) instead of incontinently unfrocking the
offender.

In considering Roderigo’s conduct, you are to consider--as has been
urged already--the age in which he lived. You are to remember that it
was an age in which the passions and the emotions wore no such masks as
they wear to-day, but went naked and knew no shame of their nudity; an
age in which personal modesty was as little studied as hypocrisy, and in
which men, wore their vices as openly as their virtues.

No amount of simple statement can convey an adequate notion of the
corrupt state of the clergy at the time. To form any just appreciation
of this, it is necessary to take a peep at some of the documents that
have survived--such a document, for instance, as that Bull of this Pope
Pius II which forbade priests from plying the trades of keeping taverns,
gaming-houses, and brothels.

Ponder also that under his successor, Sixtus IV, the tax levied upon the
courtesans of Rome enriched the pontifical coffers to the extent of
some 20,000 ducats yearly. Ponder further that when the vicar of
the libidinous Innocent VIII published in 1490 an edict against
the universal concubinage practised by the clergy, forbidding its
continuation under pain of excommunication, all that it earned him was
the severe censure of the Holy Father, who disagreed with the measure
and who straightway repealed and cancelled the edict.(1)


     1  See Burchard’s Diarium, Thuasne Edition, Vol. II. p.442
     et seq.


All this being considered, and man being admittedly a creature of his
environment, can we still pretend to horror at this Roderigo and at the
fact that being the man he was--prelate though he might be--handsome,
brilliant, courted, in the full vigour of youth, and a voluptuary by
nature, he should have succumbed to the temptations by which he was
surrounded?

One factor only could have caused him to use more restraint--the good
example of his peers. That example he most certainly had not.

Virtue is a comparative estate, when all is said; and before we can find
that Roderigo was vile, that he deserves unqualified condemnation for
his conduct, we must ascertain that he was more or less exceptional in
his licence, that he was less scrupulous than his fellows. Do we find
that? To find the contrary we do not need to go beyond the matter which
provoked that letter from the Pontiff. For we see that he was not even
alone, as an ecclesiastic, in the adventure; that he had for associate
on that amorous frolic one Giacopo Ammanati, Cardinal-Presbyter of
San Crisogno, Roderigo’s senior and an ordained priest, which--without
seeking to make undue capital out of the circumstance--we may mention
that Roderigo was not. He was a Cardinal-Deacon, be it remembered.(1) We
know that the very Pontiff who admonished these young prelates, though
now admittedly a man of saintly ways, had been a very pretty fellow
himself in his lusty young days in Siena; we know that Roderigo’s
uncle--the Calixtus to whom Pius II refers in that letter as of “blessed
memory”--had at least one acknowledged son.(2) We know that Piero and
Girolamo Riario, though styled by Pope Sixtus IV his “nephews,” were
generally recognized to be his sons.(3) And we know that the numerous
bastards of Innocent VIII--Roderigo’s immediate precursor on the
Pontifical Throne--were openly acknowledged by their father. We know, in
short, that it was the universal custom of the clergy to forget its vows
of celibacy, and to circumvent them by dispensing with the outward
form and sacrament of marriage; and we have it on the word of Pius II
himself, that “if there are good reasons for enjoining the celibacy of
the clergy, there are better and stronger for enjoining them to marry.”


     1  He was not ordained priest until 1471, after the election
     of Sixtus IV.

     2  Don Francisco de Borja, born at Valencia in 1441.

     3  Macchiavelli, Istorie Fiorentine.


What more is there to say? If we must be scandalized, let us be
scandalized by the times rather than by the man. Upon what reasonable
grounds can we demand that he should be different from his fellows; and
if we find him no different, what right or reason have we for picking
him out and rendering him the object of unparalleled obloquy?

If we are to deal justly with Roderigo Borgia, we must admit that, in
so far as his concessions to his lusts are concerned, he was a typical
churchman of his day; neither more nor less--as will presently grow
abundantly clear.

It may be objected by some that had such been the case the Pope would
not have written him such a letter as is here cited. But consider a
moment the close relations existing between them. Roderigo was the
nephew of the late Pope; in a great measure Pius II owed his election,
as we have seen, to Roderigo’s action in the Conclave. That his interest
in him apart from that was paternal and affectionate is shown in every
line of that letter. And consider further that Roderigo’s companion
is shown by that letter to be equally guilty in so far as the acts
themselves are to be weighed, guilty in a greater degree when we
remember his seniority and his actual priesthood. Yet to Cardinal
Ammanati the Pope wrote no such admonition. Is not that sufficient proof
that his admonition of Roderigo was dictated purely by his personal
affection for him?

In this same year 1460 was born to Cardinal Roderigo a son--Don Pedro
Luis de Borja--by a spinster (mulier soluta) unnamed. This son was
publicly acknowledged and cared for by the cardinal.

Seven years later--in 1467--he became the father of a daughter--Girolama
de Borja--by a spinster, whose name again does not transpire. Like Pedro
Luis she too was openly acknowledged by Cardinal Roderigo. It was widely
believed that this child’s mother was Madonna Giovanna de’ Catanei, who
soon became quite openly the cardinal’s mistress, and was maintained by
him in such state as might have become a maîtresse en titre. But, as we
shall see later, the fact of that maternity of Girolama is doubtful in
the extreme. It was never established, and it is difficult to understand
why not if it were the fact.

Meanwhile Paul II--Pietro Barbo, Cardinal of Venice--had succeeded Pius
II in 1464, and in 1471 the latter was in his turn succeeded by
the formidable Sixtus IV--Cardinal Francesco Maria della Rovere--a
Franciscan of the lowest origin, who by his energy and talents had
become general of his order and had afterwards been raised to the
dignity of the purple.

It was Cardinal Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja who, in his official capacity
of Archdeacon of Holy Church, performed the ceremony of coronation and
placed the triple crown on the head of Pope Sixtus. It is probable that
this was his last official act as Arch­deacon, for in that same year
1471, at the age of forty, he was ordained priest and consecrated Bishop
of Albano.




CHAPTER II. THE REIGNS OF SIXTUS IV AND INNOCENT VIII


The rule of Sixtus was as vigorous as it was scandalous. To say--as has
been said--that with his succession to St. Peter’s Chair came for the
Church a still sadder time than that which had preceded it, is not
altogether true. Politically, at least, Sixtus did much to strengthen
the position of the Holy See and of the Pontificate. He was not long in
giving the Roman factions a taste of his stern quality. If he employed
unscrupulous means, he employed them against unscrupulous men--on the
sound principle of similia similibus curantur--and to some extent they
were justified by the ends in view.

He found the temporal throne of the Pontiffs tottering when he ascended
it. Stefano Porcaro and his distinguished following already in 1453 had
attempted the overthrow of the pontifical authority, inspired, no doubt,
by the attacks that had been levelled against it by the erudite and
daring Lorenzo Valla.

This Valla was the distinguished translator of Homer, Herodotus, and
Thucydides, who more than any one of his epoch advanced the movement of
Greek and Latin learning, which, whilst it had the effect of arresting
the development of Italian literature, enriched Europe by opening up to
it the sources of ancient erudition, of philosophy, poetry, and literary
taste. Towards the year 1435 he drifted to the court of Alfonso of
Aragon, whose secretary he ultimately became. Some years later he
attacked the Temporal Power and urged the secularization of the States
of the Church. “Ut Papa,” he wrote, “tantum Vicarius Christi sit, et
non etiam Coesari.” In his De falso credita et ementita Constantini
Donatione, he showed that the decretals of the Donation of Constantine,
upon which rests the Pope’s claim to the Pontifical States, was an
impudent forgery, that Constantine had never had the power to give,
nor had given, Rome to the Popes, and that they had no right to govern
there. He backed up this terrible indictment by a round attack upon the
clergy, its general corruption and its practices of simony; and as a
result he fell into the hands of the Inquisition. There it might have
gone very ill with him but that King Alfonso rescued him from the
clutches of that dread priestly tribunal.

Meanwhile, he had fired his petard. If a pretext had been wanting to
warrant the taking up of arms against the Papacy, that pretext Valla had
afforded. Never was the temporal power of the Church in such danger, and
ultimately it must inevitably have succumbed but for the coming of so
strong and unscrupulous a man as Sixtus IV to stamp out the patrician
factions that were heading the hostile movement.

His election, it is generally admitted, was simoniacal; and by simony he
raised the funds necessary for his campaign to reestablish and support
the papal authority. This simony of his, says Dr. Jacob Burckhardt,
“grew to unheard-of proportions, and extended from the appointment of
cardinals down to the sale of the smallest benefice.”

Had he employed these means of raising funds for none but the purpose
of putting down the assailants of the Pontificate, a measure of
justification (political if not ecclesiastical) might be argued in his
favour. Unfortunately, having discovered these ready sources of revenue,
he continued to exploit them for purposes far less easy to condone.

As a nepotist Sixtus was almost unsurpassed in the history of the
Papacy. Four of his nephews and their aggrandizement were the particular
objects of his attentions, and two of these--as we have already
said--Piero and Girolamo Riario, were universally recognized to be his
sons.

Piero, who was a simple friar of twenty-six years of age at the time
that his father became Pope, was given the Archbishopric of Florence,
made Patriarch of Constantinople, and created Cardinal to the title of
San Sisto, with a revenue of 60,000 crowns.

We have it on the word of Cardinal Ammanati(1)--the same gentleman who,
with Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja made so scandalously merry in de Bichis’
garden at Siena--that Cardinal Riario’s luxury “exceeded all that had
been displayed by our forefathers or that can even be imagined by our
descendants”; and Macchiavelli tells us(2) that “although of very low
origin and mean rearing, no sooner had he obtained the scarlet hat than
he displayed a pride and ambition so vast that the Pontificate seemed
too small for him, and he gave a feast in Rome which would have appeared
extraordinary even for a king, the expense exceeding 20,000 florins.”

     1  In a letter to Francesco Gonzaga.

     2  Istorie Florentine.


Knowing so much, it is not difficult to understand that in one year or
less he should have dissipated 200,000 florins, and found himself in
debt to the extent of a further 60,000.

In 1473, Sixtus being at the time all but at war with Florence, this
Cardinal Riario visited Venice and Milan. In the latter State he was
planning with Duke Galeazzo Maria that the latter should become King of
Lombardy, and then assist him with money and troops to master Rome and
ascend the Papal Throne--which, it appears, Sixtus was quite willing
to yield to him--thus putting the Papacy on a hereditary basis like any
other secular State.

It is as well, perhaps, that he should have died on his return to Rome
in January of 1474--worn out by his excesses and debaucheries, say some;
of poison administered by the Venetians, say others--leaving a mass of
debts, contracted in his transactions with the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, to be cleared up by the Vicar of Christ.

His brother Girolamo, meanwhile, had married Caterina Sforza, a natural
daughter of Duke Galeazzo Maria. She brought him as her dowry the City
of Imola, and in addition to this he received from his Holiness the City
of Forli, to which end the Ordelaffi were dispossessed of it. Here again
we have a papal attempt to found a family dynasty, and an attempt that
might have been carried further under circumstances more propitious and
had not Death come to check their schemes.

The only one of the four “nephews” of Sixtus--and to this one was
imputed no nearer kinship--who was destined to make any lasting mark
in history was Giuliano della Rovere. He was raised by his uncle to the
purple with the title of San Pietro in Vincoli, and thirty-two years
later he was to become Pope (as Julius II). Of him we shall hear much in
the course of this story.

Under the pontificate of Sixtus IV the position and influence of
Cardinal Roderigo were greatly increased, for once again the Spanish
Cardinal had made the most of his opportunities. As at the election of
Pius II, so at the election of Sixtus IV it was Cardinal Roderigo who
led the act of accession which gave the new Pope his tiara, and for
this act Roderigo--in common with the Cardinals Orsini and Gonzaga who
acceded with him--was richly rewarded and advanced, receiving as his
immediate guerdon the wealthy Abbey of Subiaco.

At about this time, 1470, must have begun the relations between Cardinal
Roderigo and Giovanna Catanei, or Vannozza Catanei, as she is styled in
contemporary documents--Vannozza being a corruption or abbreviation of
Giovannozza, an affectionate form of Giovanna.

Who she was, or whence she came, are facts that have never been
ascertained. She is generally assumed to have been a Roman; but there
are no obvious grounds for the assumption, her name, for instance,
being common to many parts of Italy. And just as we have no sources of
information upon her origin, neither have we any elements from which
to paint her portrait. Gregorovius rests the probability that she was
beautiful upon the known characteristics and fastidious tastes of
the cardinal. Since it is unthinkable that such a man would have been
captivated by an ugly woman or would have been held by a stupid one,
it is fairly reasonable to conclude that she was beautiful and
ready-witted.

All that we do know of her up to the time of her liaison with Cardinal
Roderigo is that she was born on July 13, 1442, this fact being
ascertainable by a simple calculation from the elements afforded by the
inscription on her tomb in Santa Maria del Popolo:

Vix ann. LXXVI m. IV d. XII Objit anno MDXVIII XXVI, Nov.

And again, just as we know nothing of her family origin, neither have we
any evidence of what her circumstances were when she caught the magnetic
eye of Cardinal Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja--or Borgia as by now his
name, which had undergone italianization, was more generally spelled.

Infessura states in his diaries that Roderigo desiring later--as Pope
Alexander VI--to create cardinal his son by her, Cesare Borgia, he
caused false witness to be borne to the fact that Cesare was the
legitimate son of one Domenico d’Arignano, to whom he, the Pope, had
in fact married her. Guicciardini(1) makes the same statement, without,
however, mentioning name of this d’Arignano.

     1  Istoria d’Italia.


Now, bastards were by canon law excluded from the purple, and it is
probably upon this circumstance that both Infessura and Guicciardini
have built the assumption that some such means as these had been adopted
to circumvent the law, and--as so often happens in chronicles concerning
the Borgias--the assumption is straightway stated as a fact. But
there were other ways of circumventing awkward commandments, and,
unfortunately for the accuracy of these statements of Infessura and
Guicciardini, another way was taken in this instance. As early as
1480, Pope Sixtus IV had granted Cesare Borgia--in a Bull dated October
1(1)--dispensation from proving the legitimacy of his birth. This
entirely removed the necessity for any such subsequent measures as those
which are suggested by these chroniclers.

     1  See the supplement to the Appendix of Thuasne’s edition
     of Burchard’s Diarium.


Moreover, had Cardinal Roderigo desired to fasten the paternity of
Cesare on another, there was ready to his hand Vannozza’s actual
husband, Giorgio della Croce.(2) When exactly this man became her
husband is not to be ascertained. All that we know is that he was so in
1480, and that she was living with him in that year in a house in Piazza
Pizzo di Merlo (now Piazza Sforza Cesarini) not far from the house on
Banchi Vecchi which Cardinal Roderigo, as Vice-Chancellor, had converted
into a palace for himself, and a palace so sumptuous as to excite the
wonder of that magnificent age.

     2  D’Arignano is as much a fiction as the rest of
     Infessura’s story.


This Giorgio della Croce was a Milanese, under the protection of
Cardinal Roderigo, who had obtained for him a post at the Vatican as
apostolic secretary. According to some, he married him to Vannozza in
order to afford her an official husband and thus cloak his own relations
with her. It is an assumption which you will hesitate to accept. If we
know our Cardinal Roderigo at all, he was never the man to pursue his
pleasures in a hole-and-corner fashion, nor one to bethink him of a
cloak for his amusements. Had he but done so, scandalmongers would
have had less to fasten upon in their work of playing havoc with his
reputation. What is far more likely is that della Croce owed Cardinal
Roderigo’s protection and the appointment as apostolic secretary to his
own complacency in the matter of his wife’s relations with the splendid
prelate. However we look at it, the figure cut in this story by della
Croce is not heroic.

Between the years 1474 and 1476, Vannozza bore Roderigo two sons, Cesare
Borgia (afterwards Cardinal of Valencia and Duke of Valentinois), the
central figure of our story, and Giovanni Borgia (afterwards Duke of
Gandia).

Lucrezia Borgia, we know from documentary evidence before us, was born
on April 19, 1479.

But there is a mystery about the precise respective ages of Vannozza’s
two eldest sons, and we fear that at this time of day it has become
impossible to establish beyond reasonable doubt which was the firstborn;
and this in spite of the documents discovered by Gregorovius and his
assertion that they remove all doubt and enable him definitely to assert
that Giovanni was born in 1474 and Cesare in 1476.

Let us look at these documents. They are letters from ambassadors to
their masters; probably correct, and the more credible since they
happen to agree and corroborate one another; still, not so utterly and
absolutely reliable as to suffice to remove the doubts engendered by the
no less reliable documents whose evidence contradicts them.

The first letters quoted by Gregorovius are from the ambassador
Gianandrea Boccaccio to his master, the Duke of Ferrara, in 1493. In
these he mentions Cesare Borgia as being sixteen to seventeen years of
age at the time. But the very manner of writing--“sixteen to seventeen
years”--is a common way of vaguely suggesting age rather than positively
stating it. So we may pass that evidence over, as of secondary
importance.

Next is a letter from Gerardo Saraceni to the Duke of Ferrara, dated
October 26, 1501, and it is more valuable, claiming as it does to be the
relation of something which his Holiness told the writer. It is in the
post-scriptum that this ambassador says: “The Pope gave me to understand
that the said Duchess [Lucrezia Borgia] will complete twenty-two years
of age next April, and at that same time the Duke of Romagna will
complete his twenty-sixth year.”(1)


  1  “Facendomi intendere the epsa Duchessa é di etá di anni ventidui, li
quali finiranno a questo Aprile; in el qual tempo anche lo Illmo. Duca
di Romagna fornirá anni ventisei.”


This certainly fixes the year of Cesare’s birth as 1476; but we are
to remember that Saraceni is speaking of something that the Pope had
recently told him; exactly how recently does not transpire. An error
would easily be possible in so far as the age of Cesare is concerned.
In so far as the age of Lucrezia is concerned, an error is not only
possible, but has actually been committed by Saraceni. At least the age
given in his letter is wrong by one year, as we know by a legal document
drawn up in February of 1491--Lucrezia’s contract of marriage with Don
Juan Cherubin de Centelles.(2)


  2  A contract never executed.


According to this protocol in old Spanish, dated February 26, 1491,
Lucrezia completed her twelfth year on April 19, 1491,(3) which
definitely and positively gives us the date of her birth as April 19,
1479.


  3  “Item mes attenent que dita Dona Lucretia a XVIIII de Abril prop.
vinent entrará in edat de dotze anys.”


A quite extraordinary error is that made by Gregorovius when he
says that Lucrezia Borgia was born on April 18, 1480, extraordinary
considering that he made it apparently with this very protocol under his
eyes, and cites it, in fact (Document IV in the Appendix to his Lucrezia
Borgia) as his authority.

To return, however, to Cesare and Giovanni, there is yet another
evidence quoted by Gregorovius in support of his contention that the
latter was the elder and born in 1474; but it is of the same nature and
of no more, nor less, value than those already mentioned.

Worthy of more consideration in view of their greater official and
legal character are the Ossuna documents, given in the Supplement of the
Appendix in Thuasne’s edition of Burchard’s Diary, namely:


(a) October 1, 1480.--A Bull from Sixtus IV, already mentioned,
dispensing Cesare from proving his legitimacy. In this he is referred to
as in his sixth year--“in sexto tuo aetatis anno.”

This, assuming Boccaccio’s letter to be correct in the matter of April
being the month of Cesare’s birth, fixes the year of his birth as 1475.


(b) August 16, 1482.--A Bull of Sixtus IV, appointing Roderigo Borgia
administrator of Cesare’s benefices. In this he is mentioned as being
seven years of age (i.e., presumably in his eighth year), which again
gives us his birth-year as 1475.


(c) September 12, 1484.--A Bull of Sixtus IV, appointing Cesare
treasurer of the Church of Carthage. In this he is mentioned as in his
ninth year--“in nono tuo aetatis anno.” This is at variance with the
other two, and gives us 1476 as the year of his birth.

To these evidences, conflicting as they are, may be added Burchard’s
mention in his diary under date of September 12, 1491, that Cesare was
then seventeen years of age. This would make him out to have been born
in 1474.


Clearly the matter cannot definitely be settled upon such evidence as we
have. All that we can positively assert is that he was born between the
years 1474 and 1476, and we cannot, we think, do better for the purposes
of this story than assume his birth-year to have been 1475.

We know that between those same years, or in one or the other of them,
was born Giovanni Borgia; but just as the same confusion prevails with
regard to his exact age, so is it impossible to determine with any
finality whether he was Cesare’s junior or senior.

The one document that appears to us to be the most important in this
connection is that of the inscription on their mother’s tomb. This runs:

FAUSTIAE CATHANAE, CESARE VALENTINAE, JOHANNAE CANDIAE, JUFFREDO
SCYLATII, ET LUCRETIA FERRARIAE DUCIB. FILIIS NOBILI PROBITATE INSIGNI,
RELIGIONE EXIMIA, ETC., ETC.


If Giovanni was, as is claimed, the eldest of her children, why does his
name come second? If Cesare was her second son, why does his name take
the first place on that inscription?

It has been urged that if Cesare was the elder of these two, he, and not
Giovanni, would have succeeded to the Duchy of Gandia on the death of
Pedro Luis--Cardinal Roderigo’s eldest son, by an unknown mother. But
that does not follow inevitably; for it is to be remembered that Cesare
was already destined for an ecclesiastical career, and it may well be
that his father was reluctant to change his plans.

Meanwhile the turbulent reign of Sixtus IV went on, until his ambition
to increase his dominions had the result of plunging the whole of Italy
into war.

Lorenzo de’Medici had thwarted the Pope’s purposes in Romagna, coming to
the assistance of Città di Castello when this was attacked in the Pope’s
interest by the warlike Giuliano della Rovere. To avenge himself for
this, and to remove a formidable obstacle to his family’s advancement,
the Pope inspired the Pazzi conspiracy against the lives of the famous
masters of Florence. The conspiracy failed; for although Giuliano
de’Medici fell stabbed to the heart--before Christ’s altar, and at the
very moment of the elevation of the Host--Lorenzo escaped with slight
hurt, and, by the very risk to which he had been exposed, rallied the
Florentines to him more closely than ever.

Open war was the only bolt remaining in the papal quiver, and open
war he declared, preluding it by a Bull of Excommunication against the
Florentines. Naples took sides with the Pope. Venice and Milan came to
the support of Florence, whereupon Milan’s attentions were diverted to
her own affairs, Genoa being cunningly set in revolt against her.

In 1480 a peace was patched up; but it was short-lived. A few months
later war flared out again from the Holy See, against Florence this
time, and on the pretext of its having joined the Venetians against
the Pope in the late war. A complication now arose, created by the
Venetians, who seized the opportunity to forward their own ambitions and
increase their territories on the mainland, and upon a pretext of the
pettiest themselves declared war upon Ferrara. Genoa and some minor
tyrannies were drawn into the quarrel on the one side, whilst on the
other Florence, Naples, Mantua, Milan, and Bologna stood by Ferrara.
Whilst the papal forces were holding in check the Neapolitans who
sought to pass north to aid Ferrara, whilst the Roman Campagna was being
harassed by the Colonna, and Milan was engaged with Genoa, the Venetians
invested Ferrara, forced her to starvation and to yielding-point.
Thereupon the Pope, perceiving the trend of affairs, and that the only
likely profit to be derived from the campaign would lie with Venice,
suddenly changed sides that he might avoid a contingency so far removed
from all his aims.

He made a treaty with Naples, and permitted the Neapolitan army passage
through his territories, of which they availed themselves to convey
supplies to Ferrara and neutralize the siege. At the same time the Pope
excommunicated the Venetians, and urged all Italy to make war upon them.

In this fashion the campaign dragged on to every one’s disadvantage and
without any decisive battle fought, until at last the peace of Bagnolo
was concluded in August of 1484, and the opposing armies withdrew from
Ferrara.

The news of it literally killed Sixtus. When the ambassadors declared
to him the terms of the treaty he was thrown into a violent rage, and
declared the peace to be at once shameful and humiliating. The gout from
which he suffered flew to his heart, and on the following day--August
12, 1484--he died.

Two things he did during his reign to the material advantage of
the Church, however much he may have neglected the spiritual. He
strengthened her hold upon her temporal possessions and he enriched the
Vatican by the addition of the Sistine Chapel. For the decoration
of this he procured the best Tuscan talent of his day--and of many
days--and brought Alessandro Filipeppi (Botticelli), Pietro Vannuccio
(Il Perugino), and Domenico Bigordi (IL Ghirlandajo) from Florence to
adorn its walls with their frescoes.(1)


  1  The glory of the Sistine Chapel, however, is Michelangelo’s “Last
Judgement,” which was added later, in the reign of Pope Julius II
(Giuliano della Rovere).


In the last years of the reign of Pope Sixtus, Cardinal Roderigo’s
family had suffered a loss and undergone an increase.

In 1481 Vannozza bore him another son--Giuffredo Borgia, and in the
following year died his eldest son (by an unknown mother) Pedro Luis de
Borgia, who had reached the age of twenty-two and was betrothed at the
time of his decease to the Princess Maria d’Aragona.

In January of that same year, 1482, Cardinal Roderigo had married his
daughter Girolama--now aged fifteen--to Giovanni Andrea Cesarini, the
scion of a patrician Roman house. The alliance strengthened the bonds of
good feeling which for some considerable time had prevailed between the
two families. Unfortunately the young couple were not destined to many
years of life together, as in 1483 both died.

Of Cesare all that we know at this period is what we learn from the
Papal Bulls conferring several benefices upon him. In July 1482 he was
granted the revenues from the prebendals and canonries of Valencia; in
the following month he was appointed Canon of Valencia and apostolic
notary. In April 1484 he was made Provost of Alba, and in September
of the same year treasurer of the Church of Carthage. No doubt he was
living with his mother, his brothers, and his sister at the house in the
Piazza Pizzo di Merlo, where an ample if not magnificent establishment
was maintained.

By this time Cardinal Roderigo’s wealth and power had grown to
stupendous proportions, and he lived in a splendour well worthy of his
lofty rank. He was now fifty-three years of age, still retaining the air
and vigour of a man in his very prime, which, no doubt, he owed as much
as to anything to his abstemious and singularly sparing table-habits. He
derived a stupendous income from his numerous abbeys in Italy and
Spain, his three bishoprics of Valencia, Porto, and Carthage, and
his ecclesiastical offices, among which the Vice-Chancellorship alone
yielded him annually eight thousand florins.(1)


  1  The gold florin, ducat, or crown was equal to ten shillings of our
present money, and had a purchasing power of five times that amount.


Volterra refers with wonder to the abundance of his plate, to his
pearls, his gold embroideries, and his books, the splendid equipment of
his beds, the trappings of his horses, and other similar furnishings in
gold, in silver, and in silk. In short, he was the wealthiest prince of
the Church of his day, and he lived with a magnificence worthy of a king
or of the Pope himself.

Of the actual man, Volterra, writing in 1586, says: “He is of a spirit
capable of anything, and of a great intelligence. A ready speaker,
and of distinction, notwithstanding his indifferent literary culture;
naturally astute, and of marvellous talent in the conduct of affairs.”

In the year in which Volterra wrote of Cardinal Roderigo in such terms
Vannozza was left a widow by the death of Giorgio della Croce. Her
widowhood was short, however, for in the same year--on June 6--she took
a second husband, possibly at the instance of Roderigo Borgia, who
did not wish to leave her unprotected; that, at least, is the general
inference, although there is very little evidence upon which to base it.
This second husband was Carlo Canale, a Mantovese scholar who had served
Cardinal Francesco Gonzaga in the capacity of chamberlain, and who had
come to Rome on the death of his patron.

The marriage contract shows that by this time Vannozza had removed her
residence to Piazza Branchis. In addition to this she had by this
time acquired a villa with its beautiful gardens and vine­yards in the
Suburra near S. Pietro in Vincoli. She is also known to have been the
proprietor of an inn--the Albergo del Leone--in Via del Orso, opposite
the Torre di Nona, for she figures with della Croce in a contract
regarding a lease of it in 1483.

With her entrance into second nuptials, her relations with Cardinal
Roderigo came to an end, and his two children by her, then in
Rome--Lucrezia and Giuffredo--went to take up their residence with
Adriana Orsini (née de Mila) at the Orsini Palace on Monte Giordano. She
was a cousin of Roderigo’s, and the widow of Lodovico Orsini, by whom
she had a son, Orso Orsini, who from early youth had been betrothed to
Giulia Farnese, the daughter of a patrician family, still comparatively
obscure, but destined through this very girl to rise to conspicuous
eminence.

For her surpassing beauty this Giulia Farnese has been surnamed La
Bella--and as Giulia La Bella was she known in her day--and she has been
immortalized by Pinturicchio and Guglielmo della Porta. She sat to the
former as a model for his Madonna in the Borgia Tower of the Vatican,
and to the latter for the statue of Truth which adorns the tomb of her
brother Alessandro Farnese, who became Pope Paul III.

Here in Adriana Orsini’s house, where his daughter Lucrezia was being
educated, Cardinal Roderigo, now at the mature age of some six-and-fifty
years, made the acquaintance and became enamoured of this beautiful
golden-headed Giulia, some forty years his junior. To the fact that she
presently became his mistress--somewhere about the same time that
she became Orso Orsini’s wife--is due the sudden rise of the House of
Farnese. This began with her handsome, dissolute brother Alessandro’s
elevation to the purple by her lover, and grew to vast proportions
during his subsequent and eminently scandalous occupation of the Papal
Throne as Paul III.

In the year 1490 Lucrezia was the only one of Roderigo’s children by
Vannozza who remained in Rome.

Giovanni Borgia was in Spain, whither he had gone on the death of his
brother Pedro Luis, to take posession of the Duchy of Gandia, which the
power of his father’s wealth and vast influence at the Valencian Court
had obtained for that same Pedro Luis. To this Giovanni now succeeded.

Cesare Borgia--now aged fifteen--had for some two years been studying
his humanities in an atmosphere of Latinity at the Sapienza of Perugia.
There, if we are to believe the praises of him uttered by Pompilio, he
was already revealing his unusual talents and a precocious wit. In
the preface of the Syllabica on the art of Prosody dedicated to him by
Pompilio, the latter hails him as the hope and ornament of the Hous of
Borgia--“Borgiae familiae spes et decus.”

From Perugia he was moved in 1491 to the famous University of Pisa, a
college frequented by the best of Italy. For preceptor he had Giovanni
Vera of Arcilla, a Spanish gentleman who was later created a cardinal by
Cesare’s father. There in Pisa Cesare maintained an establishment of a
magnificence in keeping with his father’s rank and with the example set
him by that same father.

It was Cardinal Roderigo’s wish that Cesare should follow an
ecclesiastical career; and the studies of canon law which he pursued
under Filippo Decis, the most rated lecturer on canon law of his day,
were such as peculiarly to fit him for that end and for the highest
honours the Church might have to bestow upon him later. At the age of
seventeen, while still at Pisa, he was appointed prothonotary of the
Church and preconized Bishop of Pampeluna.

Sixtus IV died, as we have seen, in August 1482. The death of a Pope
was almost invariably the signal for disturbances in Rome, and they
certainly were not wanting on this occasion. The Riario palaces were
stormed and looted, and Girolamo Riario--the Pope’s “nepot”--threw
himself into the castle of Sant’ Angelo with his forces.

The Orsini and Colonna were in arms, “so that in a few days
incendiarism, robbery, and murder raged in several parts of the city.
The cardinals besought the Count to surrender the castle to the Sacred
College, withdraw his troops, and deliver Rome from the fear of his
forces; and he, that he might win the favour of the future Pope, obeyed,
and withdrew to Imola.”(1)


  1  Macchiavelli, Istorie Fiorentine.


The cardinals, having thus contrived to restore some semblance of order,
proceeded to the creation of a new Pontiff, and a Genoese, Giovanni
Battista Cibo, Cardinal of Malfetta, was elected and took the name of
Innocent VIII.

Again, as in the case of Sixtus, there is no lack of those who charge
this Pontiff with having obtained his election by simony. The Cardinals
Giovanni d’ Aragona (brother to the King of Naples) and Ascanio Sforza
(brother of Lodovico, Duke of Milan) are said to have disposed of their
votes in the most open and shameless manner, practically putting them
up for sale to the highest bidder. Italy rang with the scandal of it, we
are told.

Under Innocent’s lethargic rule the Church again began to lose much of
the vigour with which Sixtus had inspired it. If the reign of Sixtus
had been scandalous, infinitely worse was that of Innocent--a sordid,
grasping sensualist, without even the one redeeming virtue of strength
that had been his predecessor’s. Nepotism had characterized many
previous pontificates; open paternity was to characterize his, for he
was the first Pope who, in flagrant violation of canon law, acknowledged
his children for his own. He proceeded to provide for some seven
bastards, and that provision appears to have been the only aim and scope
of his pontificate.

Not content with raising money by the sale of preferments, Innocent
established a traffic in indulgences, the like of which had never been
seen before. In the Rome of his day you might, had you the money, buy
anything, from a cardinal’s hat to a pardon for the murder of your
father.

The most conspicuous of his bastards was Francesco Cibo--conspicuous
chiefly for the cupidity which distinguished him as it distinguished the
Pope his father. For the rest he was a poor-spirited fellow who sorely
disappointed Lorenzo de’Medici, whose daughter Maddalena he received
in marriage. Lorenzo had believed that, backed by the Pope’s influence,
Francesco would establish for himself a dynasty in Romagna. But father
and son were alike too invertebrate--the one to inspire, the other to
execute any such designs as had already been attempted by the nepots of
Calixtus III and Sixtus IV.

Under the weak and scandalous rule of Innocent VIII Rome appears to
have been abandoned to the most utter lawlessness. Anarchy, robbery, and
murder preyed upon the city. No morning dawned without revealing corpses
in the streets; and if by chance the murderer was caught, there was
pardon for him if he could afford to buy it, or Tor di Nona and the
hangman’s noose if he could not.

It is not wonderful that when at last Innocent VIII died Infessura
should have blessed the day that freed the world of such a monster.

But his death did not happen until 1492. A feeble old man, he had become
subject to lethargic or cataleptic trances, which had several times
already deceived those in attendance into believing him dead. He grew
weaker and weaker, and it became impossible to nourish him upon anything
but woman’s milk. Towards the end came, Infessura tells us, a Hebrew
physician who claimed to have a prescription by which he could save the
Pope’s life. For his infusion(1) he needed young human blood, and to
obtain it he took three boys of the age of ten, and gave them a ducat
apiece for as much as he might require of them. Unfortunately he took so
much that the three boys incontinently died of his phlebotomy, and the
Hebrew was obliged to take to flight to save his own life, for the Pope,
being informed of what had taken place, execrated the deed and ordered
the physician’s arrest. “Judeus quidem aufugit, et Papa sanatus not
est,” concludes Infessura.


  1  The silly interpretation of this afforded by later writers, that this
physician attempted transfusion of blood--silly, because unthinkable in
an age which knew nothing of the circulation of the blood--has already
been exploded.

Innocent VIII breathed his last on July 25, 1492.




CHAPTER III. ALEXANDER VI


The ceremonies connected with the obsequies of Pope Innocent VIII
lasted--as prescribed--nine days; they were concluded on August 5, 1492,
and, says Infessura naïvely, “sic finita fuit eius memoria.”

The Sacred College consisted at the time of twenty-seven cardinals, four
of whom were absent at distant sees and unable to reach Rome in time
for the immuring of the Conclave. The twenty-three present were, in the
order of their seniority: Roderigo Borgia, Oliviero Caraffa, Giuliano
della Rovere, Battista Zeno, Giovanni Michieli, Giorgio Costa, Girolamo
della Rovere, Paolo Fregosi, Domenico della Rovere, Giovanni dei
Conti, Giovanni Giacomo Sclafetani, Lorenzo Cibo, Ardicino della Porta,
Antoniotto Pallavicino, Maffeo Gerardo, Francesco Piccolomini, Raffaele
Riario, Giovanni Battista Savelli, Giovanni Colonna, Giovanni Orsini,
Ascanio Maria Sforza, Giovanni de’Medici, and Francesco Sanseverino.

On August 6 they assembled in St. Peter’s to hear the Sacred Mass of the
Holy Ghost, which was said by Giuliano della Rovere on the tomb of the
Prince of the Apostles, and to listen to the discourse “Pro eligendo
Pontefice,” delivered by the learned and eloquent Bishop of Carthage.
Thereafter the Cardinals swore upon the Gospels faithfully to observe
their trust, and thereupon the Conclave was immured.

According to the dispatches of Valori, the Ferrarese ambassador in Rome,
it was expected that either the Cardinal of Naples (Oliviero Caraffa)
or the Cardinal of Lisbon (Giorgio Costa) would be elected to the
Pontificate; and according to the dispatch of Cavalieri the ambassador
of Modena, the King of France had deposited 200,000 ducats with a Roman
banker to forward the election of Giuliano della Rovere. Nevertheless,
early on the morning of August 11 it was announced that Roderigo Borgia
was elected Pope, and we have it on the word of Valori that the election
was unanimous, for he wrote on the morrow to the Council of Eight (the
Signory of Florence) that after long contention Alexander VI was created
“omnium consensum--ne li manco un solo voto.”

The subject of this election is one with which we rarely find an author
dealing temperately or with a proper and sane restraint. To vituperate
in superlatives seems common to most who have taken in hand this and
other episodes in the history of the Borgias. Every fresh writer who
comes to the task appears to be mainly inspired by a desire to emulate
his forerunners, allowing his pen to riot zestfully in the accumulation
of scandalous matter, and seeking to increase if possible its lurid
quality by a degree or two. As a rule there is not even an attempt made
to put forward evidence in substantiation of anything that is alleged.
Wild and sweeping statement takes the place that should be held by calm
deduction and reasoned comment.

“He was the worst Pontiff that ever filled St. Peter’s Chair,” is one
of these sweeping statements, culled from the pages of an able, modern,
Italian author, whose writings, sound in all that concerns other
matters, are strewn with the most foolish extravagances and flagrant
inaccuracies in connection with Alexander VI and his family.

To say of him, as that writer says, that “he was the worst Pontiff
that ever filled St. Peter’s Chair,” can only be justified by an utter
ignorance of papal history. You have but to compare him calmly and
honestly--your mind stripped of preconceptions--with the wretched
and wholly contemptible Innocent VIII whom he succeeded, or with the
latter’s precursor, the terrible Sixtus IV.

That he was better than these men, morally or ecclesiastically, is
not to be pretended; that he was worse--measuring achievement by
opportunity--is strenuously to be denied. For the rest, that he was
infinitely more gifted and infinitely more a man of affairs is not to be
gainsaid by any impartial critic.

If we take him out of the background of history in which he is set, and
judge him singly and individually, we behold a man who, as a churchman
and Christ’s Vicar, fills us with horror and loathing, as a scandalous
exception from what we are justified in supposing from his office must
have been the rule. Therefore, that he may be judged by the standard of
his own time if he is to be judged at all, if we are even to attempt to
understand him, have we given a sketch of the careers of those Popes who
immediately preceded him, with whom as Vice-Chancellor he was intimately
associated, and whose examples were the only papal examples that he
possessed.

That this should justify his course we do not pretend. A good churchman
in his place would have bethought him of his duty to the Master whose
Vicar he was, and would have aimed at the sorely needed reform. But we
are not concerned to study him as a good churchman. It is by no means
clear that we are concerned to study him as a churchman at all. The
Papacy had by this time become far less of an ecclesiastical than a
political force; the weapons of the Church were there, but they were
being employed for the furtherance not of churchly, but of worldly aims.
If the Pontiffs in the pages of this history remembered or evoked their
spiritual authority, it was but to employ it as an instrument for the
advancement of their temporal schemes. And personal considerations
entered largely into these.

Self-aggrandizement, insufferable in a cleric, is an ambition not
altogether unpardonable in a temporal prince; and if Alexander aimed at
self-aggrandizement and at the founding of a permanent dynasty for
his family, he did not lack examples in the careers of those among his
predecessors with whom he had been associated.

That the Papacy was Christ’s Vicarage was a fact that had long since
been obscured by the conception that the Papacy was a kingdom of this
world. In striving, then, for worldly eminence by every means in his
power, Alexander is no more blameworthy than any other. What, then,
remains? The fact that he succeeded better than any of his forerunners.
But are we on that account to select him for the special object of our
vituperation? The Papacy had tumbled into a slough of materialism in
which it was to wallow even after the Reformation had given it pause
and warning. Under what obligation was Alexander VI, more than any other
Pope, to pull it out of that slough? As he found it, so he carried it
on, as much a self-seeker, as much a worldly prince, as much a family
man and as little a churchman as any of those who had gone immediately
before him.

By the outrageous discrepancy between the Papacy’s professed and actual
aims it was fast becoming an object of execration, and it is Alexander’s
misfortune that, coming when he did, he has remained as the type of his
class.

The mighty of this world shall never want for detractors. The mean and
insignificant, writhing under the consciousness of his shortcomings,
ministers to his self-love by vilifying the great that he may lessen
the gap between himself and them. To achieve greatness is to achieve
enemies. It is to excite envy; and as envy no seed can raise up such a
crop of hatred.

Does this need labouring? Have we not abundant instances about us of the
vulgar tittle-tattle and scandalous unfounded gossip which, born Heaven
alone knows on what back-stairs or in what servants’ hall, circulates
currently to the detriment of the distinguished in every walk of
life? And the more conspicuously great the individual, the greater
the incentive to slander him, for the interest of the slander is
commensurate with the eminence of the personage assailed.

Such to a great extent is the case of Alexander VI. He was too powerful
for the stomachs of many of his contemporaries, and he and his son
Cesare had a way of achieving their ends. Since that could not be
denied, it remained to inveigh loudly against the means adopted; and
with pious uplifting of hands and eyes, to cry, “Shame!” and “Horror!”
 and “The like has never been heard of!” in wilful blindness to what had
been happening at the Vatican for generations.

Later writers take up the tale of it. It is a fine subject about
which to make phrases, and the passion for phrase-making will at times
outweigh the respect for truth. Thus Villari with his “the worst Pontiff
that ever filled St. Peter’s Chair,” and again, elsewhere, echoing what
many a writer has said before him from Guicciardini downwards, in
utter and diametric opposition to the true facts of the case: “The
announcement of his election was received throughout Italy with
universal dismay.” To this he adds the ubiquitous story of King
Ferrante’s bursting into tears at the news--“though never before known
to weep for the death of his own children.”

Let us pause a moment to contemplate the grief the Neapolitan King. What
picture is evoked in your minds by that statement of his bursting into
tears at Alexander’s election? We see--do we not?--a pious, noble soul,
horror-stricken at the sight of the Papacy’s corruption; a truly sublime
figure, whose tears will surely stand to his credit in heaven; a great
heart breaking; a venerable head bowed down with lofty, righteous grief,
weeping over the grave of Christian hopes. Such surely is the image we
are meant to see by Guicciardini and his many hollow echoers.

Turn we now for corroboration of that noble picture to the history of
this same Ferrante. A shock awaits us. We find, in this bastard of
the great and brilliant Alfonso a cruel, greedy, covetous monster, so
treacherous and so fiendishly brutal that we are compelled to extend
him the charity of supposing him to be something less than sane. Let us
consider but one of his characteristics. He loved to have his enemies
under his own supervision, and he kept them so--the living ones caged
and guarded, the dead ones embalmed and habited as in life; and this
collection of mummies was his pride and delight. More, and worse could
we tell you of him. But--ex pede, Herculem.

This man shed tears we are told. Not another word. It is left to our
imagination to paint for us a picture of this weeping; it is left to us
to conclude that these precious tears were symbolical of the grief of
Italy herself; that the catastrophe that provoked them must have been
terrible indeed.

But now that we know what manner of man was this who wept, see how
different is the inference that we may draw from his sorrow. Can we
still imagine it--as we are desired to do--to have sprung from a lofty,
Christian piety? Let us track those tears to their very source, and we
shall find it to be compounded of rage and fear.

Ferrante saw trouble ahead of him with Lodovico Sforza, concerning a
matter which shall be considered in the next chapter, and not at all
would it suit him at such a time that such a Pope as Alexander--who, he
had every reason to suppose, would be on the side of Lodovico--should
rule in Rome.

So he had set himself, by every means in his power, to oppose Roderigo’s
election. His rage at the news that all his efforts had been vain,
his fear of a man of Roderigo’s mettle, and his undoubted dread of
the consequences to himself of his frustrated opposition of that man’s
election, may indeed have loosened the tears of this Ferrante who had
not even wept at the death of his own children. We say “may” advisedly;
for the matter, from beginning to end, is one of speculation. If we
leave it for the realm of fact, we have to ask--Were there any tears
at all? Upon what authority rests the statement of the Florentine
historian? What, in fact, does he say?

“It is well known that the King of Naples, for all that in public he
dissembled the pain it caused him, signified to the queen, his
wife, with tears--which were Unusual in him even on the death of his
children--that a Pope had been created who would be most pernicious to
Italy.”

So that, when all is said, Ferrante shed his kingly tears to his wife
in private, and to her in private he delivered his opinion of the new
Pontiff. How, then, came Guicciardini to know of the matter? True, he
says, “It is well known”--meaning that he had those tears upon hearsay.
It is, of course, possible that Ferrante’s queen may have repeated what
passed between herself and the king; but that would surely have been in
contravention of the wishes of her husband, who had, be it remembered,
“dissembled his grief in public.” And Ferrante does not impress one
as the sort of husband whose wishes his wife would be bold enough to
contravene.

It is surprising that upon no better authority than this should these
precious tears of Ferrante’s have been crystallized in history.

If this trivial instance has been dealt with at such length it is
because, for one reason, it is typical of the foundation of so many
of the Borgia legends, and, for another, because when history has been
carefully sifted for evidence of the “universal dismay with which the
election of Roderigo Borgia was received” King Ferrante’s is the only
case of dismay that comes through the mesh at all. Therefore was it
expedient to examine it minutely.

That “universal dismay”--like the tears of Ferrante--rests upon the word
of Guicciardini. He says that “men were filled with dread and horror by
this election, because it had been effected by such evil ways [con arte
si brutte]; and no less because the nature and condition of the person
elected were largely known to many.”

Guicciardini is to be read with the greatest caution and reserve when he
deals with Rome. His bias against, and his enmity of, the Papacy are as
obvious as they are notorious, and in his endeavours to bring it as much
as possible into discredit he does not even spare his generous patrons,
the Medicean Popes--Leo X and Clement VII. If he finds it impossible to
restrain his invective against these Pontiffs, who heaped favours and
honours upon him, what but virulence can be expected of him when
he writes of Alexander VI? He is largely to blame for the flagrant
exaggeration of many of the charges brought against the Borgias; that he
hated them we know, and that when he wrote of them he dipped his golden
Tuscan pen in vitriol and set down what he desired the world to believe
rather than what contemporary documents would have revealed to him,
we can prove here and now from that one statement of his which we have
quoted.

Who were the men who were filled with dismay, horror, or dread at
Roderigo’s election?

The Milanese? No. For we know that Cardinal Ascanio Sforza, the Duke
of Milan’s brother, was the most active worker in favour of Roderigo’s
election, and that this same election was received and celebrated in
Milan with public rejoicings.

The Florentines? No. For the Medici were friendly to the House of
Borgia, and we know that they welcomed the election, and that from
Florence Manfredi--the Ferrarese ambassador--wrote home: “It is said he
will be a glorious Pontiff” (“Dicesi che sará glorioso Pontefice”).

Were Venice, Genoa, Mantua, Siena, or Lucca dismayed by this election?
Surely not, if the superlatively laudatory congratulations of their
various ambassadors are of any account.

Venice confessed that “a better pastor could not have been found for the
Church,” since he had proved himself “a chief full of experience and an
excellent cardinal.”

Genoa said that “his merit lay not in having been elected, but in having
been desired.”

Mantua declared that it “had long awaited the pontificate of one who,
during forty years, had rendered himself, by his wisdom and justice,
capable of any office.”

Siena expressed its joy at seeing the summit of eminence attained by
a Pope solely upon his merits--“Pervenuto alla dignitá pontificale
meramente per meriti proprii.”

Lucca praised the excellent choice made, and extolled the
accomplishments, the wisdom, and experience of the Pontiff.

Not dismay, then, but actual rejoicing must have been almost universal
in Italy on the election of Pope Alexander VI. And very properly--always
considering the Pontificate as the temporal State it was then being
accounted; for Roderigo’s influence was vast, his intelligence was
renowned, and had again and again been proved, and his administrative
talents and capacity for affairs were known to all. He was well-born,
cultured, of a fine and noble presence, and his wealth was colossal,
comprising the archbishoprics of Valencia and Porto, the bishoprics of
Majorca, Carthage, Agria, the abbeys of Subiaco, the Monastery of Our
Lady of Bellefontaine, the deaconry of Sancta Maria in Via Lata, and his
offices of Vice-Chancellor and Dean of Holy Church.

We are told that he gained his election by simony. It is very
probable that he did. But the accusation has never been categorically
established, and until that happens it would be well to moderate
the vituperation hurled at him. Charges of that simony are common;
conclusive proof there is none. We find Giacomo Trotti, the French
ambassador in Milan, writing to the Duke of Ferrara a fortnight after
Roderigo’s election that “the Papacy has been sold by simony and a
thousand rascalities, which is a thing ignominious and detestable.”

Ignominious and detestable indeed, if true; but be it remembered that
Trotti was the ambassador of France, whose candidate, backed by French
influence and French gold, as we have seen, was della Rovere; and, even
if his statement was true, the “ignominious and detestable thing” was at
least no novelty. Yet Guicciardini, treating of this matter, says: “He
gained the Pontificate owing to discord between the Cardinals Ascanio
Sforza and Giuliano di San Pietro in Vincoli; and still more because, in
a manner without precedent in that age [con esempio nuovo in quella etá]
he openly bought the votes of many cardinals, some with money, some with
promises of his offices and benefices, which were very great.”

Again Guicciardini betrays his bias by attempting to render Roderigo’s
course, assuming it for the moment to be truly represented, peculiarly
odious by this assertion that it was without precedent in that age.

Without precedent! What of the accusations of simony against Innocent
VIII, which rest upon a much sounder basis than these against Alexander,
and what of those against Sixtus IV? Further, if a simoniacal election
was unprecedented, what of Lorenzo Valla’s fierce indictment of
simony--for which he so narrowly escaped the clutches of the Inquisition
some sixty years before this date?

Simony was rampant at the time, and it is the rankest hypocrisy to make
this outcry against Alexander’s uses of it, and to forget the others.

Whether he really was elected by simony or not depends largely--so far
as the evidence available goes--upon what we are to consider as
simony. If payment in the literal sense was made or promised, then
unquestionably simony there was. But this, though often asserted, still
awaits proof. If the conferring of the benefices vacated by a cardinal
on his elevation to the Pontificate is to be considered simony, then
there never was a Pope yet against whom the charge could not be levelled
and established.

Consider that by his election to the Pontificate his Archbishoprics,
offices, nay, his very house itself--which at the time of which we write
it was customary to abandon to pillage--are vacated; and remember that,
as Pope, they are now in his gift and that they must of necessity be
bestowed upon somebody. In a time in which Pontiffs are imbued with a
spiritual sense of their office and duties, they will naturally make
such bestowals upon those whom they consider best fitted to use them
for the greater honour and glory of God. But we are dealing with no such
spiritual golden age as that when we deal with the Cinquecento, as we
have already seen; and, therefore, all that we can expect of a Pope is
that he should bestow the preferment he has vacated upon those among
the cardinals whom he believes to be devoted to himself. Considering his
election in a temporal sense, it is natural that he should behave as any
other temporal prince; that he should remember those to whom he owes
the Pontificate, and that he should reward them suitably. Alexander
VI certainly pursued such a course, and the greatest profit from his
election was derived by the Cardinal Sforza who--as Roderigo himself
admitted--had certainly exerted all his influence with the Sacred
College to gain him the Pontificate. Alexander gave him the vacated
Vice-Chancellorship (for which, when all is said, Ascanio Sforza was
excellently fitted), his vacated palace on Banchi Vecchi, the town of
Nepi, and the bishopric of Agri.

To Orsini he gave the Church of Carthage and the legation of Marche; to
Colonna the Abbey of Subiaco; to Savelli the legation of Perugia (from
which he afterwards recalled him, not finding him suited to so difficult
a charge); to Raffaele Riario went Spanish benefices worth four thousand
ducats yearly; to Sanseverino Roderigo’s house in Milan, whilst he
consented that Sanseverino’s nephew--known as Fracassa--should enter
the service of the Church with a condotta of a hundred men-at-arms and a
stipend of thirteen thousand ducats yearly.

Guicciardini says of all this that Ascanio Sforza induced many of the
cardinals “to that abominable contract, and not only by request and
persuasion, but by example; because, corrupt and of an insatiable
appetite for riches, he bargained for himself, as the reward of so much
turpitude, the Vice-Chancellorships, churches, fortresses [the very
plurals betray the frenzy of exaggeration dictated by his malice] and
his [Roderigo’s] palace in Rome full of furniture of great value.”

What possible proof can Guicciardini have--what possible proof can there
be--of such a “bargain”? It rests upon purest assumption formed after
those properties had changed hands--Ascanio being rewarded by them for
his valuable services, and, also--so far as the Vice-Chancellorship was
concerned--being suitably preferred. To say that Ascanio received
them in consequence of a “bargain” and as the price of his vote and
electioneering services is not only an easy thing to say, but it is the
obvious thing for any one to say who aims at defaming.

It is surprising that we should find in Guicciardini no mention of the
four mule-loads of silver removed before the election from Cardinal
Roderigo’s palace on Banchi Vecchi to Cardinal Ascanio’s palace in
Trastevere. This is generally alleged to have been part of the price
of Ascanio’s services. Whether it was so, or whether, as has also been
urged, it was merely removed to save it from the pillaging by the mob
of the palace of the cardinal elected to the Pontificate, the fact is
interesting as indicating in either case Cardinal Roderigo’s assurance
of his election.

M. Yriarte does not hesitate to say: “We know to-day, by the dispatches
of Valori, the narrative of Girolamo Porzio, and the Diarium of
Burchard, the Master of Ceremonies, each of the stipulations made with
the electors whose votes were bought.”

Now whilst we do know from Valori and Porzio what benefices Alexander
actually conferred, we do not know, nor could they possibly have
told us, what stipulations had been made which these benefices were
insinuated to satisfy.

Burchard’s Diarium might be of more authority on this subject, for
Burchard was the Master of Ceremonies at the Vatican; but, unfortunately
for the accuracy of M. Yriarte’s statement, Burchard is silent on the
subject, for the excellent reason that there is no diary for the period
under consideration. Burchard’s narrative is interrupted on the death of
Innocent VIII, on July 12, and not resumed until December 2, when it is
not retrospective.

There is, it is true, the Diarium of Infessura. But that is of no more
authority on such a matter than the narrative of Porzio or the letters
of Valori.

Lord Acton--in his essay upon this subject--has not been content to rest
the imputation of simony upon such grounds as satisfied M. Yriarte. He
has realized that the only testimony of any real value in such a case
would be the actual evidence of such cardinals as might be willing
to bear witness to the attempt to bribe them. And he takes it for
granted--as who would not at this time of day, and in view of such
positive statements as abound?--that such evidence has been duly
collected; thus, he tells us confidently that the charge rests upon the
evidence of those cardinals who refused Roderigo’s bribes.

That it most certainly does not. If it did there would be an end to
the matter, and so much ink would not have been spilled over it; but no
single cardinal has left any such evidence as Lord Acton supposes and
alleges. It suffices to consider that, according to the only evidences
available--the Casanatense Codices(1) and the dispatches of that same
Valori(2) whom M. Yriarte so confidently cites, Roderigo Borgia’s
election was unanimous. Who, then, were these cardinals who refused
his bribes? Or are we to suppose that, notwithstanding that refusal--a
refusal which we may justifiably suppose to have been a scandalized and
righteously indignant one--they still afforded him their votes?


  1  “...essendo concordi tutti i cardinali, quasi da contrari voti rivolti
tutti in favore di uno solo, crearono lui sommo ponteflce” (Casanatense
MSS). See P. Leonetti, Alessandro VI. 2 “Fu pubblicato il Cardinale
Vice-Cancelliere in Sommo Pontefice Alessandro VI(to) nuncupato, el
quale dopo una lunga contentione fu creato omnium consensum--ne ii manco
un solo voto” (Valori’s letter to the Otto di Pratica, August 12,
1492). See Supplement to Appendix in E. Thuasne’s edition of Burchard’s
Diarium.


This charge of simony was levelled with the object of making Alexander
VI appear singularly heinous. So much has that object engrossed and
blinded those inspired by it, that, of itself, it betrays them. Had
their horror been honest, had it sprung from true principles, had it
been born of any but a desire to befoul and bespatter at all costs
Roderigo Borgia, it is not against him that they would have hurled their
denunciations, but against the whole College of Cardinals which took
part in the sacrilege and which included three future Popes.(1)


  1  Cardinals Piccolomini, de’Medici, and Giuliano della Rovere.


Assuming not only that there was simony, but that it was on as wholesale
a scale as was alleged, and that for gold--coined or in the form of
benefices--Roderigo bought the cardinal’s votes, what then? He bought
them, true. But they--they sold him their sacred trust, their duty
to their God, their priestly honour, their holy vows. For the gold he
offered them they bartered these. So much admitted, then surely, in that
transaction, those cardinals were the prostitutes! The man who bought
so much of them, at least, was on no baser level than were they.
Yet invective singles him out for its one object, and so betrays the
aforethought malice of its inspiration.

Our quarrel is with that; with that, and with those writers who have
taken Alexander’s simony for granted--eagerly almost--for the purpose
of heaping odium upon him by making him appear a scandalous exception to
the prevailing rule.

If, nevertheless, we hold, as we have said, that simony probably did
take place, we do so, not so much upon the inconclusive evidence of the
fact, as upon the circumstance that it had become almost an established
custom to purchase the tiara, and that Roderigo Borgia--since his
ambition clearly urged him to the Pontificate--would have been an
exception had he refrained.

It may seem that to have disputed so long to conclude by admitting so
much is no better than a waste of labour. Not so, we hope. Our aim has
been to correct the adjustment of the focus and properly to trim the
light in which Roderigo Borgia is to be viewed, to the end that you may
see him as he was--neither better nor worse--the creature of his
times, of his environment, and of the system in which he was reared and
trained. Thus shall you also get a clearer view of his son Cesare, when
presently he takes the stage more prominently.

During the seventeen days of the interregnum between the death of
Innocent and the election of Alexander the wild scenes usual to
such seasons had been taking place in Rome; and, notwithstanding the
Cardinal-Chamberlain’s prompt action in seizing the gates and bridges,
and the patrols’ endeavours to maintain order, crime was unfettered
to such an extent that some 220 murders are computed to have taken
place--giving the terrible average of thirteen a day.

It was a very natural epilogue to the lax rule of the lethargic
Innocent. One of the first acts of Alexander’s reign was to deal
summarily with this lawlessness. He put down violence with a hard hand
that knew no mercy. He razed to the ground the house of a murderer
caught red-handed, and hanged him above the ruins, and so dealt
generally that such order came to prevail as had never before been known
in Rome.

Infessura tells us how, in the very month of his election, he appointed
inspectors of prisons and four commissioners to administer justice,
and that he himself gave audience on Tuesdays and settled disputes,
concluding, “et justitiam mirabili modo facere coepit.”

He paid all salaries promptly--a striking departure, it would seem,
from what had been usual under his predecessor--and the effect of his
improved and strenuous legislation was shortly seen in the diminished
prices of commodities.

He was crowned Pope on August 6, on the steps of the Basilica of
St. Peter, by the Cardinal-Archdeacon Piccolomini. The ceremony was
celebrated with a splendour worthy of the splendid figure that was its
centre. Through the eyes of Michele Ferno--despite his admission that
he is unable to convey a worthy notion of the spectacle--you may see the
gorgeous procession to the Lateran in which Alexander VI showed himself
to the applauding Romans; the multitude of richly adorned men, gay and
festive; the seven hundred priests and prelates, with their familiars
the splendid cavalcade of knights and nobles of Rome; the archers and
Turkish horsemen, and the Palatine Guard, with its great halberds and
flashing shields; the twelve white horses, with their golden bridles,
led by footmen; and then Alexander himself on a snow-white horse,
“serene of brow and of majestic dignity,” his hand uplifted--the
Fisherman’s Ring upon its forefinger--to bless the kneeling populace.
The chronicler flings into superlatives when he comes to praise the
personal beauty of the man, his physical vigour and health, “which go to
increase the veneration shown him.”

Thus in the brilliant sunshine of that Italian August, amid the plaudits
of assembled Rome, amid banners and flowers, music and incense, the
flash of steel and the blaze of decorations with the Borgian arms
everywhere displayed--or, a grazing steer gules--Alexander VI passes to
the Vatican, the aim and summit of his vast ambition.

Friends and enemies alike have sung the splendours of that coronation,
and the Bull device--as you can imagine--plays a considerable part in
those verses, be they paeans or lampoons. The former allude to Borgia as
“the Bull,” from the majesty and might of the animal that was displayed
upon their shield; the latter render it the subject of much scurrilous
invective, to which it lends itself as readily. And thereafter, in
almost all verse of their epoch, writers ever say “the Bull” when they
mean the Borgia.




CHAPTER IV. BORGIA ALLIANCES


At the time of his father’s election to the throne of St. Peter, Cesare
Borgia--now in his eighteenth year--was still at the University of Pisa.

It is a little odd, considering the great affection for his children
which was ever one of Roderigo’s most conspicuous characteristics,
that he should not have ordered Cesare to Rome at once, to share in the
general rejoicings. It has been suggested that Alexander wished to avoid
giving scandal by the presence of his children at such a time. But that
again looks like a judgement formed upon modern standards, for by the
standards of his day one cannot conceive that he would have given
very much scandal; moreover, it is to be remembered that Lucrezia and
Giuffredo, at least, were in Rome at the time of their father’s election
to the tiara.

However that may be, Cesare did not quit Pisa until August of that year
1492, and even then not for Rome, but for Spoleto--in accordance with
his father’s orders--where he took up his residence in the castle.
Thence he wrote a letter to Piero de’Medici, which is interesting,
firstly, as showing the good relations prevailing between them;
secondly, as refuting a story in Guicciardini, wherewith that historian,
ready, as ever, to belittle the Borgias, attempts to show him cutting a
poor figure. He tells us(1) that, whilst at Pisa, Cesare had occasion
to make an appeal to Piero de’Medici in the matter of a criminal case
connected with one of his familiars; that he went to Florence and waited
several hours in vain for an audience, whereafter he returned to Pisa
“accounting himself despised and not a little injured.”


  1  Istoria d’Italia, tom. V.


No doubt Guicciardini is as mistaken in this as in many another matter,
for the letter written from Spoleto expresses his regret that, on
the occasion of his passage through Florence (on his way from Pisa to
Spoleto), he should not have had time to visit Piero, particularly as
there was a matter upon which he desired urgently to consult with him.
He recommends to Piero his faithful Remolino, whose ambition it is to
occupy the chair of canon law at the University of Pisa, and begs his
good offices in that connection. That Juan Vera, Cesare’s preceptor
and the bearer of that letter, took back a favourable answer is highly
probable, for in Fabroni’s Hist. Acad. Pisan we find this Remolino duly
established as a lecturer on canon law in the following year.

The letter is further of interest as showing Cesare’s full consciousness
of the importance of his position; its tone and its signature--“your
brother, Cesar de Borgia, Elect of Valencia”--being such as were usual
between princes.

The two chief aims of Alexander VI, from the very beginning of his
pontificate, were to re-establish the power of the Church, which was
then the most despised of the temporal States of Italy, and to promote
the fortune of his children. Already on the very day of his coronation
he conferred upon Cesare the bishopric of Valencia, whose revenues
amounted to an annual yield of sixteen thousand ducats. For the time
being, however, he had his hands very full of other matters, and it
behoved him to move slowly at first and with the extremest caution.

The clouds of war were lowering heavily over Italy when Alexander came
to St. Peter’s throne, and it was his first concern to find for himself
a safe position against the coming of the threatening storm. The chief
menace to the general peace was Lodovico Maria Sforza, surnamed Il
Moro,(1) who sat as regent for his nephew, Duke Gian Galeazzo, upon
the throne of Milan. That regency he had usurped from Gian Galeazzo’s
mother, and he was now in a fair way to usurp the throne itself. He kept
his nephew virtually a prisoner in the Castle of Pavia, together with
his young bride, Isabella of Aragon, who had been sent thither by her
father, the Duke of Calabria, heir to the crown of Naples.


  1  Touching Lodovico Maria’s by-name of “Il Moro”--which is generally
translated as “The Moor,” whilst in one writer we have found him
mentioned as “Black Lodovico,” Benedetto Varchi’s explanation (in his
Storia Fiorentina) may be of interest. He tells us that Lodovico was not
so called on account of any swarthiness of complexion, as is supposed by
Guicciardini, because, on the contrary, he was fair; nor yet on account
of his device, showing a Moorish squire, who, brush in hand, dusts the
gown of a young woman in regal apparel, with the motto, “Per Italia
nettar d’ogni bruttura”; this device of the Moor, he tells us, was a
rébus or pun upon the word “moro,” which also means the mulberry, and
was so meant by Lodovico. The mulberry burgeons at the end of winter
and blossoms very early. Thus Lodovico symbolized his own prudence and
readiness to seize opportunity betimes.


Gian Galeazzo thus bestowed, Lodovico Maria went calmly about the
business of governing, like one who did not mean to relinquish the
regency save to become duke. But it happened that a boy was born to the
young prisoners at Pavia, whereupon, spurred perhaps into activity by
this parenthood and stimulated by the thought that they had now a son’s
interests to fight for as well as their own, they made appeal to King
Ferrante of Naples that he should enforce his grandson-in-law’s rights
to the throne of Milan. King Ferrante could desire nothing better, for
if his grandchild and her husband reigned in Milan, and by his favour
and contriving, great should be his influence in the North of Italy.
Therefore he stood their friend.

Matters were at this stage when Alexander VI ascended the papal throne.

This election gave Ferrante pause, for, as we have seen, he had schemed
for a Pope devoted to his interests, who would stand by him in the
coming strife, and his schemes were rudely shaken now. Whilst he was
still cogitating the matter of his next move, the wretched Francesco
Cibo (Pope Innocent’s son) offered to sell the papal fiefs of Cervetri
and Anguillara, which had been made over to him by his father, to
Gentile Orsini--the head of his powerful house. And Gentile purchased
them under a contract signed at the palace of Cardinal Giuliano della
Rovere, on September 3, for the sum of forty thousand ducats advanced
him by Ferrante.

Alexander protested strongly against this illegal transaction, for
Cervetri and Anguillara were fiefs of the Church, and neither had Cibo
the right to sell nor Orsini the right to buy them. Moreover, that they
should be in the hands of a powerful vassal of Naples such as Orsini
suited the Pope as little as it suited Lodovico Maria Sforza. It stirred
the latter into taking measures against the move he feared Ferrante
might make to enforce Gian Galeazzo’s claims.

Lodovico Maria went about this with that sly shrewdness so
characteristic of him, so well symbolized by his mulberry badge--a
humorous shrewdness almost, which makes him one of the most delightful
rogues in history, just as he was one of the most debonair and cultured.
He may indeed be considered as one of the types of the subtle, crafty,
selfish politician that was the ideal of Macchiavelli.

You see him, then, effacing the tight-lipped, cunning smile from his
comely face and pointing out to Venice with a grave, sober countenance
how little it can suit her to have the Neapolitan Spaniards ruffling
it in the north, as must happen if Ferrante has his way with Milan.
The truth of this was so obvious that Venice made haste to enter into
a league with him, and into the camp thus formed came, for their own
sakes, Mantua, Ferrara, and Siena. The league was powerful enough thus
to cause Ferrante to think twice before he took up the cudgels for Gian
Galeazzo. If Lodovico could include the Pope, the league’s might would
be so paralysing that Ferrante would cease to think at all about his
grandchildren’s affairs.

Foreseeing this, Ferrante had perforce to dry the tears Guicciardini has
it that he shed, and, replacing them by a smile, servile and obsequious,
repaired, hat in hand, to protest his friendship for the Pope’s
Holiness.

And so, in December of 1492, came the Prince of Altamura--Ferrante’s
second son--to Rome to lay his father’s homage at the feet of the
Pontiff, and at the same time to implore his Holiness to refuse the King
of Hungary the dispensation the latter was asking of the Holy See, to
enable him to repudiate his wife, Donna Leonora--Ferrante’s daughter.

Altamura was received in Rome and sumptuously entertained by the
Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere. This cardinal had failed, as we have
seen, to gain the Pontificate for himself, despite the French influence
by which he had been supported. Writhing under his defeat, and hating
the man who had defeated him with a hatred so bitter and venomous
that the imprint of it is on almost every act of his life--from the
facilities he afforded for the assignment to Orsini of the papal fiefs
that Cibo had to sell--he was already scheming for the overthrow of
Alexander. To this end he needed great and powerful friends; to this end
had he lent himself to the Cibo-Orsini transaction; to this end did he
manifest himself the warm well-wisher of Ferrante; to this end did he
cordially welcome the latter’s son and envoy, and promise his support to
Ferrante’s petition.

But the Holy Father was by no means as anxious for the friendship of
the old wolf of Naples. The matter of the King of Hungary was one that
required consideration, and, meanwhile, he may have hinted slyly there
was between Naples and Rome a little matter of two fiefs to be adjusted.

Thus his most shrewd Holiness thought to gain a little time, and in that
time he might look about him and consider what alliances would suit his
interests best.

At this Cardinal della Rovere, in high dudgeon, flung out of Rome and
away to his Castle of Ostia to fortify--to wield the sword of St. Paul,
since he had missed the keys of St. Peter. It was a shrewd move.
He foresaw the injured dignity of the Spanish House of Naples, and
Ferrante’s wrath at the Pope’s light treatment of him and apathy for
his interests; and the cardinal knew that with Ferrante were allied the
mighty houses of Colonna and Orsini. Thus, by his political divorcement
from the Holy See, he flung in his lot with theirs, hoping for red war
and the deposition of Alexander.

But surely he forgot Milan and Lodovico Maria, whose brother, Ascanio
Sforza, was at the Pope’s elbow, the energetic friend to whose efforts
Alexander owed the tiara, and who was therefore hated by della Rovere
perhaps as bitterly as Alexander himself.

Alexander went calmly about the business of fortifying the Vatican and
the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, and gathering mercenaries into his service.
And, lest any attempt should be made upon his life when he went abroad,
he did so with an imposing escort of men-at-arms; which so vexed and
fretted King Ferrante, that he did not omit to comment upon it in
scathing terms in a letter that presently we shall consider. For the
rest, the Pope’s Holiness preserved an unruffled front in the face of
the hostile preparations that were toward in the kingdom of Naples,
knowing that he could check them when he chose to lift his finger and
beckon the Sforza into alliance. And presently Naples heard an alarming
rumour that Lodovico Maria had, in fact, made overtures to the Pope,
and that the Pope had met these advances to the extent of betrothing
his daughter Lucrezia to Giovanni Sforza, Lord of Pesaro and cousin to
Lodovico.

So back to the Vatican went the Neapolitan envoys with definite
proposals of an alliance to be cemented by a marriage between Giuffredo
Borgia--aged twelve--and Ferrante’s granddaughter Lucrezia of Aragon.
The Pope, with his plans but half-matured as yet, temporized, was
evasive, and continued to arm and to recruit. At last, his arrangements
completed, he abruptly broke off his negotiations with Naples, and on
April 25, 1493, publicly proclaimed that he had joined the northern
league.

The fury of Ferrante, who realized that he had been played with and
outwitted, was expressed in a rabid letter to his ambassador at the
Court of Spain.

“This Pope,” he wrote, “leads a life that is the abomination of all,
without respect for the seat he occupies. He cares for nothing save to
aggrandize his children, by fair means or foul, and this is his sole
desire. From the beginning of his Pontificate he has done nothing but
disturb the peace, molesting everybody, now in one way, now in another.
Rome is more full of soldiers than of priests, and when he goes abroad
it is with troops of men-at-arms about him, with helmets on their heads
and lances by their sides, all his thoughts being given to war and to
our hurt; nor does he overlook anything that can be used against us, not
only inciting in France the Prince of Salerno and other of our rebels,
but befriending every bad character in Italy whom he deems our enemy;
and in all things he proceeds with the fraud and dissimulation natural
to him, and to make money he sells even the smallest office and
preferment.”

Thus Ferrante of the man whose friendship he had been seeking some six
weeks earlier, and who had rejected his advances. It is as well to know
the precise conditions under which that letter was indited, for extracts
from it are too often quoted against Alexander. These conditions known,
and known the man who wrote it, the letter’s proper value is at once
apparent.

It was Ferrante’s hope, and no doubt the hope of Giuliano della Rovere,
that the King of Spain would lend an ear to these grievances, and move
in the matter of attempting to depose Alexander; but an event more
important than any other in the whole history of Spain--or of Europe,
for that matter--was at the moment claiming its full attention, and the
trifling affairs of the King of Naples--trifling by comparison--went
all unheeded. For this was the year in which the Genoese navigator,
Cristofero Colombo, returned to tell of the new and marvellous world
he had discovered beyond the seas, and Ferdinand and Isabella were
addressing an appeal to the Pope--as Ruler of the World--to establish
them in the possession of the discovered continent. Whereupon the Pope
drew a line from pole to pole, and granted to Spain the dominion over
all lands discovered, or to be discovered, one hundred miles westward of
Cape Verde and the Azores.

And thus Ferrante’s appeal to Spain against a Pope who showed himself so
ready and complaisant a friend to Spain went unheeded by Ferdinand and
Isabella. And what time the Neapolitan nursed his bitter chagrin, the
alliance between Rome and Milan was consolidated by the marriage of
Lucrezia Borgia to Giovanni Sforza, the comely weakling who was Lord of
Pesaro and Cotignola.

Lucrezia Borgia’s story has been told elsewhere; her rehabilitation
has been undertaken by a great historian(1) among others, and all
serious-minded students must be satisfied at this time of day that the
Lucrezia Borgia of Hugo’s tragedy is a creature of fiction, bearing
little or no resemblance to the poor lady who was a pawn in the
ambitious game played by her father and her brother Cesare, before she
withdrew to Ferrara, where eventually she died in child-birth in her
forty-first year. We know that she left the duke, her husband, stricken
with a grief that was shared by his subjects, to whom she had so deeply
endeared herself by her exemplary life and loving rule.(2)


  1  Ferdinand Gregorovius, Lucrezia Borgia.
2 See, inter alia, the letters of Alfonso d’Este and Giovanni Gonzaga on
her death, quoted in Gregorovius, Lucrezia Borgia.


Later, in the course of this narrative, where she crosses the story
of her brother Cesare, it will be necessary to deal with some of
the revolting calumnies concerning her that were circulated, and, in
passing, shall be revealed the sources of the malice that inspired them
and the nature of the evidence upon which they rest, to the eternal
shame alike of those pretended writers of fact and those avowed writers
of fiction who, as dead to scruples as to chivalry, have not hesitated
to make her serve their base melodramatic or pornographic ends.

At present, however, there is no more than her first marriage to be
recorded. She was fourteen years of age at the time, and, like all the
Borgias, of a rare personal beauty, with blue eyes and golden hair.
Twice before, already, had she entered into betrothal contracts with
gentlemen of her father’s native Spain; but his ever-soaring ambition
had caused him successively to cancel both those unfulfilled contracts.
A husband worthy of the daughter of Cardinal Roderigo Borgia was no
longer worthy of the daughter of Pope Alexander VI, for whom an alliance
must now be sought among Italy’s princely houses. And so she came to be
bestowed upon the Lord of Pesaro, with a dowry of 30,000 ducats.

Her nuptials were celebrated in the Vatican on June 12, 1493, in
the splendid manner worthy of the rank of all concerned and of the
reputation for magnificence which the Borgia had acquired. That night
the Pope gave a supper-party, at which were present some ten cardinals
and a number of ladies and gentlemen of Rome, besides the ambassadors
of Ferrara, Venice, Milan, and France. There was vocal and instrumental
music, a comedy was performed, the ladies danced, and they appear to
have carried their gaieties well into the dawn. Hardly the sort of scene
for which the Vatican was the ideal stage. Yet at the time it should
have given little or no scandal. But what a scandal was there not,
shortly afterwards, in connection with it, and how that scandal was
heaped up later, by stories so revolting of the doings of that night
that one is appalled at the minds that conceived them and the credulity
that accepted them.

Infessura writes of what he heard, and he writes venomously, as he
betrays by the bitter sarcasm with which he refers to the fifty silver
cups filled with sweetmeats which the Pope tossed into the laps of
ladies present at the earlier part of the celebration. “He did it,”
 says Infessura, “to the greater honour and glory of Almighty God and the
Church of Rome.” Beyond that he ventures into no great detail, checking
himself betimes, however, with a suggested motive for reticence a
thousand times worse than any formal accusation. Thus: “Much else is
said, of which I do not write, because either it is not true, or, if
true, incredible.”(1)


  1  “Et multa alia dicta sunt; que hic non scribo, que aut non sunt; vel
si sunt, incredibilia” (Infessura, Diarium).


It is amazing that the veil which Infessura drew with those words should
have been pierced--not indeed by the cold light of fact, but by the hot
eye of prurient imagination; amazing that he should be quoted at all--he
who was not present--considering that we have the testimony of what did
take place from the pen of an eye-witness, in a letter from Gianandrea
Boccaccio, the ambassador of Ferrara, to his master.

At the end of his letter, which describes the proceedings and the
wedding-gifts and their presentation, he tells us how the night was
spent. “Afterwards the ladies danced, and, as an interlude, a worthy
comedy was performed, with much music and singing, the Pope and all the
rest of us being present throughout. What else shall I add? It would
make a long letter. The whole night was spent in this manner; let your
lordship decide whether well or ill.”

Is not that sufficient to stop the foul mouth of inventive slander? What
need to suggest happenings unspeakable? Yet it is the fashion to quote
the last sentence above from Boccaccio’s letter in the original--“totam
noctem comsumpsimus; judicet modo Ex(ma.) Dominatio vestra si bene
o male”--as though decency forbade its translation; and at once this
poisonous reticence does its work, and the imagination--and not only
that of the unlettered--is fired, and all manner of abominations are
speculatively conceived.

Infessura, being absent, says that the comedies performed were
licentious (“lascive”). But what comedies of that age were not? It was
an age which had not yet invented modesty, as we understand it. That
Boccaccio, who was present, saw nothing unusual in the comedy--there
was only one, according to him--is proved by his description of it as
“worthy” (“una degna commedia.”)

M. Yriarte on this same subject(1) is not only petty, but grotesque.
He chooses to relate the incident from the point of view of Infessura,
whom, by the way, he translates with an amazing freedom,(2) and he makes
bold to add regarding Gianandrea Boccaccio that: “It must also be
said that the ambassador of Ferrara, either because he did not see
everything, or because he was less austere than Infessura, was not
shocked by the comedies, etc.” (“soit qu’il n’ait pas tout vu, soit
qu’il ait été moins austère qu’Infessura, n’est pas choqué....”)


  1  La Vie de César Borgia.
2 Thus in the matter of the fifty silver cups tossed by the Pope into
the ladies’ laps, “sinum” is the word employed by Infessura--a word
which has too loosely been given its general translation of “bosom,”
 ignoring that it equally means “lap” and that “lap” it obviously means
in this instance. M. Yriarte, however, goes a step further, and prefers
to translate it as “corsage,” which at once, and unpleasantly, falsifies
the picture; and he adds matter to dot the I’s to an extent certainly
not warranted even by Infessura.


M. Yriarte, you observe, does not scruple to opine that Boccaccio, who
was present, did not see everything; but he has no doubt that Infessura,
who was not present, and who wrote from “hearsay,” missed nothing.

Alas! Too much of the history of the Borgias has been written in this
spirit, and the discrimination in the selection of authorities has ever
been with a view to obtaining the more sensational rather than the more
truthful narrative.

Although it is known that Cesare came to Rome in the early part of
1493--for his presence there is reported by Gianandrea Boccaccio
in March of that year--there is no mention of him at this time in
connection with his sister’s wedding. Apparently, then, he was not
present, although it is impossible to suggest where he might have been
at the time.

Boccaccio draws a picture of him in that letter, which is worthy of
attention, “On the day before yesterday I found Cesare at home in
Trastevere. He was on the point of setting out to go hunting, and
entirely in secular habit; that is to say, dressed in silk and armed.
Riding together, we talked a while. I am among his most intimate
acquaintances. He is man of great talent and of an excellent nature; his
manners are those of the son of a great prince; above everything, he is
joyous and light-hearted. He is very modest, much superior to, and of a
much finer appearance than, his brother the Duke of Gandia, who also is
not short of natural gifts. The archbishop never had any inclination for
the priesthood. But his benefice yields him over 16,000 ducats.”

It may not be amiss--though perhaps no longer very necessary, after what
has been written--to say a word at this stage on the social position of
bastards in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, to emphasize the fact
that no stigma attached to Cesare Borgia or to any other member of his
father’s family on the score of the illegitimacy of their birth.

It is sufficient to consider the marriages they contracted to perceive
that, however shocking the circumstances may appear to modern notions,
the circumstance of their father being a Pope not only cannot have been
accounted extraordinarily scandalous (if scandalous at all) but, on the
contrary, rendered them eligible for alliances even princely.

In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries we see the bastard born of
a noble, as noble as his father, displaying his father’s arms without
debruisement and enjoying his rank and inheritance unchallenged on the
score of his birth, even though that inheritance should be a throne--as
witness Lucrezia’s husband Giovanni, who, though a bastard of the house
of Sforza, succeeded, nevertheless, his father in the Tyranny of Pesaro
and Cotignola.

Later we shall see this same Lucrezia, her illegitimacy notwithstanding,
married into the noble House of Este and seated upon the throne of
Ferrara. And before then we shall have seen the bastard Cesare married
to a daughter of the royal House of Navarre. Already we have seen the
bastard Francesco Cibo take to wife the daughter of the great Lorenzo
de’Medici, and we have seen the bastard Girolamo Riario married to
Caterina Sforza--a natural daughter of the ducal House of Milan--and we
have seen the pair installed in the Tyranny of Imola and Forli. A score
of other instances might be added; but these should suffice.

The matter calls for the making of no philosophies, craves no
explaining, and, above all, needs no apology. It clears itself.
The fifteenth and sixteenth centuries--more just than our own more
enlightened times--attributed no shame to the men and women born out of
wedlock, saw no reason--as no reason is there, Christian or Pagan--why
they should suffer for a condition that was none of their contriving.

To mention it may be of help in visualizing and understanding that
direct and forceful epoch, and may even suggest some lenience in
considering a Pope’s carnal paternity. To those to whom the point of
view of the Renaissance does not promptly suggest itself from this plain
statement of fact, all unargued as we leave it, we recommend a perusal
of Gianpietro de Crescenzi’s Il Nobile Romano.

The marriage of Lucrezia Borgia to Giovanni Sforza tightened the
relations between the Pope and Milan, as the Pope intended. Meanwhile,
however, the crafty and mistrustful Lodovico, having no illusions as
to the true values of his allies, and realizing them to be self-seekers
like himself, with interests that were fundamentally different from his
own, perceived that they were likely only to adhere to him for just
so long as it suited their own ends. He bethought him, therefore, of
looking about him for other means by which to crush the power of Naples.
France was casting longing eyes upon Italy, and it seemed to Lodovico
that in France was a ready catspaw. Charles VIII, as the representative
of the House of Anjou, had a certain meagre claim upon the throne of
Naples; if he could be induced to ride south, lance on thigh, and press
that claim there would be an end to the dominion of the House of Aragon,
and so an end to Lodovico’s fears of a Neapolitan interference with his
own occupation of the throne of Milan.

To an ordinary schemer that should have been enough; but as a schemer
Lodovico was wholly extraordinary. His plans grew in the maturing, and
took in side-issues, until he saw that Naples should be to Charles VIII
as the cheese within the mouse-trap. Let his advent into Italy to break
the power of Naples be free and open; but, once within, he should find
Milan and the northern allies between himself and his retreat, and
Lodovico’s should it be to bring him to his knees. Thus schemed Lodovico
to shiver, first Naples and then France, before hurling the latter back
across the Alps. A daring, bold, and yet simple plan of action. And what
a power in Italy should not Lodovico derive from its success!

Forthwith he got secretly to work upon it, sending his invitation to
Charles to come and make good his claim to Naples, offering the French
troops free passage through his territory.(1) And in the character
of his invitation he played upon the nature of malformed, ambitious
Charles, whose brain was stuffed with romance and chivalric
rhodomontades. The conquest of Naples was an easy affair, no more than
a step in the glorious enterprise that awaited the French king, for
from Naples he could cross to engage the Turk, and win back the Holy
Sepulchre, thus becoming a second Charles the Great.


  1  See Corlo, Storia di Milano, and Lodovico’s letter to Charles VIII,
quoted therein, lib. vii.


Thus Lodovico Maria the crafty, to dazzle Charles the romantic, and to
take the bull of impending invasion by the very horns.

We have seen the failure of the appeal to Spain against the Pope made
by the King of Naples. To that failure was now added the tightening of
Rome’s relations with Milan by the marriage between Lucrezia Borgia and
Giovanni Sforza, and Ferrante--rumours of a French invasion, with
Naples for its objective being already in the air--realized that nothing
remained him but to make another attempt to conciliate the Pope’s
Holiness. And this time he went about his negotiations in a manner
better calculated to serve his ends, since his need was grown more
urgent. He sent the Prince of Altamura again to Rome for the ostensible
purpose of settling the vexatious matter of Cervetri and Anguillara and
making alliance with the Holy Father, whilst behind Altamura was the
Neapolitan army ready to move upon Rome should the envoy fail this time.

But on the terms now put forward, Alexander was willing to negotiate,
and so a peace was patched up between Naples and the Holy See, the
conditions of which were that Orsini should retain the fiefs for his
lifetime, but that they should revert to Holy Church on his death, and
that he should pay the Church for the life-lease of them the sum of
40,000 ducats, which already he had paid to Francesco Cibo; that the
peace should be consolidated by the marriage of the Pope’s bastard,
Giuffredo, with Sancia of Aragon, the natural daughter of the Duke of
Calabria, heir to the throne of Naples, and that she should bring the
Principality of Squillace and the County of Coriate as her dowry.

The other condition demanded by Naples--at the suggestion of Cardinal
Giuliano della Rovere--was that the Pope should disgrace and dismiss
his Vice­Chancellor, Ascanio Sforza, which would have shattered the
pontifical relations with Milan. To this, however, the Pope would not
agree, but he met Naples in the matter to the extent of consenting to
overlook Cardinal della Rovere’s defection and receive him back into
favour.

On these terms the peace was at last concluded in August of 1493, and
immediately afterwards there arrived in Rome the Sieur Peron de Basche,
an envoy from the King of France charged with the mission to prevent any
alliance between Rome and Naples.

The Frenchman was behind the fair. The Pope took the only course
possible under the awkward circumstances, and refused to see the
ambasssador. Thereupon the offended King of France held a grand council
“in which were proposed and treated many things against the Pope and for
the reform of the Church.”

These royal outbursts of Christianity, these pious kingly frenzies to
unseat an unworthy Pontiff and reform the Church, follow always, you
will observe, upon the miscarriage of royal wishes.

In the Consistory of September 1493 the Pope created twelve new
cardinals to strengthen the Sacred College in general and his own hand
in particular.

Amongst these new creations were the Pope’s son Cesare, and Alessandro
Farnese, the brother of the beautiful Giulia. The grant of the red hat
to the latter appears to have caused some scandal, for, owing to the
Pope’s relations with his sister, to which it was openly said that
Farnese owed the purple, he received the by-name of Cardinal della
Gonella--Cardinal of the Petticoat.

That was the first important step in the fortunes of the House of
Farnese, which was to give dukes to Parma, and reach the throne of Spain
(in the person of Isabella Farnese) before becoming extinct in 1758.





BOOK II. THE BULL PASCANT

Roma Bovem invenit tunc, cum fundatur aratro, Et nunc lapsa suo est ecce
renata Bove.

From an inscription quoted by Bernardino Coaxo.





CHAPTER I. THE FRENCH INVASION


You see Cesare Borgia, now in his nineteenth year, raised to the purple
with the title of Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria Nuova--notwithstanding
which, however, he continues to be known in preference, and, indeed, to
sign himself by the title of his archbishopric, Cardinal of Valencia.

It is hardly necessary to mention that, although already Bishop of
Pampeluna and Archbishop of Valencia, he had received so far only his
first tonsure. He never did receive any ecclesiastical orders beyond the
minor and revocable ones.

It was said by Infessura, and has since been repeated by a multitude of
historians, upon no better authority than that of this writer on hearsay
and inveterate gossip, that, to raise Cesare to the purple, Alexander
was forced to prove the legitimacy of that young man’s birth, and that
to this end he procured false witnesses to swear that he was “the son of
Vannozza de’ Catanei and her husband, Domenico d’Arignano.” Already has
this been touched upon in an earlier chapter, here it was shown that
Vannozza never had a husband of the name of d’Arignano, and it might
reasonably be supposed that this circumstance alone would have sufficed
to restrain any serious writer from accepting and repeating Infessura’s
unauthoritative statement.

But if more they needed, it was ready to their hands in the Bull
of Sixtus IV of October 1, 1480--to which also allusion has been
made--dispensing Cesare from proving his legitimacy: “Super defectum
natalium od ordines et quoecumque beneficia.”

Besides that, of what avail would any false swearing have been,
considering that Cesare was openly named Borgia, that he was openly
acknowledged by his father, and that in the very Bull above mentioned he
is stated to be the son of Roderigo Borgia?

This is another instance of the lightness, the recklessness with which
Alexander VI has been accused of unseemly and illicit conduct, which it
may not be amiss to mention at this stage, since, if not the accusation
itself, at least the matter that occasioned it belongs chronologically
here.

During the first months of his reign--following in the footsteps of
predecessors who had made additions to the Vatican--Alexander set
about the building of the Borgia Tower. For its decoration he brought
Perugino, Pinturicchio, Volterrano, and Peruzzi to Rome. Concerning
Pinturicchio and Alexander, Vasari tells us, in his Vita degli Artefici,
that over the door of one of the rooms in the Borgia Tower the artist
painted a picture of the Virgin Mary in the likeness of Giulia Farnese
(who posed to him as the model) with Alexander kneeling to her in
adoration, arrayed in full pontificals.

Such a thing would have been horrible, revolting, sacrilegious.
Fortunately it does not even amount to a truth untruly told; and well
would it be if all the lies against the Borgias were as easy to refute.
True, Pinturicchio did paint Giulia Farnese as the Madonna; true also
that he did paint Alexander kneeling in adoration--but not to the
Madonna, not in the same picture at all. The Madonna for which Giulia
Farnese was the model is over a doorway, as Vasari says. The kneeling
Alexander is in another room, and the object of his adoration is the
Saviour rising from His tomb.

Yet one reputable writer after another has repeated that lie of
Vasari’s, and shocked us by the scandalous spectacle of a Pope so
debauched and lewd that he kneels in pontificals, in adoration, at the
feet of his mistress depicted as the Virgin Mary.

In October of that same year of 1493 Cesare accompanied his father on a
visit to Orvieto, a journey which appears to have been partly undertaken
in response to an invitation from Giulia Farnese’s brother Alessandro.

Orvieto was falling at the time into decay and ruin, no longer the
prosperous centre it had been less than a hundred years earlier; but the
shrewd eye of Alexander perceived its value as a stronghold, to be used
as an outpost of Rome or as a refuge in time of danger, and he proceeded
to repair and fortify it. In the following summer Cesare was invested
with its governorship, at the request of its inhabitants, who sent an
embassy to the Pope with their proposal,--by way, no doubt, of showing
their gratitude for his interest in the town.

But in the meantime, towards the end of 1493, King Ferrante’s uneasiness
at the ever-swelling rumours of the impending French invasion was
quickened by the fact that the Pope had not yet sent his son Giuffredo
to Naples to marry Donna Sancia, as had been contracted. Ferrante feared
the intrigues of Milan with Alexander, and that the latter might
be induced, after all, to join the northern league. In a frenzy of
apprehension, the old king was at last on the point of going to Milan to
throw himself at the feet of Lodovico Sforza, who was now his only hope,
when news reached him that his ambassadors had been ordered to leave
France.

That death-blow to his hopes was a death-blow to the man himself. Upon
receiving the news he was smitten by an apoplexy, and upon January 25,
1494, he departed this life without the consolation of being able to
suppose that any of his schemes had done anything to avert the impending
ruin of his house.

In spite of all Alexander’s intercessions and representations,
calculated to induce Charles VIII to abandon his descent upon Italy; in
spite, no less, of the counsel he received at home from such far-seeing
men as had his ear, the Christian King was now determined upon the
expedition and his preparations were well advanced. In the month of
March he assumed the title of King of Sicily, and sent formal intimation
of it to Alexander, demanding his investiture at the hands of the Pope
and offering to pay him a heavy annual tribute. Alexander was thus given
to choose between the wrath of France and the wrath of Naples, and--to
put the basest construction on his motives--he saw that the peril from
an enemy on his very frontiers would be more imminent than that of an
enemy beyond the Alps. It is also possible that he chose to be guided by
his sense of justice and to do in the matter what he considered right.
By whatever motive he was prompted, the result was that he refused to
accede to the wishes of the Christian King.

The Consistory which received the French ambassador--Peron de
Basche--became the scene of stormy remonstrances, Cardinal Giuliano
della Rovere, of course, supporting the ambassador and being supported
in his act of insubordination by the Vice-Chancellor Ascanio Sforza
(who represented his brother Lodovico in the matter) and the Cardinals
Sanseverino, Colonna, and Savelli, all attached to French interests.
Peron de Basche so far presumed, no doubt emboldened by this support, as
to threaten the Pope with deposition if he persisted in his refusal to
obey the King of France.

You see once more that kingly attitude, and you shall see it yet again
presently and be convinced of its precise worth. In one hand a bribe of
heavy annual tribute, in the other a threat of deposition; it was thus
they conducted their business with the Holy Father. In this instance his
Holiness took the threat, and dismissed the insolent ambassador. Della
Rovere, conceiving that in France he had a stouter ally than in Naples,
and seeing that he had once more incurred the papal anger by his
open enmity, fled back to Ostia; and, not feeling safe there, for the
pontifical forces were advancing upon his fortress, took ship to Genoa,
and thence to France, to plot the Pope’s ruin with the exasperated
Charles; and, the charge of simony being the only weapon with which
they could attack Alexander’s seat upon the papal throne, the charge of
simony was once more brandished.

His Holiness took the matter with a becoming and stately calm. He sent
his nephew, Giovanni Borgia, to Naples to crown Alfonso, and with him
went Giuffredo Borgia to carry out the marriage contract with Alfonso’s
daughter, and thus strengthen the alliance between Rome and Naples.

By the autumn Charles had crossed the Alps with the most formidable army
that had ever been sent out of France, full ninety thousand strong. And
so badly was the war conducted by the Neapolitan generals who were sent
to hold him in check that the appearance of the French under the very
walls of Rome was almost such as to take the Pope by surprise. Charles’s
advance from the north had been so swift and unhindered that Alexander
contemptuously said the French soldiers had come into Italy with wooden
spurs and chalk in their hands to mark their lodgings.

Charles had been well received by the intriguing Lodovico Sforza, with
whom he visited the Castle of Pavia and the unfortunate Gian Galeazzo,
who from long confinement, chagrin, and other causes was now reduced
to the sorriest condition. Indeed, on October 22, some days after that
visit, the wretched prince expired. Whether or not Lodovico had him
poisoned, as has been alleged--a charge, which, after all, rests on no
proof, nor even upon the word of any person of reliance--his death most
certainly lies at his ambitious uncle’s door.

Charles was at Piacenza when the news of Gian Galeazzo’s death reached
him. Like the good Christian that he accounted himself, he ordered the
most solemn and imposing obsequies for the poor youth for whom in life
he had done nothing.

Gian Galeazzo left a heart-broken girl-widow and two children to succeed
him to the throne he had never been allowed to occupy--the eldest,
Francesco Sforza, being a boy of five. Nevertheless, Lodovico was
elected Duke of Milan. Not only did he suborn the Parliament of Milan
to that end, but he induced the Emperor to confirm him in the title. To
this the Emperor consented, seeking to mask the unscrupulous deed by a
pitiful sophism. He expounded that the throne of Milan should originally
have been Lodovico’s, and never Galeazzo Maria’s (Gian Galeazzo’s
father), because the latter was born before Francesco Sforza had become
Duke of Milan, whereas Lodovico was born when he already was so.

The obsequies of Gian Galeazzo completed, Charles pushed on. From
Florence he issued his manifesto, and although this confined itself to
claiming the kingdom of Naples, and said no word of punishing the Pope
for his disobedience in crowning Alfonso and being now in alliance with
him, it stirred up grave uneasiness at the Vatican.

The Pope’s position was becoming extremely difficult; nevertheless,
he wore the boldest possible face when he received the ambassadors of
France, and on December 9 refused to grant the letters patent of passage
through the Pontifical States which the French demanded. Thereupon
Charles advanced threateningly upon Rome, and was joined now by those
turbulent barons Orsini, Colonna, and Savelli.

Alexander VI has been widely accused of effecting a volte-face at this
stage and betraying his Neapolitan allies; but his conduct, properly
considered, can hardly amount to that. What concessions he made to
France were such as a wise and inadequately supported man must make to
an army ninety thousand strong. To be recklessly and quixotically heroic
is not within the function of Popes; moreover, Alexander had Rome to
think of, for Charles had sent word that, if he were resisted he would
leave all in ruins, whereas if a free passage were accorded him he would
do no hurt nor suffer any pillage to be done in Rome.

So the Pope did the only thing consistent with prudence: he made a
virtue of necessity and gave way where it was utterly impossible for him
to resist. He permitted Charles the passage through his territory which
Charles was perfectly able to take for himself if refused. There ensued
an interchange of compliments between Pope and King, and early in
January Charles entered Rome in such warlike panoply as struck terror
into the hearts of all beholders. Of that entrance Paolo Giovio has left
us an impressive picture.

The vanguard was composed of Swiss and German mercenaries--tall fellows,
these professional warriors, superb in their carriage and stepping
in time to the beat of their drums; they were dressed in variegated,
close-fitting garments that revealed all their athletic symmetry. A
fourth of them were armed with long, square-bladed halberts, new to
Italy; the remainder trailed their ten-foot pikes, and carried a short
sword at their belts, whilst to every thousand of them there were a
hundred arquebusiers. After them came the French infantry, without
armour save the officers, who wore steel corselets and head-pieces.
These, again, were followed by five thousand Gascon arbalisters, each
shouldering his arbalest--a phalanx of short, rude fellows, not to be
compared with the stately Swiss. Next came the cavalry, advancing in
squadrons, glittering and resplendent in their steel casings; 2,500 of
these were in full heavy armour, wielding iron maces and the ponderous
lances that were usual also in Italy. Every man-at-arms had with him
three horses, mounted by a squire and two valets (four men going to the
lance in France). Some 5,000 of the cavalry were more lightly armed, in
corselets and head-piece only, and they carried long wooden bows in the
English fashion; whilst some were armed with pikes, intended to complete
the work of the heavier cavalry. These were followed by 200 knights--the
very flower of French chivalry for birth and valour--shouldering their
heavy iron maces, their armour covered by purple, gold-embroidered
surcoats. Behind them came 400 mounted archers forming the bodyguard of
the king.

The misshapen monarch himself was the very caricature of a man, hideous
and grotesque as a gargoyle. He was short of stature, spindle-shanked,
rachitic and malformed, and of his face, with its colossal nose, loose
mouth and shallow brow, Giovio says that “it was the ugliest ever seen
on man.”

Such was the person of the young king--he was twenty-four years of age
at the time--who poured his legions into Rome, and all full-armed as if
for work of immediate destruction. Seen, as they were, by torchlight
and the blaze of kindled bonfires--for night had fallen long before
the rearguard had entered the city--they looked vague, fantastic, and
terrifying. But the most awe-inspiring sight of all was kept for the
end; it consisted of the thirty-six pieces of artillery which brought
up the rear, each piece upon a carriage swiftly drawn by horses, and
the longest measuring eight feet, weighing six thousand pounds, and
discharging an iron ball as big as a man’s head.

The king lay in the Palace of San Marco, where a lodging had been
prepared for him, and thither on the day after his entrance came Cesare
Borgia, with six Cardinals, from the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, whither
the Pope had withdrawn, to wait upon his Christian Majesty. Charles
immediately revealed the full and exigent nature of his demands. He
required the Pope’s aid and counsel in the conquest of Naples, upon
which he was proceeding; that Cesare Borgia be delivered into his hands
as a hostage to ensure the Pope’s friendliness; and that the Castle of
Sant’ Angelo be handed over to him to be used as a retreat in case of
need or danger. Further, he demanded that Prince Djem--the brother of
Sultan Bajazet, who was in the Pope’s hands--should be delivered up to
him as a further hostage.

This Djem (Gem, or Zizim, as his name is variously spelled) was the
second son of Mahomet II, whose throne he had disputed with his brother
Bajazet on their father’s death. He had raised an army to enforce his
claim, and had not lacked for partisans; but he was defeated and put
to flight by his brother. For safety he had delivered himself up to the
Knights of Rhodes, whom he knew to be Bajazet’s implacable enemies.
They made him very welcome, for d’Aubusson, the Grand Master of Rhodes,
realized that the possession of the prince’s person was a very fortunate
circumstance for Christianity, since by means of such a hostage the
Turk could be kept in submission. Accordingly d’Aubusson had sent him to
France, and wrote: “While Djem lives, and is in our hands, Bajazet will
never dare to make war upon Christians, who will thus enjoy great peace.
Thus is it salutary that Djem should remain in our power.” And in France
Djem had been well received and treated with every consideration due to
a person of his princely rank.

But he appears to have become a subject of contention among the
Powers, several of which urged that he could be of greater service to
Christianity in their hands than in those of France. Thus, the King of
Hungary had demanded him because, being a neighbour of Bajazet’s, he
was constantly in apprehension of Turkish raids. Ferdinand of Spain had
desired him because the possession of him would assist the Catholic King
in the expulsion of the Moors. Ferrante of Naples had craved him because
he lived in perpetual terror of a Turkish invasion.

In the end he had been sent to Rome, whither he went willingly under
the advice of the Knights of Rhodes, whose prisoner he really considered
himself. They had discovered that Bajazet was offering enormous bribes
to Charles for the surrender of him, and they feared lest Charles should
succumb to the temptation.

So Prince Djem had come to Rome in the reign of Pope Innocent VIII, and
there he had since remained, Sultan Bajazet making the Pope an annual
allowance of forty thousand ducats for his brother’s safe custody. He
was a willing prisoner, or rather a willing exile, for, far from being
kept a prisoner, he was treated at Rome with every consideration,
associating freely with those about the Pontifical Court, and being
frequently seen abroad in company with the Pope and the Duke of Gandia.

Now Charles was aware that the Pope, in his dread of a French invasion,
and seeing vain all his efforts to dissuade Charles from making his
descent upon Italy, had appealed for aid to Bajazet. For so doing he has
been severely censured, and with some justice, for the picture of the
Head of Christianity making appeal to the infidel to assist him against
Christians is not an edifying one. Still, it receives some measure
of justification when we reflect what was the attitude of these same
Christians towards their Head.

Bajazet himself, thrown into a panic at the thought of Djem falling into
the hands of a king who proposed to make a raid upon him, answered the
Pope begging his Holiness to “have Djem removed from the tribulations of
this world, and his soul transported to another, where he might enjoy a
greater peace.” For this service he offered the Pope 300,000 ducats, to
be paid on delivery of the prince’s body; and, if the price was high, so
was the service required, for it would have ensured Bajazet a peace of
mind he could not hope to enjoy while his brother lived.

This letter was intercepted by Giovanni della Rovere, the Prefect of
Sinigaglia, who very promptly handed it to his brother, the Cardinal
Giuliano. The cardinal, in his turn, laid it before the King of France,
who now demanded of the Pope the surrender of the person of this Djem as
a further hostage.

Alexander began by rejecting the king’s proposals severally and
collectively, but Charles pressed him to reconsider his refusal, and so,
being again between the sword and the wall, the Pope was compelled to
submit. A treaty was drawn up and signed on January 15, the king, on
his side, promising to recognize the Pope and to uphold him in all his
rights.

On the following day Charles made solemn act of veneration to the
Pontiff in Consistory, kissing his ring and his foot, and professing
obedience to him as the kings of France, his forbears, had ever done.
Words for deeds!

Charles remained twelve days longer in Rome, and set out at last, on
January 28, upon the conquest of Naples. First he went solemnly to take
his leave of the Pope, and they parted with every outward mark of a
mutual esteem which they most certainly cannot have experienced. When
Charles knelt for the Pope’s blessing, Alexander raised him up and
embraced him; whilst Cesare completed the show of friendliness by
presenting Charles with six beautiful chargers.

They set out immediately afterwards, the French king taking with him
his hostages, neither of which he was destined to retain for long, with
Cesare riding in the place of honour on his right.

The army lay at Marino that night, and on the following at Velletri. In
the latter city Charles was met by an ambassador of Spain--Antonio da
Fonseca. Ferdinand and Isabella were moved at last to befriend their
cousins of Naples, whom all else had now abandoned, and at the same time
serve their own interests. Their ambassador demanded that Charles should
abandon his enterprise and return to France, or else be prepared for war
with Spain.

It is eminently probable that Cesare had knowledge of this ultimatum to
Charles, and that his knowledge influenced his conduct. However that may
be, he slipped out of Velletri in the dead of that same night disguised
as a groom. Half a mile out of the town, Francesco del Sacco, an officer
of the Podestá of Velletri, awaited him with a horse, and on this he
sped back to Rome, where he arrived on the night of the 30th. He went
straight to the house of one Antonio Flores, an auditor of the Tribunal
of the Ruota and a person of his confidence, who through his influence
and protection was destined to rise to the eminence of the archbishopric
of Avignon and Papal Nuncio to the Court of France.

Cesare remained at Flores’s house, sending word to the Pope of his
presence, but not attempting to approach the Vatican. On the following
day he withdrew to the stronghold of Spoleto.

Meanwhile Rome was thrown into a panic by the young cardinal’s
action and the dread of reprisals on the part of France. The quaking
municipality sent representatives to Charles to assure him that Rome had
had nothing to do with this breach of the treaty, and to implore him not
to visit it upon the city. The king replied by a special embassy to
the Pope, and there apparently dropped the matter, for a few days later
Cesare reappeared at the Vatican.

Charles, meanwhile, despite the threats of Spain, pushed on to
accomplish his easy conquest.

King Alfonso had already fled the kingdom (January 25), abdicating in
favour of his brother Federigo. His avowed object was to withdraw to
Sicily, retire from the world, and do penance for his sins, for which no
doubt there was ample occasion. The real spur was probably--as opined
by Commines--cowardice; for, says that Frenchman, “Jamais homme cruel ne
fut hardi.”

Federigo’s defence of the realm consigned to him was not conspicuous,
for the French entered Naples almost without striking a blow within
twenty days of their departure from Rome.

Scarcely had Charles laid aside his armour when death robbed him of the
second hostage he had brought from the Vatican. On February 25, after
a week’s illness, Prince Djem died of dysentery at the Castle of Capua,
whither Charles had sent him.

Rumours that he had been poisoned by the Pope arose almost at once; but,
considering that twenty­eight days had elapsed since his parting
from Alexander, it was, with the best intentions in the world, rather
difficult to make that poisoning credible, until the bright notion was
conceived, and made public, that the poison used was a “white powder”
 of unknown components, which did its work slowly, and killed the victim
some time after it had been administered. Thus, by a bold and brazen
invention, an impossible falsehood was made to wear a possible aspect.

And in that you have most probably the origin of the famous secret
poison of the Borgias. Having been invented to fit the alleged poisoning
of Prince Djem, which it was desired to fasten upon the Pope by hook or
by crook, it was found altogether too valuable an invention not to be
used again. By means of it, it became possible to lay almost any death
in the world at the door of Alexander.

Before proceeding to inquire further into this particular case, let us
here and now say that, just as to-day there is no inorganic toxin known
to science that will either lie fallow for weeks in the human system,
suddenly to become active and slay, or yet to kill by slow degrees
involving some weeks in the process, so none was known in the Borgian or
any other era. Science indeed will tell you that the very notion of
any such poison is flagrantly absurd, and that such a toxic action is
against all the laws of nature.

But a scientific disquisition is unnecessary. For our present needs
arguments of common sense should abundantly suffice. This poison--this
white powder--was said to be a secret of the Borgias. If that is so,
by what Borgia was the secret of its existence ever divulged? Or, if it
never was divulged, how comes it to be known that a poison so secret,
and working at such distances of time, was ever wielded by them?

The very nature of its alleged action was such as utterly to conceal the
hand that had administered it; yet here, on the first recorded occasion
of its alleged use, it was more or less common knowledge if Giovio and
Guicciardini are to be believed!

Sagredo(1) says that Djem died at Terracina three days after having been
consigned to Charles VIII, of poison administered by Alexander, to whom
Bajazet had promised a large sum of money for the deed. The same is
practically Giovio’s statement, save that Giovio causes him to die at
a later date and at Gaeta; Guicciardini and Corio tell a similar story,
but inform us that he died in Naples.


  1  In Mem. Storiche dei Monarchi Ottomani.


It is entirely upon the authority of these four writers that the Pope is
charged with having poisoned Djem, and it is noteworthy that in the four
narratives we find different dates and three different places given as
the date and place of the Turk’s death, and more noteworthy still that
in not one instance of these four is date or place correctly stated.

Now the place where Djem died, and the date of his death, were public
facts about which there was no mystery; they were to be ascertained--as
they are still--by any painstaking examiner. His poisoning, on the
other hand, was admittedly a secret matter, the truth of which it was
impossible to ascertain with utter and complete finality. Yet of this
poisoning they know all the secrets, these four nimble writers who
cannot correctly tell us where or when the man died!

We will turn from the fictions they have left us--which, alas! have but
too often been preferred by subsequent writers to the true facts
which lay just as ready to their hands, but of course were less
sensational--and we will consider instead the evidence of those
contemporaries who do, at least, know the time and place of Djem’s
decease.

If any living man might have known of a secret poison of the Borgias at
this stage, that man was Burchard the Caeremoniarius, and, had he known
of it, not for a moment would he have been silent on the point. Yet
not a word of this secret poison shall you find in his diaries, and
concerning the death of Djem he records that “on February 25 died at the
Castle of Capua the said Djem, through meat or drink that disagreed with
him.”

Panvinio, who, being a Neapolitan, was not likely to be any too friendly
to the Pope--as, indeed, he proves again and again--tells us positively
that Djem died of dysentry at Capua.(1)


  1  Vitis Pontif. Rom.


Sanuto, writing to the Council of Ten, says that Djem took ill at Capua
of a catarrh, which “descended to his stomach”; and that so he died.

And now mark Sanuto’s reasoning upon his death, which is the very
reasoning we should ourselves employ finally to dispose of this chatter
of poisoning, did we not find it awaiting quotation, more authoritative
therefore than it could be from us, and utterly irrefutable and
conclusive in its logic. “This death is very harmful to the King of
France, to all Italy, and chiefly to the Pope, who is thereby deprived
of 40,000 ducats yearly, which was paid him by his [Djem’s] brother for
his custody. And the king showed himself greatly grieved by this death,
and it was suspected that the Pope had poisoned him, which, however, was
not to be believed, as it would have been to his own loss.”

Just so--to his own infinite loss, not only of the 40,000 ducats yearly,
but of the hold which the custody of Djem gave him upon the Turks.

The reason assigned by those who charged Alexander with this crime
was the bribe of 300,000 ducats offered by Bajezet in the intercepted
letter. The offer--which, incidentally, had never reached the Pope--was
instantly taken as proof of its acceptance--a singular case of making
cause follow upon effect, a method all too prevalent with the Borgian
chroniclers. Moreover, they entirely overlooked the circumstance that,
for Djem’s death in the hands of France, the Pope could make no claim
upon Bajazet.

Finally--though the danger be incurred of becoming tedious upon this
point--they also forgot that, years before, Bajazet had offered such
bribes to Charles for the life of Djem as had caused the Knights of
Rhodes to remove the Turk from French keeping. Upon that circumstance
they might, had it sorted with their inclinations, have set up a
stronger case of poisoning against Charles than against the Pope, and
they would not have been put to the necessity of inventing a toxin that
never had place in any earthly pharmacopoeia.

It is not, by this, suggested that there is any shadow of a case against
Charles. Djem died a perfectly natural death, as is established by the
only authorities competent to speak upon the matter, and his death was
against the interests of everybody save his brother Bajazet; and against
nobody’s so much as the Pope’s.




CHAPTER II. THE POPE AND THE SUPERNATURAL


By the middle of March of that year 1495 the conquest of Naples was a
thoroughly accomplished fact, and the French rested upon their victory,
took their ease, and made merry in the capital of the vanquished
kingdom.

But in the north Lodovico Sforza-now Duke of Milan de facto, as we have
seen--set about the second part of the game that was to be played. He
had a valuable ally in Venice, which looked none too favourably on the
French and was fully disposed to gather its forces against the common
foe. The Council of Ten sent their ambassador, Zorzi, to the Pope to
propose an alliance.

News reached Charles in Naples of the league that was being formed. He
laughed at it, and the matter was made the subject of ridicule in some
of the comedies that were being performed for the amusement of his
Court. Meanwhile, the intrigue against him went forward; on March 26 his
Holiness sent the Golden Rose to the Doge, and on Palm Sunday the league
was solemnly proclaimed in St. Peter’s. Its terms were vague; there
was nothing in it that was directly menacing to Charles; it was simply
declared to have been formed for the common good. But in the north the
forces were steadily gathering to cut off the retreat of the French, and
suddenly Lodovico Sforza threw aside the mask and made an attack upon
the French navy at Genoa.

At last Charles awoke to his danger and began to care for his safety.
Rapidly he organized the occupation of Naples, and, leaving Montpensier
as Viceroy and d’Aubigny as Captain-General, he set out for Rome with
his army, intent upon detaching the Pope from the league; for the Pope,
being the immediate neighbour of Naples, would be as dangerous as an
enemy as he was valuable as an ally to Charles.

He entered Rome on June 1. The Pope, however, was not there to receive
him. Alexander had left on May 28 for Orvieto, accompanied by Cesare,
the Sacred College, 200 men-at-arms, and 1,000 horse and 3,000 foot,
supplied by Venice. At Orvieto, on June 3, the Pontiff received an
ambassador from the Emperor, who had joined the league, and on the
4th he refused audience to the ambassador of France, sent to him from
Ronciglione, where the King had halted. Charles, insistent, sent again,
determined to see the Pope; but Alexander, quite as determined not to
see the king, pushed on to Perugia with his escort.

There his Holiness abode until the French and Italians had met on the
River Taro and joined battle at Fornovo, of which encounter both sides
claimed the victory. If Charles’s only object was to win through, then
the victory undoubtedly was his, for he certainly succeeded in cutting
a way through the Italians who disputed his passage. But he suffered
heavily, and left behind him most of his precious artillery, his tents
and carriages, and the immense Neapolitan booty he was taking home, with
which he had loaded (says Gregorovius) twenty thousand mules. All this
fell into the hands of the Italian allies under Gonzaga of Mantua,
whilst from Fornovo Charles’s retreat was more in the nature of
a flight. Thus he won back to France, no whit the better for his
expedition, and the only mark of his passage which he left behind him
was an obscene ailment, which, with the coming of the French into Italy,
first manifested itself in Europe, and which the Italians paid them the
questionable compliment of calling “the French disease”--morbo gallico,
or il mal francese.

During the Pope’s visit to Perugia an incident occurred which is not
without importance to students of his character, and of the character
left of him by his contemporaries and others.

There lived in Perugia at this time a young nun of the Order of St.
Dominic, who walked in the way of St. Catherine of Siena, Colomba da
Rieti by name. You will find some marvellous things about her in the
Perugian chronicles of Matarazzo, which, for that matter, abound in
marvellous things--too marvellous mostly to be true.

When he deals with events happening beyond the walls of his native town
Matarazzo, as an historian, is contemptible to a degree second only to
that of those who quote him as an authority. When he deals with matters
that, so to speak, befell under his very eyes, he is worthy, if not of
credit at least of attention, for his “atmosphere” is valuable.

Of this Sister Colomba Matarazzo tells us that she ate not nor drank,
save sometimes some jujube fruit, and even these but rarely. “On the day
of her coming to Perugia (which happened in 1488), as she was Crossing
the Bridge of St. Gianni some young men attempted to lay hands upon her,
for she was comely and beautiful; but as they did so, she showed them
the jujube fruit which she carried in a white cloth, whereupon they
instantly stood bereft of strength and wits.”

Next he tells us how she would pass from life for an hour or two, and
sometimes for half a day, and her pulse would cease to beat, and she
would, seem all dead. And then she would quiver and come to herself
again, and prophesy the future, and threaten disaster. And again:
“One morning two of her teeth were found to have fallen out, which had
happened in fighting with the devil; and, for the many intercessions
which she made, and the scandals which she repaired by her prayers, the
people came to call her saint.”

Notwithstanding all this, and the fact that she lived without
nourishment, he tells us that the brothers of St. Francis had little
faith in her. Nevertheless, the community built her a very fine
monastery, which was richly endowed, and many nuns took the habit of her
Order.

Now it happened that whilst at Perugia in his student days, Cesare had
witnessed a miracle performed by this poor ecstatic girl; or rather he
had arrived on the scene--the Church of St. Catherine of Siena--to
find her, with a little naked boy in her lap, the centre of an excited,
frenzied crowd, which was proclaiming loudly that the child had been
dead and that she had resurrected him. This was a statement which the
Prior of the Dominicans did not seem disposed unreservedly to accept,
for, when approached with a suggestion that the bells should be rung
in honour of the event, he would not admit that he saw any cause to
sanction such a course.

In the few years that were sped since then, however, sister Colomba
had acquired the great reputation of which Matarazzo tells us, so that,
throughout the plain of Tiber, the Dominicans were preaching her fame
from convent to convent. In December of 1495 Charles VIII heard of
her at Siena, and was stirred by a curiosity which he accounted
devotional--the same curiosity that caused one of his gentlemen to
entreat Savonarola to perform “just a little miracle” for the King’s
entertainment. You can picture the gloomy fanatic’s reception of that
invitation.

The Pope now took the opportunity of his sojourn in Perugia to pay
Colomba da Rieti a visit, and there can be no doubt that he did so in a
critical spirit. Accompanied by Cesare and some cardinals and gentlemen
of his following, he went to the Church of St. Dominic and was conducted
to the sister’s cell by the Prior--the same who in Cesare’s student-days
had refused to have the bells rung.

Upon seeing the magnificent figure of the Pontiff filling the doorway of
her little chamber, Sister Colomba fell at his feet, and, taking hold of
the hem of his gown, she remained prostrate and silent for some moments,
when at last she timidly arose. Alexander set her some questions
concerning the Divine Mysteries. These she answered readily at first,
but, as his questions grew, she faltered, became embarrassed, and fell
silent, standing before him white and trembling, no doubt a very piteous
figure. The Pope, not liking this, turned to the Prior to demand an
explanation, and admonished him sternly: “Caveto, Pater, quia ego Papa
sum!”

This had the effect of throwing the Prior into confusion, and he set
himself to explain that she was in reality very wonderful, that he
himself had not at first believed in her, but that he had seen so
much that he had been converted. At this stage Cesare came to his
aid, bearing witness, as he could, that he himself had seen the
Prior discredit her when others were already hailing her as a saint,
wherefore, if he now was convinced, he must have had very good evidence
to convince him. We can imagine the Prior’s gratitude to the young
cardinal for that timely word when he saw himself in danger perhaps of
being called to account for fostering and abetting an imposture.

What was Alexander’s opinion of her in the end we do not know; but we
do know that he was not readily credulous. When, for instance, he heard
that the stigmata were alleged to have appeared upon the body of Lucia
di Narni he did what might be expected of a sceptic of our own times
rather than of a churchman of his superstitious age--he sent his
physicians to examine her.

That is but one instance of his common-sense attitude towards
supernatural manifestations. His cold, calm judgement caused him to
seek, by all available and practical means, to discriminate between the
true and the spurious in an age in which men, by their credulity, were
but too ready to become the prey of any impostor. It argues a breadth of
mind altogether beyond the times in which he had his being. Witches and
warlocks, who elsewhere--and even in much later ages, and in Protestant
as well as Catholic States--were given to the fire, he contemptuously
ignored. The unfortunate Moors and Jews, who elsewhere in Europe were
being persecuted by the Holy Inquisition and burnt at the stake as an
act of faith for the good of their souls and the greater honour and
glory of God, found in Alexander a tolerant protector and in Rome a safe
shelter.

These circumstances concerning him are not sufficiently known; it is
good to know them for their own sake. But, apart from that, they have
a great historical value which it is well to consider. It is not to be
imagined that such breadth of views could be tolerated in a Pope in the
dawn of the sixteenth century. The times were not ripe for it; men
did not understand it; and what men do not understand they thirst to
explain, and have a way of explaining in their own fashion and according
to their own lights.

A Pope who did such things could not be a good Pope, since such things
must be abhorrent to God--as men conceived God then.

To understand this is to understand much of the bad feeling against
Alexander and his family, for this is the source of much of it. Because
he did not burn witches and magicians it was presently said that he
was himself a warlock, and that he practised black magic. It was not,
perhaps, wanton calumny; it was said in good faith, for it was the only
reason the times could think of that should account for his restraint.
Because he tolerated Moors and Jews it was presently said by some that
he was a Moor, by others that he was a Jew, and by others still that he
was both.

What wonder, then, if the rancorous Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere
venomously dubbed him Moor and Jew, and the rabid fanatic Savonarola
screamed that he was no Pope at all, that he was not a Christian, nor
did he believe in any God?

Misunderstood in these matters, he was believed to be an infidel, and no
crime was too impossible to be fastened upon the man who was believed to
be that in the Italy of the Cinquecento.

Alexander, however, was very far from being an infidel, very far from
not being a Christian, very far from not believing in God, as he has
left abundant evidence in the Bulls he issued during his pontificate.
It is certainly wrong to assume--and this is pointed out by
l’Espinois--that a private life which seems to ignore the commandments
of the Church must preclude the possibility of a public life devoted to
the service of the Church. This is far from being the case. Such a state
of things--such a dual personality--is by no means inconsistent with
churchmen of the fifteenth, or, for that matter, of the twentieth
century.

The whole truth of the matter is contained in a Portuguese rhyme, which
may roughly be translated:

     Soundly Father Thomas preaches.
     Don’t do as he does; do as he teaches.

A debauchee may preach virtue with salutary effect, just as a man may
preach hygiene without practising the privations which it entails, or
may save you from dyspepsia by pointing out to you what is indigestible
without himself abstaining from it.

Such was the case of Alexander VI, as we are justified in concluding
from the evidence that remains.

Let us consider the apostolic zeal revealed by his Bull granting America
to Spain. This was practically conceded--as the very terms of it will
show--on condition that Spain should employ the dominion accorded her
over the New World for the purpose of propagating the Christian
faith and the conversion and baptism of the heathen. This is strictly
enjoined, and emphasized by the command that Spain shall send out
God-fearing men who are learned in religion and capable of teaching it
to the people of the newly discovered lands.

Thus Alexander invented the missionary.

To King Manuel the Fortunate (of Portugal), who sought his authority for
the conquest of Africa, he similarly enjoined that he should contrive
that the name of the Saviour be adored there, and the Catholic faith
spread and honoured, to the end that the king “might win eternal life
and the blessing of the Holy See.”

To the soldiers going upon this expedition his Holiness granted the same
indulgences as to those who fought in the Holy Land, and he aided the
kings of Spain and Portugal in this propagation of Christianity out of
the coffers of the Church.

He sent to America a dozen of the children of St. Francis, as apostles
to preach the Faith, and he invested them with the amplest powers.

He prosecuted with stern rigour the heretics of Bohemia, who were
obscenely insulting Church and Sacraments, and he proceeded similarly
against the “Picards” and “Vaudois.” Against the Lombard demoniacs, who
had grown bold, were banding themselves together and doing great evil to
property, to life, and to religion, Alexander raised his mighty arm.

Then there is his Bull of June 1, 1501, against those who already were
turning to evil purposes the newly discovered printing-press. In this
he inveighed against the printing of matter prejudicial to healthy
doctrine, to good manners, and, above all, to the Catholic Faith or
anything that should give scandal to the faithful. He threatened the
printers of impious works with excommunication should they persist,
and enlisted secular weapons to punish them in a temporal as well as
a spiritual manner. He ordered the preparation of indexes of all
works containing anything hurtful to religion, and pronounced a ban of
excommunication against all who should peruse the books so indexed.

Thus Alexander invented the Index Expurgatorius.

There is abundant evidence that he was a fervid celebrant, and of his
extreme devotion to the Blessed Virgin--in whose honour he revived the
ringing of the Angelus Bell--shall be considered later.

Whatever his private life, it is idle to seek to show that his public
career was other than devoted to the upholding of the dignity and honour
of the Church.




CHAPTER III. THE ROMAN BARONS


Having driven Charles VIII out of Italy, it still remained for the
allies to remove all traces of his passage from Naples and to restore
the rule of the House of Aragon. In this they had the aid of Ferdinand
and Isabella, who sent an army under the command of that distinguished
soldier Gonzalo de Cordoba, known in his day as the Great Captain.

He landed in Calabria in the spring of 1496, and war broke out afresh
through that already sorely devastated land. The Spaniards were joined
by the allied forces of Venice and the Church under the condotta of the
Marquis Gonzaga of Mantua, the leader of the Italians at Fornovo.

Lodovico had detached himself from the league, and again made terms
with France for his own safety’s sake. But his cousin, Giovanni Sforza,
Tyrant of Pesaro--the husband of Lucrezia Borgia--continued in the
pontifical army at the head of a condotta of 600 lances. Another command
in the same ranks was one of 700 lances under the youthful Giuffredo
Borgia, now Prince of Squillace and the husband of Doña Sancia of
Aragon, a lady of exceedingly loose morals, who had brought to Rome the
habits acquired in the most licentious Court of that licentious age.

The French lost Naples even more easily than they had conquered it, and
by July 7 Ferdinand II was able to reenter his capital and reascend
his throne. D’Aubigny, the French general, withdrew to France, whilst
Montpensier, the Viceroy, retired to Pozzuoli, where he died in the
following year.

Nothing could better have suited the purposes of Alexander than the
state of things which now prevailed, affording him, as it did, the means
to break the power of the insolent Roman barons, who already had so
vexed and troubled him. So in the Consistory of June 1 he published
a Bull whereby Gentile Virginio Orsini, Giangiordano Orsini, and his
bastard Paolo Orsini and Bartolomeo d’Alviano, were declared outlawed
for having borne arms with France against the Church, and their
possessions were confiscated to the State. This decree was to be
enforced by the sword, and, for the purposes of the impending war, the
Duke of Gandia was recalled to Rome. He arrived early in August, having
left at Gandia his wife Maria Enriquez, a niece of the Royal House of
Spain. It was Cesare Borgia who took the initiative in the pomp with
which his brother was received in Rome, riding out at the head of the
entire Pontifical Court to meet and welcome the young duke.

In addition to being Duke of Gandia, Giovanni Borgia was already Duke
of Sessa and Prince of Teano, which further dignities had been conferred
upon him on the occasion of his brother Giuffredo’s marriage to Donna
Sancia. To these the Pope now added the governorship of Viterbo and of
the Patrimony of St. Peter, dispossessing Cardinal Farnese of the latter
office to bestow it upon this well-beloved son.

In Venice it was being related, a few months later,--in October--that
Gandia had brought a woman from Spain for his father, and that the
latter had taken her to live with him. The story is given in Sanuto,
and of course has been unearthed and served up by most historians and
essayists. It cannot positively be said that it is untrue; but it can
be said that it is unconfirmed. There is, for instance, no word of it
in Burchard’s Diarium, and when you consider how ready a chronicler
of scandalous matter was this Master of Ceremonies, you will no doubt
conclude that, if any foundation there had been for that Venetian story,
Burchard would never have been silent on the subject.

The Pope had taken into his pay that distinguished condottiero, Duke
Guidobaldo of Urbino, who later was to feel the relentless might
of Cesare. To Guidobaldo’s command was now entrusted the punitive
expedition against the Orsini, and with him was to go the Duke of
Gandia, ostensibly to share the leadership, in reality that, under so
able a master, he might serve his apprenticeship to the trade of arms.
So on October 25 Giovanni Borgia was very solemnly created Gonfalonier
of the Church and Captain-General of the pontifical troops. On the same
day the three standards were blessed in St. Peter’s--one being the Papal
Gonfalon bearing the arms of the Church and the other two the personal
banners of Guidobaldo and Gandia. The two condottieri attended the
ceremony, arrayed in full armour, and received the white truncheons that
were the emblems of their command.

On the following day the army set out, accompanied by the Cardinal de
Luna as papal legate a latere, and within a month ten Orsini strongholds
had surrendered.

So far all had been easy for the papal forces; but now the Orsini
rallied in the last three fortresses that remained them--Bracciano,
Trevignano, and Anguillara, and their resistance suddenly acquired a
stubborn character, particularly that of Bracciano, which was captained
by Bartolomeo d’Alviano, a clever, resourceful young soldier who was
destined to go far. Thus the campaign, so easily conducted at the
outset, received a check which caused it to drag on into the winter. And
now the barons received further reinforcements. Vitellozzo Vitelli, the
Tyrant of Città di Castello, came to the aid of the Orsini, as did also
the turbulent Baglioni of Perugia, the della Rovere in Rome, and all
those who were inimical to Alexander VI. On the other hand, however, the
barons Colonna and Savelli ranged themselves on the side of the Pope.

Already Trevignano had fallen, and the attack of the pontifical army
was concentrated upon Bracciano. Hard pressed, and with all supplies
cut off, Bartolomeo d’Alviano was driven to the very verge of surrender,
when over the hills came Carlo Orsini, with the men of Vitellozzo
Vitelli, to take the papal forces by surprise and put them to utter
rout. Guidobaldo was made prisoner, whilst the Duke of Gandia, Fabrizio
Colonna, and the papal legate narrowly escaped, and took shelter in
Ronciglione, the Pope’s son being slightly wounded in the face.

It was a severe and sudden conclusion to a war that had begun under
such excellent auspices for the Pontificals. Yet, notwithstanding that
defeat, which had left guns and baggage in the hands of the enemy, the
Pope was the gainer by the campaign, having won eleven strongholds from
the Orsini in exchange for one battle lost.

The barons now prepared to push home their advantage and complete
the victory; but the Pope checkmated them by an appeal to Gonzalo de
Cordoba, who promptly responded and came with Prospero Colonna to the
aid of the Church. He laid siege to Ostia, which was being held for the
Cardinal della Rovere, and compelled it to a speedy surrender, thereby
bringing the Orsini resistance practically to an end. For the present
the might of the barons was broken, and they were forced to pay
Alexander the sum of 50,000 ducats to redeem their captured fortresses.

Gonzalo de Cordoba made a triumphal entry into Rome, bringing with him
Monaldo da Guerra, the unfortunate defender of Ostia, in chains. He was
received with great honour by the Duke of Gandia, accompanied by his
brother-in-law, Giovanni Sforza, and they escorted him to the Vatican,
where the Pope awaited him.

This was but one of the many occasions just then on which Giovanni
Sforza was conspicuous in public in close association with his
father-in-law, the Pope. Burchard mentions his presence at the blessing
of the candles on the Feast of the Purification, and shows him to us as
a candle-bearer standing on the Pope’s right hand. Again we see him
on Palm Sunday in attendance upon Alexander, he and Gandia standing
together on the steps of the pontifical throne in the Sixtine Chapel
during the Blessing of the Palms. There and elsewhere Lucrezia’s husband
is prominently in the public eye during those months of February and
March of 1497, and we generally see him sharing, with the Duke of
Gandia, the honour of close attendance upon the Pontiff, all of which
but serves to render the more marked his sudden disappearance from that
scene.

The matter of his abrupt and precipitate flight from Rome is one
concerning which it is unlikely that the true and complete facts will
ever be revealed. It was public gossip at this time that his marriage
with Lucrezia was not a happy one, and that discord marred their life
together. Lucrezia’s reported grievance upon this subject reads a
little vaguely to us now, whatever it may have conveyed at the time. She
complained that Giovanni “did not fittingly keep her company,”(1) which
may be taken to mean that a good harmony did not prevail between them,
or, almost equally well, that there were the canonical grounds for
complaint against him as a husband which were afterwards formally
preferred and made the grounds for the divorce. It is also possible that
Alexander’s ambition may have urged him to dissolve the marriage to
the end that she might be free to be used again as a pawn in his
far-reaching game.


  1  “Che non gli faceva buona compagnia.”


All that we do know positively is that, one evening in Holy Week, Sforza
mounted a Turkish horse, and, on the pretext of going as far as the
Church of Sant’ Onofrio to take the air, he slipped out of Rome, and so
desperately did he ride that, twenty-four hours later, he was home in
Pesaro, his horse dropping dead as he reached the town.

Certainly some terrible panic must have urged him, and this rather lends
colour to the story told by Almerici in the Memorie di Pesaro. According
to this, the Lord of Pesaro’s chamberlain, Giacomino, was in Lucrezia’s
apartments one evening when Cesare was announced, whereupon, by
Lucrezia’s orders, Giacomino concealed himself behind a screen. The
Cardinal of Valencia entered and talked freely with his sister, the
essence of his conversation being that the order had been issued for her
husband’s death.

The inference to be drawn from this is that Giovanni had been given to
choose in the matter of a divorce, and that he had refused to be a party
to it, whence it was resolved to remove him in a still more effective
manner.

Be that as it may, the chroniclers of Pesaro proceed to relate that,
after Cesare had left her, Lucrezia asked Giacomino if he had heard what
had been said, and, upon being answered in the affirmative, urged him
to go at once and warn Giovanni. It was as a consequence of this alleged
warning that Giovanni made his precipitate departure.

A little while later, at the beginning of June, Lucrezia left the
Vatican and withdrew to the Convent of San Sisto, in the Appian Way, a
step which immediately gave rise to speculation and to unbridled gossip,
all of which, however, is too vague to be worthy of the least attention.
Aretino’s advices to the Cardinal Ippolito d’Este suggest that she did
not leave the Vatican on good terms with her family, and it is very
possible, if what the Pesaro chroniclers state is true, that her
withdrawal arose out of her having warned Giovanni of his danger and
enabled him to escape.

At about the same time that Lucrezia withdrew to her convent her brother
Gandia was the recipient of further honours at the hands of his fond
father. The Pope had raised the fief of Benevento to a dukedom, and as
a dukedom conferred it upon his son, to him and to his legitimate heirs
for ever. To this he added the valuable lordships of Terracina and
Pontecorvo.

Cesare, meanwhile, had by no means been forgotten, and already this
young cardinal was--with perhaps the sole exception of the Cardinal
d’Estouteville--the richest churchman in Christendom. To his many other
offices and benefices it was being proposed to add that of Chamberlain
of the Holy See, Cardinal Riario, who held the office, being grievously
ill and his recovery despaired of. Together with that office it was the
Pope’s avowed intention to bestow upon Cesare the palace of the late
Cardinal of Mantua, and with it, no doubt, he would receive a proportion
of the dead cardinal’s benefices.

Cesare was twenty-two years of age at the time; tall, of an athletic
slenderness, and exceedingly graceful in his movements, he was
acknowledged to be the handsomest man of his age. His face was long and
pale, his brow lofty, his nose delicately aquiline. He had long
auburn hair, and his hazel eyes, large, quick in their movements, and
singularly searching in their glance, were alive with the genius of the
soul behind them. He inherited from his father the stupendous health
and vigour for which Alexander had been remarkable in his youth, and
was remarkable still in his old age. The chase had ever been Cesare’s
favourite pastime, and the wild boar his predilect quarry; and in
the pursuit of it he had made good use of his exceptional physical
endowments, cultivating them until--like his father before him--he was
equal to the endurance of almost any degree of fatigue.

In the Consistory of June 8 he was appointed legate a latere to go to
Naples to crown King Federigo of Aragon--for in the meanwhile another
change had taken place on the Neapolitan throne by the death of young
Ferdinand II, who had been succeeded by his uncle, Federigo, Prince of
Altamura.

Cesare made ready for his departure upon this important mission, upon
which he was to be accompanied by his brother Giovanni, Duke of Gandia.
They were both to be back in Rome by September, when Gandia was to
return to Spain, taking with him his sister Lucrezia.

Thus had the Pope disposed; but the Borgia family stood on the eve of
the darkest tragedy associated with its name, a tragedy which was to
alter all these plans.




CHAPTER IV. THE MURDER OF THE DUKE OF GANDIA


On June 14, 1497, the eve of Cesare and Giovanni Borgia’s departure
for Naples, their mother Vannozza gave them a farewell supper in her
beautiful vineyard in Trastevere. In addition to the two guests of
honour several other kinsmen and friends were present, among whom were
the Cardinal of Monreale and young Giuffredo Borgia. They remained at
supper until an advanced hour of the night, when Cesare and Giovanni
took their departure, attended only by a few servants and a mysterious
man in a mask, who had come to Giovanni whilst he was at table, and who
almost every day for about a month had been in the habit of visiting him
at the Vatican.

The brothers and these attendants rode together into Rome and as far as
the Vice-Chancellor Ascanio Sforza’s palace in the Ponte Quarter. Here
Giovanni drew rein, and informed Cesare that he would not be returning
to the Vatican just yet, as he was first “going elsewhere to amuse
himself.” With that he took his leave of Cesare, and, with one single
exception--in addition to the man in the mask--dismissed his servants.
The latter continued their homeward way with the cardinal, whilst the
Duke, taking the man in the mask upon the crupper of his horse and
followed his single attendant, turned and made off in the direction of
the Jewish quarter.

In the morning it was found that Giovanni had not yet returned, and
his uneasy servants informed the Pope of his absence and of the
circumstances of it. The Pope, however, was not at all alarmed.
Explaining his son’s absence in the manner so obviously suggested by
Giovanni’s parting words to Cesare on the previous night, he assumed
that the gay young Duke was on a visit to some complacent lady and that
presently he would return.

Later in the day, however, news was brought that his horse had been
found loose in the streets, in the neighbourhood of the Cardinal of
Parma’s palace, with only one stirrup-leather, the other having clearly
been cut from the saddle, and, at the same time, it was related that the
servant who had accompanied him after he had separated from the rest
had been found at dawn in the Piazza della Giudecca mortally wounded and
beyond speech, expiring soon after his removal to a neighbouring house.

Alarm spread through the Vatican, and the anxious Pope ordered inquiries
to be made in every quarter where it was possible that anything might
be learned. It was in answer to these inquiries that a boatman of the
Schiavoni--one Giorgio by name--came forward with the story of what he
had seen on the night of Wednesday. He had passed the night on board his
boat, on guard over the timber with which she was laden. She was moored
along the bank that runs from the Bridge of Sant’ Angelo to the Church
of Santa Maria Nuova.

He related that at about the fifth hour of the night, just before
daybreak, he had seen two men emerge from the narrow street alongside
the Hospital of San Girolamo, and stand on the river’s brink at the spot
where it was usual for the scavengers to discharge their refuse carts
into the water. These men had looked carefully about, as if to make
sure that they were not being observed. Seeing no one astir, they made a
sign, whereupon a man well mounted on a handsome white horse, his heels
armed with golden spurs, rode out of that same narrow street. Behind
him, on the crupper of his horse, Giorgio beheld the body of a man, the
head hanging in one direction and the legs in the other. This body was
supported there by two other men on foot, who walked on either side of
the horseman.

Arrived at the water’s edge, they turned the horse’s hind-quarters to
the river; then, taking the body between them, two of them swung it well
out into the stream. After the splash, Giorgio had heard the horseman
inquire whether they had thrown well into the middle, and had heard
him receive the affirmative answer--“Signor, Si.” The horseman then sat
scanning the surface a while, and presently pointed out a dark object
floating, which proved to be their victim’s cloak. The men threw stones
at it, and so sank it, whereupon they turned, and all five departed as
they had come.

Such is the boatman’s story, as related in the Diarium of Burchard. When
the Pope had heard it, he asked the fellow why he had not immediately
gone to give notice of what he had witnessed, to which this Giorgio
replied that, in his time, he had seen over a hundred bodies thrown into
the Tiber without ever anybody troubling to know anything about them.

This story and Gandia’s continued absence threw the Pope into a frenzy
of apprehension. He ordered the bed of the river to be searched foot by
foot. Some hundreds of boatmen and fishermen got to work, and on that
same afternoon the body of the ill-fated Duke of Gandia was brought up
in one of the nets. He was not only completely dressed--as was to
have been expected from Giorgio’s story--but his gloves and his purse
containing thirty ducats were still at his belt, as was his dagger, the
only weapon he had carried; the jewels upon his person, too, were all
intact, which made it abundantly clear that his assassination was not
the work of thieves.

His hands were still tied, and there were from ten to fourteen wounds on
his body, in addition to which his throat had been cut.

The corpse was taken in a boat to the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, where it
was stripped, washed, and arrayed in the garments of the Captain-General
of the Church. That same night, on a bier, the body covered with a
mantle of brocade, the face “looking more beautiful than in life,” he
was carried by torchlight from Sant’ Angelo to Santa Maria del Popolo
for burial, quietly and with little pomp.

The Pope’s distress was terrible. As the procession was crossing the
Bridge of Sant’ Angelo, those who stood there heard his awful cries of
anguish, as is related in the dispatches of an eye-witness quoted by
Sanuto. Alexander shut himself up in his apartments with his passionate
sorrow, refusing to see anybody; and it was only by insistence that the
Cardinal of Segovia and some of the Pope’s familiars contrived to gain
admission to his presence; but even then, not for three days could they
induce him to taste food, nor did he sleep.

At last he roused himself, partly in response to the instances of the
Cardinal of Segovia, partly spurred by the desire to avenge the death of
his child, and he ordered Rome to be ransacked for the assassins;
but, although the search was pursued for two months, it proved utterly
fruitless.

That is the oft-told story of the death of the Duke of Gandia. Those are
all the facts concerning it that are known or that ever will be known.
The rest is speculation, and this speculation follows the trend of
malice rather than of evidence.

Suspicion fell at first upon Giovanni Sforza, who was supposed to have
avenged himself thus upon the Pope for the treatment he had received.
There certainly existed that reasonable motive to actuate him, but not a
particle of evidence against him.

Next rumour had it that Cardinal Ascanio Sforza’s was the hand that had
done this work, and with this rumour Rome was busy for months. It was
known that he had quarrelled violently with Gandia, who had been grossly
insulted by a chamberlain of Ascanio’s, and who had wiped out the insult
by having the man seized and hanged.

Sanuto quotes a letter from Rome on July 21, which states that “it is
certain that Ascanio murdered the Duke of Gandia.” Cardinal Ascanio’s
numerous enemies took care to keep the accusation alive at the
Vatican, and Ascanio, in fear for his life, had left Rome and fled to
Grottaferrata. When summoned to Rome, he had refused to come save under
safe­conduct. His fears, however, appear to have been groundless, for
the Pope attached no importance to the accusation against him, convinced
of his innocence, as he informed him.

Thereupon public opinion looked about for some other likely person
upon whom to fasten its indictment, and lighted upon Giuffredo Borgia,
Gandia’s youngest brother. Here, again, a motive was not wanting.
Already has mention been made of the wanton ways of Giuffredo’s
Neapolitan wife, Doña Sancia. That she was prodigal of her favours there
is no lack of evidence, and it appears that, amongst those she admitted
to them, was the dead duke. Jealousy, then, it was alleged, was the spur
that had driven Giuffredo to the deed; and that the rumour of this must
have been insistent is clear when we find the Pope publicly exonerating
his youngest son.

Thus matters stood, and thus had public opinion spoken, when in the
month of August the Pope ordered the search for the murderer to cease.
Bracci, the Florentine ambassador, explains this action of Alexander’s.
He writes that his Holiness knew who were the murderers, and that he was
taking no further steps in the matter in the hope that thus, conceiving
themselves to be secure, they might more completely discover themselves.

Bracci’s next letter bears out the supposition that he writes from
inference, and not from knowledge. He repeats that the investigations
have been suspended, and that to account for this some say what already
he has written, whilst others deny it; but that the truth of the matter
is known to none.

Later in the year we find the popular voice denouncing Bartolomeo
d’Alviano and the Orsini. Already in August the Ferrarese ambassador,
Manfredi, had written that the death of the Duke of Gandia was being
imputed to Bartolomeo d’Alviano, and in December we see in Sanuto a
letter from Rome which announces that it is positively stated that the
Orsini had caused the death of Giovanni Borgia.

These various rumours were hardly worth mentioning for their own values,
but they are important as showing how public opinion fastened the crime
in turn upon everybody it could think of as at all likely to have had
cause to commit it, and more important still for the purpose of refuting
what has since been written concerning the immediate connection of
Cesare Borgia with the crime in the popular mind.

Not until February of the following year was the name of Cesare ever
mentioned in connection with the deed. The first rumour of his
guilt synchronized with that of his approaching renunciation of his
ecclesiastical career, and there can be little doubt that the former
sprang from the latter. The world conceived that it had discovered on
Cesare’s part a motive for the murder of his brother. That motive--of
which so very much has been made--shall presently be examined.
Meanwhile, to deal with the actual rumour, and its crystallization into
history. The Ferrarese ambassador heard it in Venice on February 12,
1498. Capello seized upon it, and repeated it two and a half years
later, stating on September 28, 1500: “etiam amazó il fratello.”

And there you have the whole source of all the unbridled accusations
subsequently launched against Cesare, all of which find a prominent
place in Gregorovius’s Geschichte der Stadt Rom, whilst the rumours
accusing others, which we have mentioned here, are there slurred over.

One hesitates to attack the arguments and conclusions of the very
eminent author of that mighty History of Rome in the Middle Ages, but
conscience and justice demand that his chapter upon this subject be
dealt with as it deserves.

The striking talents of Gregorovius are occasionally marred by the
egotism and pedantry sometimes characteristic of the scholars of his
nation. He is too positive; he seldom opines; he asserts with finality
the things that only God can know; occasionally his knowledge,
transcending the possible, quits the realm of the historian for that
of the romancer, as for instance--to cite one amid a thousand--when he
actually tells us what passes in Cesare Borgia’s mind at the coronation
of the King of Naples. In the matter of authorities, he follows a
dangerous and insidious eclecticism, preferring those who support the
point of view which he has chosen, without a proper regard for their
intrinsic values.

He tells us definitely that, if Alexander had not positive knowledge, he
had at least moral conviction that it was Cesare who had killed the
Duke of Gandia. In that, again, you see the God-like knowledge which
he usurps; you see him clairvoyant rather than historical. Starting out
with the positive assertion that Cesare Borgia was the murderer, he sets
himself to prove it by piling up a mass of worthless evidence, whose
worthlessness it is unthinkable he should not have realized.

“According to the general opinion of the day, which in all probability
was correct, Cesare was the murderer of his brother.”

Thus Gregorovius in his Lucrezia Borgia. A deliberate misstatement! For,
as we have been at pains to show, not until the crime had been fastened
upon everybody whom public opinion could conceive to be a possible
assassin, not until nearly a year after Gandia’s death did rumour for
the first time connect Cesare with the deed. Until then the ambassadors’
letters from Rome in dealing with the murder and reporting speculation
upon possible murderers never make a single allusion to Cesare as the
guilty person.

Later, when once it had been bruited, it found its way into the writings
of every defamer of the Borgias, and from several of these it is taken
by Gregorovius to help him uphold that theory.

Two motives were urged for the crime. One was Cesare’s envy of his
brother, whom he desired to supplant as a secular prince, fretting
in the cassock imposed upon himself which restrained his unbounded
ambition. The other--and no epoch but this one under consideration,
in its reaction from the age of chivalry, could have dared to level it
without a careful examination of its sources--was Cesare’s jealousy,
springing from the incestuous love for their sister Lucrezia, which he
is alleged to have disputed with his brother. Thus, as l’Espinois has
pointed out, to convict Cesare Borgia of a crime which cannot absolutely
be proved against him, all that is necessary is that he should be
charged with another crime still more horrible of which even less proof
exists.

This latter motive, it is true, is rejected by Gregorovius. “Our sense
of honesty,” he writes, “repels us from attaching faith to the belief
spread in that most corrupt age.” Yet the authorities urging one motive
are commonly those urging the other, and Gregorovius quotes those that
suit him, without considering that, if he is convinced they lie in one
connection, he has not the right to assume them truthful in another.

The contemporary, or quasi-contemporary writers upon whose “authority”
 it is usual to show that Cesare Borgia was guilty of both those
revolting crimes are: Sanazzaro, Capello, Macchiavelli, Matarazzo,
Sanuto, Pietro Martire d’Anghiera, Guicciardini, and Panvinio.

A formidable array! But consider them, one by one, at close quarters,
and take a critical look at what they actually wrote:

SANAZZARO was a Neapolitan poet and epigrammatist, who could not--his
times being what they were--be expected to overlook the fact that
in these slanderous rumours of incest was excellent matter for
epigrammatical verse. Therefore, he crystallized them into lines which,
whilst doing credit to his wit, reveal his brutal cruelty. No one will
seriously suppose that such a man would be concerned with the veracity
of the matter of his verses--even leaving out of the question his enmity
towards the House of Borgia, which will transpire later. For him a ben
trovato was as good matter as a truth, or better. He measured its value
by its piquancy, by its adaptability to epigrammatic rhymes.

Conceive the heartlessness of the man who, at the moment of Alexander’s
awful grief at the murder of his son--a grief which so moved even
his enemies that the bitter Savonarola, and the scarcely less bitter
Cardinal della Rovere, wrote to condole with him--could pen that
terrible epigram:

     Piscatorem hominum ne te non, Sexte, putemus,
     Piscaris notum retibus ecce tuum.

Consider the ribaldry of that, and ask yourselves whether this is a man
who would immolate the chance of a witticism upon the altar of Truth.

It is significant that Sanazzaro, for what he may be worth, confines
himself to the gossip of incest. Nowhere does he mention that Cesare was
the murderer, and we think that his silence upon the matter, if it shows
anything, shows that Cesare’s guilt was not so very much the “general
opinion of the day,” as Gregorovius asks us to believe.

CAPPELLO was not in Rome at the time of the murder, nor until three
years later, when he merely repeated the rumour that had first sprung up
some eight months after the crime.

The precise value of his famous “relation” (in which this matter is
recorded, and to which we shall return in its proper place) and the
spirit that actuated him is revealed in another accusation of murder
which he levels at Cesare, an accusation which, of course, has also been
widely disseminated upon no better authority than his own. It is Capello
who tells us that Cesare stabbed the chamberlain Perrotto in the Pope’s
very arms; he adds the details that the man had fled thither for shelter
from Cesare’s fury, and that the blood of him, when he was stabbed,
spurted up into the very face of the Pope. Where he got the story is
not readily surmised--unless it be assumed that he evolved it out of his
feelings for the Borgias. The only contemporary accounts of the death of
this Perrotto--or Pedro Caldes, as was his real name--state that he fell
by accident into the Tiber and was drowned.

Burchard, who could not have failed to know if the stabbing story had
been true, and would not have failed to report it, chronicles the
fact that Perrotto was fished out of Tiber, having fallen in six days
earlier--“non libenter.” This statement, coming from the pen of the
Master of Ceremonies at the Vatican, requires no further corroboration.
Yet corroboration there actually is in a letter from Rome of February
20, 1498, quoted by Marino Sanuto in his Diarii. This states that
Perrotto had been missing for some days, no one knowing what had become
of him, and that now “he has been found drowned in the Tiber.”

We mention this, in passing, with the twofold object of slaying another
calumny, and revealing the true value of Capello, who happens to be the
chief “witness for the prosecution” put forward by Gregorovius. “Is it
not of great significance,” inquires the German historian, “that
the fact should have been related so positively by an ambassador who
obtained his knowledge from the best sources?”

The question is frivolous, for the whole trouble in this matter is that
there were no sources at all, in the proper sense of the word--good or
bad. There was simply gossip, which had been busy with a dozen names
already.

MACCHIAVELLI includes a note in his Extracts from Letters to the Ten, in
which he mentions the death of Gandia, adding that “at first nothing was
known, and then men said it was done by the Cardinal of Valencia.”

There is nothing very conclusive in that. Besides, incidentally it
may be mentioned, that it is not clear when or how these extracts were
compiled by Macchiavelli (in his capacity of Secretary to the Signory
of Florence) from the dispatches of her ambassadors. But it has been
shown--though we are hardly concerned with that at the moment--that
these extracts are confused by comments of his own, either for his own
future use or for that of another.

MATARAZZO is the Perugian chronicler of whom we have already expressed
the only tenable opinion. The task he set himself was to record
the contemporary events of his native town--the stronghold of the
blood-dripping Baglioni. He enlivened it by every scrap of scandalous
gossip that reached him, however alien to his avowed task. The
authenticity of this scandalmongering chronicle has been questioned;
but, even assuming it to be authentic, it is so wildly inaccurate when
dealing with matters happening beyond the walls of Perugia as to be
utterly worthless.

Matarazzo relates the story of the incestuous relations prevailing in
the Borgia family, and with an unsparing wealth of detail not to be
found elsewhere; but on the subject of the murder he has a tale to tell
entirely different from any other that has been left us. For, whilst he
urges the incest as the motive of the crime, the murderer, he tells us,
was Giovanni Sforza, the outraged husband; and he gives us the fullest
details of that murder, time and place and exactly how committed, and
all the other matters which have never been brought to light.

It is all a worthless, garbled piece of fiction, most obviously; as such
it has ever been treated; but it is as plausible as it is untrue, and,
at least, as authoritative as any available evidence assigning the guilt
to Cesare.

SANUTO we accept as a more or less careful and painstaking chronicler,
whose writings are valuable; and Sanuto on the matter of the murder
confines himself to quoting the letter of February 1498, in which the
accusation against Cesare is first mentioned, after having given other
earlier letters which accuse first Ascanio and then Orsini far more
positively than does the latter letter accuse Cesare.

On the matter of the incest there is no word in Sanuto; but there is
mention of Doña Sancia’s indiscretions, and the suggestion that, through
jealousy on her account, it was rumoured that the murder had been
committed--another proof of how vague and ill-defined the rumours were.

PIETRO MARTIRE D’ANGHIERA writes from Burgos, in Spain, that he
is convinced of the fratricide. It is interesting to know of that
conviction of his; but difficult to conceive how it is to be accepted as
evidence.

If more needs to be said of him, let it be mentioned that the letter
in which he expresses that conviction is dated April 1497--two months
before the murder took place! So that even Gregorovius is forced to
doubt the authenticity of that document.

GUICCIARDINI is not a contemporary chronicler of events as they
happened, but an historian writing some thirty years later. He merely
repeats what Capello and others have said before him. It is for him
to quote authorities for what he writes, and not to be set up as an
authority. He is not reliable, and he is a notorious defamer of the
Papacy, sparing nothing that will serve his ends. He dilates with gusto
upon the accusation of incest.

Lastly, PANVINTO is in the same category as Guicciardini. He was not
born until some thirty years after these events, and his History of the
Popes was not written until some sixty years after the murder of the
Duke of Gandia. This history bristles with inaccuracies; he never
troubles to verify his facts, and as an authority he is entirely
negligible.

In the valuable Diarium of Burchard there is unfortunately a lacuna at
this juncture, from the day after the murder (of which he gives the full
particulars to which we have gone for our narrative of that event) until
the month of August following. And now we may see Gregorovius actually
using silence as evidence. He seizes upon that lacuna, and goes so far
as to set up the tentative explanation that Burchard “perhaps purposely
interrupted his Diary that he might avoid mentioning the fratricide.”

If such were the case, it would be a strange departure from Burchard’s
invariable rule, which is one of cold, relentless, uncritical
chronicling of events, no matter what their nature. Besides, any
significance with which that lacuna might be invested is discounted by
the fact that such gaps are of fairly common occurrence in the course
of Burchard’s record. Finally it remains to be shown that the lacuna
in question exists in the original diaries, which have yet to be
discovered.

So much for the valuable authorities, out of which--and by means of a
selection which is not quite clearly defined--Gregorovius claims to have
proved that the murderer of the Duke of Gandia was his brother Cesare
Borgia, Cardinal of Valencia.(1)


  1  It is rather odd that, in the course of casting about for a possible
murderer of Gandia, public opinion should never have fastened upon
Cardinal Alessandro Farnese. He had lately been stripped of the
Patrimony of St. Peter that the governorship of this might be bestowed
upon Gandia; his resentment had been provoked by that action of the
Pope’s, and the relations between himself and the Borgias were strained
in consequence. Possibly there was clear proof that he could have had no
connection with the crime.


Now to examine more closely the actual motives given by those
authorities and by later, critical writers, for attributing the guilt to
Cesare.

In September of the year 1497, the Pope had dissolved the marriage
of his daughter Lucrezia and Giovanni Sforza, and the grounds for
the dissolution were that the husband was impotens et frigidus
natura--admitted by himself.(2)


  2  “El S. de Pesaro ha scripto qua de sua mano non haverla mai
cognosciuta et esser impotente, alias la sententia non se potea dare. El
prefato S. dice pero haver scripto cosi per obedire el Duca de Milano et
Aschanio” (Collenuccio’s letter from Rome to the Duke of Ferrara, Dec.
25, 1497).


If you know anything of the Italy of to-day, you will be able to
conceive for yourself how the Italy of the fifteenth century must have
held her sides and pealed her laughter at the contemptible spectacle of
an unfortunate who afforded such reason to be bundled out of a nuptial
bed. The echo of that mighty burst of laughter must have rung from
Calabria to the Alps, and well may it have filled the handsome weakling
who was the object of its cruel ridicule with a talion fury. The
weapons he took up wherewith to defend himself were a little obvious. He
answered the odious reflections upon his virility by a wholesale charge
of incest against the Borgia family; he screamed that what had been said
of him was a lie invented by the Borgias to serve their own unutterable
ends.(1) Such was the accusation with which the squirming Lord of Pesaro
retaliated, and, however obvious, yet it was not an accusation that
the world of his day would lightly cast aside, for all that the
perspicacious may have rated it at its proper value.


  1 “Et mancho se e curato de fare prova de qua con Done per poterne
chiarire el Rev. Legato che era qua, sebbene sua Excellentia tastandolo
sopra cio gli ne abbia facto offerta.” And further: “Anzi haverla
conosciuta infinite volte, ma chel Papa non geiha tolta per altro se
non per usare con lei” (Costabili’s letter from Milan to the Duke of
Ferrara, June 23, 1497).


What is of great importance to students of the history of the Borgias is
that this was the first occasion on which the accusation of incest was
raised. Of course it persisted; such a charge could not do otherwise.
But now that we see in what soil it had its roots we shall know what
importance to attach to it.

Not only did it persist, but it developed, as was but natural. Cesare
and the dead Gandia were included in it, and presently it suggested
a motive--not dreamed of until then--why Cesare might have been his
brother’s murderer.

Then, early in 1498, came the rumour that Cesare was intending to
abandon the purple, and later Writers, from Capello down to our own
times, have chosen to see in Cesare’s supposed contemplation of that
step a motive so strong for the crime as to prove it in the most
absolutely conclusive manner. In no case could it be such proof, even
if it were admitted as a motive. But is it really so to be admitted? Did
such a motive exist at all? Does it really follow--as has been taken
for granted--that Cesare must have remained an ecclesiastic had Gandia
lived? We cannot see that it does. Indeed, such evidence as there is,
when properly considered, points in the opposite direction, even if no
account is taken of the fact that this was not the first occasion on
which it was proposed that Cesare should abandon the ecclesiastical
career, as is shown by the Ferrarese ambassador’s dispatches of March
1493.

It is contended that Gandia was a stumbling-block to Cesare, and that
Gandia held the secular possessions which Cesare coveted; but if that
were really the case why, when eventually (some fourteen months after
Gandia’s death) Cesare doffed the purple to replace it by a soldier’s
harness, did he not assume the secular possessions that had been his
brother’s?

His dead brother’s lands and titles went to his dead brother’s son,
whilst Cesare’s career was totally different, as his aims were totally
different, from any that had been Gandia’s, or that might have been
Gandia’s had the latter lived. True, Cesare became Captain-General of
the Church in his dead brother’s place; but for that his brother’s death
was not necessary. Gandia had neither the will nor the intellect
to undertake the things that awaited Cesare. He was a soft-natured,
pleasure-loving youth, whose way of life was already mapped out for him.
His place was at Gandia, in Spain, and, whilst he might have continued
lord of all the possessions that were his, it would have been Cesare’s
to become Duke of Valentinois, and to have made himself master of
Romagna, precisely as he did.

In conclusion, Gandia’s death no more advanced, than his life could have
impeded, the career which Cesare afterwards made his own, and to say
that Cesare murdered him to supplant him is to set up a theory which the
subsequent facts of Cesare’s life will nowise justify.

It is idle of Gregorovius to say that the logic of the crime is
inexorable--in its assigning the guilt to Cesare--fatuous of him to
suppose that, as he claims, he has definitely proved Cesare to be his
brother’s murderer.

There is much against Cesare Borgia, but it never has been proved, and
never will be proved, that he was a fratricide. Indeed the few really
known facts of the murder all point to a very different conclusion--a
conclusion more or less obvious, which has been discarded, presumably
for no better reason than because it was obvious.

Where was all this need to go so far afield in quest of a probable
murderer imbued with political motives? Where the need to accuse in turn
every enemy that Gandia could possibly possess before finally fastening
upon his own brother?

Certain evidence is afforded by the known facts of the case, scant as
they are. It may not amount to much, but at least it is sufficient
to warrant a plausible conclusion, and there is no justification
for discarding it in favour of something for which not a particle of
evidence is forthcoming.

There is, first of all, the man in the mask to be accounted for. That
he is connected with the crime is eminently probable, if not absolutely
certain.

It is to be remembered that for a month--according to Burchard--he
had been in the habit of visiting Gandia almost daily. He comes to
Vannozza’s villa on the night of the murder. Is it too much to suppose
that he brought a message from some one from whom he was in the habit of
bringing messages?

He was seen last on the crupper of Gandia’s horse as the latter rode
away towards the Jewish quarter.(1) Gandia himself announced that he was
bound on pleasure--going to amuse himself. Even without the knowledge
which we possess of his licentious habits, no doubt could arise as to
the nature of the amusement upon which he was thus bound at dead of
night; and there are the conclusions formed in the morning by his
father, when it was found that Gandia had not returned.


  1  The Ghetto was not yet in existence.  It was not built until 1556,
under Paul IV.


Is it so very difficult to conceive that Gandia, in the course of the
assignation to which he went, should have fallen into the hands of
an irate father, husband, or brother? Is it not really the obvious
inference to draw from the few facts that we possess? That it was the
inference drawn by the Pope and clung to even some time after the
crime and while rumours of a different sort were rife, is shown by the
perquisition made in the house of Antonio Pico della Mirandola, who had
a daughter whom it was conceived might have been the object of the young
duke’s nocturnal visit, and whose house was near the place where Gandia
was flung into the Tiber.

We could hazard speculations that would account for the man in the mask,
but it is not our business to speculate save where the indications are
fairly clear.

Let us consider the significance of Gandia’s tied hands and the wounds
upon his body in addition to the mortal gash across his throat. To what
does this condition point? Surely not to a murder of expediency so much
as to a fierce, lustful butchery of vengeance. Surely it suggests that
Gandia may have been tortured before his throat was cut. Why else were
his wrists pinioned? Had he been swiftly done to death there would have
been no need for that. Had hired assassins done the work they would not
have stayed to pinion him, nor do we think they would have troubled to
fling him into the river; they would have slain and left him where he
fell.

The whole aspect of the case suggests the presence of the master, of the
personal enemy himself. We can conceive Gandia’s wrists being tied, to
the end that this personal enemy might do his will upon the wretched
young man, dealing him one by one the ten or fourteen wounds in the body
before making an end of him by cutting his throat. We cannot explain
the pinioned wrists in any other way. Then the man on the handsome white
horse, the man whom the four others addressed as men address their lord.
Remember his gold spurs--a trifle, perhaps; but hired assassins do not
wear gold spurs, even though their bestriding handsome white horses may
be explainable.

Surely that was the master, the personal enemy himself--and it was not
Cesare, for Cesare at the time was at the Vatican.

There we must leave the mystery of the murder of the Duke of Gandia; but
we leave it convinced that, such scant evidence as there is, points to
an affair of sordid gallantry, and nowise implicates his brother Cesare.




CHAPTER V. THE RENUNCIATION OF THE PURPLE


At the Consistory of June 19, 1497 the Sacred College beheld a
broken-hearted old man who declared that he had done with the world, and
that henceforth life could offer him nothing that should endear it to
him.

“A greater sorrow than this could not be ours, for we loved him
exceedingly, and now we can hold neither the Papacy nor any other thing
as of concern. Had we seven Papacies, we would give them all to restore
the duke to life.” So ran his bitter lament.

He denounced his course of life as not having been all that it should
have been, and appeared to see in the murder of his son a punishment
for the evil of his ways. Much has been made of this, and quite
unnecessarily. It has been taken eagerly as an admission of his
unparalleled guilt. An admission of guilt it undoubtedly was; but what
man is not guilty? and how many men--ay, and saints even--in the hour of
tribulation have cried out that they were being made to feel the wrath
of God for the sins that no man is without?

If humanity contains a type that would not have seen in such a cause for
sorrow a visitation of God, it is the type of inhuman monster to
which we are asked to believe that Alexander VI belonged. A sinner
unquestionably he was, and a great one; but a human sinner, and not an
incarnate devil, else there could have been no such outcry from him in
such an hour as this.

He announced that henceforth the spiritual needs of the Church should be
his only care. He inveighed against the corruption of the ecclesiastical
estate, confessing himself aware of how far it had strayed from the
ancient discipline and from the laws that had been framed to bridle
licence and cupidity, which were now rampant and unchecked; and he
proclaimed his intention to reform the Curia and the Church of Rome. To
this end he appointed a commission consisting of the Cardinal-Bishops
Oliviero Caraffa and Giorgio Costa, the Cardinal-Priests Antonietto
Pallavicino and Gianantonio Sangiorgio, and the Cardinal-Deacons
Francesco Piccolomini and Raffaele Riario.

There was even a suggestion that he was proposing to abdicate, but that
he was prevailed upon to do nothing until his grief should have abated
and his judgement be restored to its habitual calm. This suggestion,
however, rests upon no sound authority.

Letters of condolence reached him on every hand. Even his arch-enemy,
Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere, put aside his rancour in the face of the
Pope’s overwhelming grief--and also because it happened to consort with
his own interests, as will presently transpire. He wrote to Alexander
from France that he was truly pained to the very soul of him in his
concern for the Pope’s Holiness--a letter which, no doubt, laid the
foundations to the reconciliation that was toward between them.

Still more remarkable was it that the thaumaturgical Savonarola should
have paused in the atrabilious invective with which he was inflaming
Florence against the Pope, should have paused to send him a letter of
condolence in which he prayed that the Lord of all mercy might comfort
his Holiness in his tribulation.

That letter is a singular document; singularly human, yielding a
singular degree of insight into the nature of the man who penned it.
A whole chapter of intelligent speculation upon the character of
Savonarola, based upon a study of externals, could not reveal as much of
the mentality of that fanatical demagogue as the consideration of just
this letter.

The sympathy by which we cannot doubt it to have been primarily inspired
is here overspread by the man’s rampant fanaticism, there diluted by the
prophecies from which he cannot even now refrain; and, throughout, the
manner is that of the pulpit-thumping orator. The first half of his
letter is a prelude in the form of a sermon upon Faith, all very trite
and obvious; and the notion of this excommunicated friar holding forth
to the Pope’s Holiness in polemical platitudes delivered with all the
authority of inspired discoveries of his own is one more proof that at
the root of fanaticism in all ages and upon all questions, lies an utter
lack of a sense of fitness and proportion. Having said that “the just
man liveth in the Lord by faith,” and that “the Lord in His mercy
passeth over all our sins,” he proclaims that he announces things
of which he is assured, and for which he is ready to suffer all
persecutions, and begs his Holiness to turn a favourable eye upon the
work of faith in which he is labouring, and to give heed no more to the
impious, promising the Holy Father that thus shall the Lord bestow upon
him the essence of joy instead of the spirit of grief. Having begun, as
we have seen, with an assurance that “the Lord in His mercy passeth over
all our sins,” he concludes by prophesying, with questionable logic,
that “the thunders of His wrath will ere long be heard.” Nor does he
omit to mention--with an apparent arrogance that again betrays that same
want of a sense of proportion--that all his predictions are true.

His letter, however, and that of Cardinal della Rovere, among so
many others, show us how touched was the world by the Pope’s loss and
overwhelming grief, how shocked at the manner in which this had been
brought about.

The commission which Alexander had appointed for the work of reform had
meanwhile got to work, and the Cardinal of Naples edited the articles of
a constitution which was undoubtedly the object of prolonged study and
consideration, as is revealed by the numerous erasures and emendations
which it bears. Unfortunately--for reasons which are not apparent--it
was never published by Alexander. Possibly by the time that it was
concluded the aggrandizement of the temporal power was claiming his
entire attention to the neglect of the spiritual needs of the Holy See.
It is also possible--as has been abundantly suggested--that the stern
mood of penitence had softened with his sorrow, and was now overpast.

Nevertheless, it may have been some lingering remnant of this fervour of
reform that dictated the severe punishment which fell that year upon the
flagitious Bishop of Cosenza. A fine trade was being driven in Rome by
the sale of forged briefs of indulgence. Raynaldus cites a Bull on that
score addressed by Alexander, in the first year of his pontificate, to
the bishops of Spain, enjoining them to visit with punishment all who
in that kingdom should be discovered to be pursuing such a traffic. On
September 4, 1497, Burchard tells us, three servants of the Pontifical
Secretary, the Archbishop of Cosenza (Bartolomeo Florido) were arrested
in consequence of the discovery of twenty forged briefs issued by them.
In their examination they incriminated their master the archbishop, who
was consequently put upon his trial and found guilty. Alexander deposed,
degraded, and imprisoned him in Sant’ Angelo in a dark room, where
he was supplied with oil for his lamp and bread and water for his
nourishment until he died. His underlings were burnt in the Campo di
Fiori in the following month.

The Duke of Gandia left a widow and two children--Giovanni, a boy of
three years of age, and Isabella, a girl of two. In the interests of
her son, the widowed duchess applied to the Governor of Valencia in
the following September for the boy’s investiture in the rights of his
deceased father. This was readily granted upon authority from Rome, and
so the boy Giovanni was recognized as third Duke of Gandia, Prince
of Sessa and Teano, and Lord of Cerignola and Montefoscolo, and the
administration of his estates during his minority was entrusted to his
uncle, Cesare Borgia.

The Lordship of Benevento--the last grant made to Giovanni Borgia--was
not mentioned; nor was it then nor ever subsequently claimed by the
widow. It is the one possession of Gandia’s that went to Cesare, who was
confirmed in it by the King of Naples.

The Gandia branch of the Borgia family remained in Spain, prospered and
grew in importance, and, incidentally, produced St. Francis de Borgia.
This Duke of Gandia was Master of the Household to Charles V, and thus
a man of great worldly consequence; but it happened that he was so moved
by the sight of the disfigured body of his master’s beautiful queen
that he renounced the world and entered the Society of Jesus, eventually
becoming its General. He died in 1562, and in the fulness of time was
canonized.

Cesare’s departure for Naples as legate a latere to anoint and crown
Federigo of Aragon was naturally delayed by the tragedy that had
assailed his house, and not until July 22 did he take his leave of the
Pope and set out with an escort of two hundred horse.

Naples was still in a state of ferment, split into two parties, one of
which favoured France and the other Aragon, so that disturbances were
continual. Alexander expressed the hope that Cesare might appear in that
distracted kingdom in the guise of an “angel of peace,” and that by his
coronation of King Federigo he should set a term to the strife that was
toward.

The city of Naples itself was now being ravaged by fever, and in
consequence of this it was determined that Cesare should repair instead
to Capua, where Federigo would await him. Arrived there, however, Cesare
fell ill, and the coronation ceremony again suffered a postponement
until August 10. Cesare remained a fortnight in the kingdom, and on
August 22 set out to return to Rome, and his departure appears to have
been a matter of relief to Federigo, for so impoverished did the King
of Naples find himself that the entertainment of the legate and his
numerous escort had proved a heavy tax upon his flabby purse.

On the morning of September 6 all the cardinals in Rome received a
summons to attend at the Monastery of Santa Maria Nuova to welcome the
returned Cardinal of Valencia. In addition to the Sacred College all the
ambassadors of the Powers were present, and, after the celebration of
the Mass, the entire assembly proceeded to the Vatican, where the
Pope was waiting to receive his son. When the young cardinal presented
himself at the foot of the papal throne Alexander opened his arms to
him, embraced, and kissed him, speaking no word.

This rests upon the evidence of two eye-witnesses,(1) and the
circumstance has been urged and propounded into the one conclusive piece
of evidence that Cesare had murdered his brother, and that the Pope knew
it. In this you have some more of what Gregorovius terms “inexorable
logic.” He kissed him, but he spake no word to him; therefore, they
reason, Cesare murdered Gandia. Can absurdity be more absurd, fatuity
more fatuous? Lucus a non lucendo! To square the circle should surely
present no difficulty to these subtle logicians.


  1  “Non dixit verbum Pape Valentinus, nec Papa sibi, sed eo deosculato,
descendit de solio” (Burchard’s Diarium, and “Solo lo bació,” in letter
from Rome in Sanuto’s Diarii)


It was, as we have seen, in February of 1498 that it was first rumoured
that Cesare intended to put off the purple; and that the rumour had
ample foundation was plain from the circumstance that the Pope was
already laying plans whose fulfilment must be dependent upon that step,
and seeking to arrange a marriage for Cesare with Carlotta of Aragon,
King Federigo of Naples’s daughter, stipulating that her dowry should
be such that Cesare, in taking her to wife, should become Prince of
Altamura and Tarentum.

But Federigo showed himself unwilling, possibly in consideration of
the heavy dowry demanded and of the heavy draft already made by the
Borgias--through Giuffredo Borgia, Prince of Squillace--upon this Naples
which the French invasion had so impoverished. He gave out that he would
not have his daughter wedded to a priest who was the son of a priest and
that he would not give his daughter unless the Pope could contrive that
a cardinal might marry and yet retain his hat.

It all sounded as if he were actuated by nice scruples and high
principles; but the opinion is unfortunately not encouraged when we
find him, nevertheless, giving his consent to the marriage of his nephew
Alfonso to Lucrezia Borgia upon the pronouncement of her divorce from
Giovanni Sforza. The marriage, let us say in passing, was celebrated
at the Vatican on June 20, 1498, Lucrezia receiving a dowry of 40,000
ducats. But the astute Alexander saw to it that his family should
acquire more than it gave, and contrived that Alfonso should receive the
Neapolitan cities of Biselli and Quadrata, being raised to the title of
Prince of Biselli.

Nevertheless, there was a vast difference between giving in marriage a
daughter who must take a weighty dowry out of the kingdom and receiving
a daughter who would bring a handsome dowry with her. And the facts
suggest that such was the full measure of Federigo’s scruples.

Meanwhile, to dissemble his reluctance to let Cesare have his daughter
to wife, Federigo urged that he must first take the feeling of Ferdinand
and Isabella in this matter.

While affairs stood thus, Charles VIII died suddenly at Amboise in April
of that year 1498. Some work was being carried out there by artists whom
he had brought from Naples for the purpose, and, in going to visit this,
the king happened to enter a dark gallery, and struck his forehead so
violently against the edge of a door that he expired the same day--at
the age of twenty-eight. He was a poor, malformed fellow, as we have
seen, and “of little understanding,” Commines tells us, “but so good
that it would have been impossible to have found a kinder creature.”

With him the Valois dynasty came to an end. He was succeeded by his
cousin, the Duke of Orleans, who, upon his coronation at Rheims, assumed
the title of King of France and the Two Sicilies and Duke of Milan--a
matter which considerably perturbed Federigo of Aragon and Lodovico
Sforza. Each of these rulers saw in that assumption of his own title by
Louis XII a declaration of enmity, the prelude to a declaration of open
war; wherefore, deeming it idle to send their ambassadors to represent
them at the Court of France, they refrained from doing so.

Louis XII’s claim upon the Duchy of Milan was based upon his being the
grandson of Valentina Visconti, and, considering himself a Visconti, he
naturally looked upon the Sforza dominion as no better than a usurpation
which too long had been left undisturbed. To disturb it now was the
first aim of his kingship. And to this end, as well as in another
matter, the friendship of the Pope was very desirable to Louis.

The other matter concerned his matrimonial affairs. No sooner did he
find himself King of France than he applied to Rome for the dissolution
of his marriage with Jeanne de Valois, the daughter of Louis XI. The
grounds he urged were threefold: Firstly, between himself and Jeanne
there existed a relationship of the fourth degree and a spiritual
affinity, resulting from the fact that her father, Louis XI, had
held him at the baptismal font--which before the Council of Trent
did constitute an impediment to marriage. Secondly, he had not been a
willing party to the union, but had entered into it as a consequence of
intimidation from the terrible Louis XI, who had threatened his life
and possessions if not obeyed in this. Thirdly, Jeanne laboured under
physical difficulties which rendered her incapable of maternity.

Of such a nature was the appeal he made to Alexander, and Alexander
responded by appointing a commission presided over by the Cardinal of
Luxembourg, and composed of that same cardinal and the Bishops of Albi
and Ceuta, assisted by five other bishops as assessors, to investigate
the king’s grievance. There appears to be no good reason for assuming
that the inquiry was not conducted fairly and honourably or that the
finding of the bishops and ultimate annulment of the marriage was not in
accordance with their consciences. We are encouraged to assume that all
this was indeed so, when we consider that Jeanne de Valois submitted
without protest to the divorce, and that neither then nor subsequently
at any time did she prefer any complaint, accepting the judgement, it is
presumable, as a just and fitting measure.

She applied to the Pope for permission to found a religious order, whose
special aim should be the adoration and the emulation of the perfections
of the Blessed Virgin, a permission which Alexander very readily
accorded her. He was, himself, imbued with a very special devotion for
the Mother of the Saviour. We see the spur of this special devotion of
his in the votive offering of a silver effigy to her famous altar of the
Santissima Nunziata in Florence, which he had promised in the event of
Rome being freed from Charles VIII. Again, after the accident of the
collapse of a roof in the Vatican, in which he narrowly escaped death,
it is to Santa Maria Nuova that we see him going in procession to hold
a solemn thanksgiving service to Our Lady. In a dozen different ways
did that devotion find expression during his pontificate; and be it
remembered that Catholics owe it to Alexander VI that the Angelus-bell
is rung thrice daily in honour of the Blessed Virgin.

To us this devotion to the Mother of Chastity on the part of a churchman
openly unchaste in flagrant subversion of his vows is a strange and
incongruous spectacle. But the incongruity of it is illumining. It
reveals Alexander’s simple attitude towards the sins of the flesh,
and shows how, in common with most churchmen of his day, he found no
conscientious difficulty in combining fervid devotion with perfervid
licence. Whatever it may seem by ours, by his lights--by the light of
the examples about him from his youth, by the light of the precedents
afforded him by his predecessors in St. Peter’s Chair--his conduct was
a normal enough affair, which can have afforded him little with which to
reproach himself.

In the matter of the annulment of the marriage of Louis XII it is to
be conceded that Alexander made the most of the opportunity it afforded
him. He perceived that the moment was propitious for enlisting the
services of the King of France to the achievement of his own ends, more
particularly to further the matter of the marriage of Cesare Borgia
with Carlotta of Aragon, who was being reared at the Court of France.
Accordingly Alexander desired the Bishop of Ceuta to lay his wishes in
the matter before the Christian King, and, to the end that Cesare might
find a fitting secular estate awaiting him when eventually he emerged
from the clergy, the Pope further suggested to Louis, through the
bishop’s agency, that Cesare should receive the investiture of the
counties of Valentinois and Dyois in Dauphiny. On the face of it this
wears the look of inviting bribery. In reality it scarcely amounted
to so much, although the opportunism that prompted the request is
undeniable. Yet it is worthy of consideration that in what concerned the
counties of Valentinois and Dyois, the Pope’s suggestion constituted
a wise political step. These territories had been in dispute between
France and the Holy See for a matter of some two hundred years, during
which the Popes had been claiming dominion over them. The claims had
been admitted by Louis XI, who had relinquished the counties to the
Church; but shortly after his death the Parliament of Dauphiny had
restored them to the crown of France. Charles VIII and Innocent VIII had
wrangled over them, and an arbitration was finally projected, but never
held.

Alexander now perceived a way to solve the difficulty by a compromise
which should enrich his son and give the latter a title to replace that
of cardinal which he was to relinquish. So his proposal to Louis XII was
that the Church should abandon its claim upon the territories, whilst
the king, raising Valentinois to the dignity of a duchy, should so
confer it upon Cesare Borgia.

Although the proposal was politically sound, it constituted at the same
time an act of flagrant nepotism. But let us bear in mind that Alexander
did not lack a precedent for this particular act. When Louis XI had
surrendered Valentinois to Sixtus IV, this Pope had bestowed it upon
his nephew Girolamo, thereby vitiating any claim that the Holy See
might subsequently have upon the territory. We judge it--under the
circumstances that Louis XI had surrendered it to the Church--to be a
far more flagrant piece of nepotism than was Alexander’s now.

Louis XII, nothing behind the Pope in opportunism, saw in the concession
asked of him the chance of acquiring Alexander’s good-will. He
consented, accompanying his consent by a request for a cardinal’s hat
for Georges d’Amboise, Bishop of Rouen, who had been his devoted friend
in less prosperous times, and the sharer of his misfortunes under
the previous reign, and was now his chief counsellor and minister. In
addition he besought--dependent, of course, upon the granting of
the solicited divorce--a dispensation to marry Anne of Brittany, the
beautiful widow of Charles VIII. This was Louis’s way of raising the
price, as it were, of the concession and services asked of him; yet,
that there might be no semblance of bargaining, his consent to Cesare’s
being created Duke of Valentinois was simultaneous with his request for
further favours.

With the Royal Patents conferring that duchy upon the Pope’s son, Louis
de Villeneuve reached Rome on August 7, 1498. On the same day the young
cardinal came before the Sacred College, assembled in Consistory, to
crave permission to doff the purple.

After the act of adoration of the Pope’s Holiness, he humbly submitted
to his brother cardinals that his inclinations had ever been in
opposition to his embracing the ecclesiastical dignity, and that, if he
had entered upon it at all, this had been solely at the instances of his
Holiness, just as he had persevered in it to gratify him; but that, his
inclinations and desires for the secular estate persisting, he implored
the Holy Father, of his clemency, to permit him to put off his habit and
ecclesiastical rank, to restore his hat and benefices to the Church, and
to grant him dispensation to return to the world and be free to contract
marriage. And he prayed the very reverend cardinals to use their good
offices on his behalf, adding to his own their intercessions to the
Pope’s Holiness to accord him the grace he sought.

The cardinals relegated the decision of the matter to the Pope. Cardinal
Ximenes alone--as the representative of Spain--stood out against the
granting of the solicited dispensation, and threw obstacles in the way
of it. In this, no doubt, he obeyed his instructions from Ferdinand and
Isabella, who saw to the bottom of the intrigue with France that was
toward, and of the alliance that impended between Louis XII and the Holy
See--an alliance not at all to the interests of Spain.

The Pope made a speedy rout of the cardinal’s objections with the most
apostolic and irresistible of all weapons. He pointed out that it was
not for him to hinder the Cardinal of Valencia’s renunciation of the
purple, since that renunciation was clearly become necessary for the
salvation of his soul--“Pro salutae animae suae”--to which, of course,
Ximenes had no answer.

But, with the object of conciliating Spain, this ever-politic Pope
indicated that, if Cesare was about to become a prince of France, his
many ecclesiastical benefices, yielding some 35,000 gold florins yearly,
being mostly in Spain, would be bestowed upon Spanish churchmen, and he
further begged Ximenes to remember that he already had a “nephew” at the
Court of Spain in the person of the heir of Gandia, whom he particularly
commended to the favour of Ferdinand and Isabella.

Thus was Cesare Borgia’s petition granted, and his return to the world
accomplished. And, by a strange chance of homonymy, his title remained
unchanged despite his change of estate. The Cardinal of Valencia, in
Spain, became the Duke of Valence--or Valentinois--in France and in
Italy Valentino remained Valentino.





BOOK III. THE BULL RAMPANT

“Cum numine Caesaris omen.”

(motto on Cesare Borgia’s sword.)





CHAPTER I. THE DUCHESS OF VALENTINOIS


King Louis XII dispatched the Sieur de Sarenon by sea, with a fleet of
three ships and five galleys, to the end that he should conduct the
new duke to France, which fleet was delayed so that it did not drop its
anchors at Ostia until the end of September.

Meanwhile, Cesare’s preparations for departure had been going forward,
and were the occasion of a colossal expenditure on the part of his sire.
For the Pope desired that his son, in going to France to assume his
estate, and for the further purposes of marrying a wife, of conveying
to Louis the dispensation permitting his marriage with Anne of Brittany,
and of bearing the red hat to Amboise, should display the extraordinary
magnificence for which the princes of cultured and luxurious Italy were
at the time renowned.

His suite consisted of fully a hundred attendants, what with
esquires, pages, lacqueys and grooms, whilst twelve chariots and fifty
sumpter-mules were laden with his baggage. The horses of his followers
were all sumptuously caparisoned with bridles and stirrups of solid
silver; and, for the rest, the splendour of the liveries, the weapons
and the jewels, and the richness of the gifts he bore with him were the
amazement even of that age of dazzling displays.

In Cesare’s train went Ramiro de Lorqua, the Master of his Household;
Agabito Gherardi, his secretary; and his Spanish physician, Gaspare
Torella--the only medical man of his age who had succeeded in
discovering a treatment for the pudendagra which the French had left in
Italy, and who had dedicated to Cesare his learned treatise upon that
disease.

As a body-guard, or escort of honour, Cesare took with him thirty
gentlemen, mostly Romans, among whom were Giangiordano Orsini, Pietro
Santa Croce, Mario di Mariano, Domenico Sanguigna, Giulio Alberini,
Bartolomeo Capranica, and Gianbattista Mancini--all young, and all
members of those patrician families which Alexander VI had skilfully
attached to his own interest.

The latest of these was the Orsini family, with which an alliance was
established by the marriage celebrated at the Vatican on September 28 of
that same year between Fabio Orsini and Girolama Borgia, a niece of the
Pope’s.

Cesare’s departure took place on October 1, in the early morning, when
he rode out with his princely retinue, and followed the Tiber along
Trastevere, without crossing the city. He was mounted on a handsome
charger, caparisoned in red silk and gold brocade--the colours of
France, in which he had also dressed his lacqueys. He wore a doublet
of white damask laced with gold, and carried a mantle of black velvet
swinging from his shoulders. Of black velvet, too, was the cap on his
auburn head, its sable colour an effective background for the ruddy
effulgence of the great rubies--“as large as beans”--with which it was
adorned.

Of the gentlemen who followed him, the Romans were dressed in the French
mode, like himself, whilst the Spaniards adhered to the fashions of
their native Spain.

He was escorted as far as the end of the Banchi by four cardinals, and
from a window of the Vatican the Pope watched the imposing cavalcade
and followed it with his eyes until it was lost to view, weeping, we
are told, for very joy at the contemplation of the splendour and
magnificence which it had been his to bestow upon his beloved son--“the
very heart of him,” as he wrote to the King of France in that letter of
which Cesare was the bearer.

On October 12 the Duke of Valentinois landed at Marseilles, where he was
received by the Bishop of Dijon, whom the king had sent to meet him, and
who now accompanied the illustrious visitor to Avignon. There Cesare
was awaited by the Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere. This prelate was now
anxious to make his peace with Alexander--and presently we shall look
into the motives that probably inspired him, a matter which has so far,
we fancy, escaped criticism for reasons that we shall also strive to
make apparent. To the beginnings of a reconciliation with the Pontiff
afforded by his touching letter of condolence on the death of the Duke
of Gandia, he now added a very cordial reception and entertainment of
Cesare; and throughout his sojourn in France the latter received at
the hands of della Rovere the very friendliest treatment, the cardinal
missing no opportunity of working in the duke’s interests and for the
advancement of his ends.

The Pope wrote to the cardinal commending Cesare to his good graces, and
the cardinal replied with protestations which he certainly proceeded to
make good.

Della Rovere was to escort Cesare to the king, who was with his Court
then at Chinon, awaiting the completion of the work that was being
carried out at his Castle of Blois, which presently became his chief
residence. But Cesare appears to have tarried in Avignon, for he was
still there at the end of October, nor did he reach Chinon until the
middle of December. The pomp of his entrance was a thing stupendous. We
find a detailed relation of it in Brantôme, translated into prose
form some old verses which, he tells us, that he found in the family
treasury. He complains of their coarseness, and those who are acquainted
with the delightful old Frenchman’s own frankness of expression may
well raise their brows at that criticism of his. Whatever the coarse
liberties taken with the subject--of which we are not allowed more than
an occasional glimpse--and despite the fact that the relation was
in verse, which ordinarily makes for the indulgence of the rhymer’s
fancy--the description appears to be fairly accurate, for it corresponds
more or less with the particulars given in Sanuto.

At the head of the cavalcade went twenty-four sumpter-mules, laden with
coffers and other baggage under draperies embroidered with Cesare’s
arms--prominent among which would be the red bull, the emblem of his
house, and the three-pointed flame, his own particular device. Behind
these came another twenty-four mules, caparisoned in the king’s colours
of scarlet and gold, to be followed in their turn by sixteen beautiful
chargers led by hand, similarly caparisoned, and their bridles and
stirrups of solid silver. Next came eighteen pages on horseback, sixteen
of whom were in scarlet and yellow, whilst the remaining two were in
cloth of gold. These were followed by a posse of lacqueys in the same
liveries and two mules laden with coffers draped with cloth of gold,
which contained the gifts of which Cesare was the bearer. Behind these
rode the duke’s thirty gentlemen, in cloth of gold and silver, and
amongst them came the duke himself.

Cesare was mounted on a superb war-horse that was all empanoplied in a
cuirass of gold leaves of exquisite workmanship, its head surmounted
by a golden artichoke, its tail confined in a net of gold abundantly
studded with pearls. The duke was in black velvet, through the slashings
of which appeared the gold brocade of the undergarment. Suspended from
a chain said by Brantôme’s poet to be worth thirty thousand ducats, a
medallion of diamonds blazed upon his breast, and in his black velvet
cap glowed those same wonderful rubies that we saw on the occasion of
his departure from Rome. His boots were of black velvet, laced with gold
thread that was studded with gems.

The rear of the cavalcade was brought up by more mules and the chariots
bearing his plate and tents and all the other equipage with which a
prince was wont to travel.

It is said by some that his horse was shod with solid gold, and there is
also a story--pretty, but probably untrue--that some of his mules were
shod in the same metal, and that, either because the shoes were loosely
attached of intent, or because the metal, being soft, parted readily
from the hoofs, these golden shoes were freely cast and left as largesse
for those who might care to take them.

The Bishop of Rouen--that same Georges d’Amboise for whom he was
bringing the red hat--the Seneschal of Toulouse and several gentlemen
of the Court went to meet him on the bridge, and escorted him up through
the town to the castle, where the king awaited him. Louis XII gave him
a warm and cordial welcome, showing him then and thereafter the
friendliest consideration. Not so, however, the lady he was come to woo.
It was said in Venice that she was in love with a young Breton gentleman
in the following of Queen Anne. Whether this was true, and Carlotta
acted in the matter in obedience to her own feelings, or whether she
was merely pursuing the instructions she had received from Naples, she
obstinately and absolutely refused to entertain or admit the suit of
Cesare.

Della Rovere, on January 18, wrote to the Pope from Nantes, whither the
Court had moved, a letter in which he sang the praises of the young Duke
of Valentinois.

“By his modesty his readiness, his prudence, and his other virtues he
has known how to earn the affections of every one.” Unfortunately, there
was one important exception, as the cardinal was forced to add: “The
damsel, either out of her own contrariness, or because so induced by
others, which is easier to believe, constantly refuses to hear of the
wedding.”

Della Rovere was quite justified in finding it easier to believe that
Carlotta was acting upon instructions from others, for, when hard
pressed to consent to the alliance, she demanded that the Neapolitan
ambassador should himself say that her father desired her to do so--a
statement which, it seems, the ambassador could not bring himself to
make.

Baffled by the persistence of that refusal, Cesare all but returned a
bachelor to Italy. So far, indeed, was his departure a settled matter
that in February of 1489, at the Castle of Loches, he received the
king’s messages for the Pope. Yet Louis hesitated to let him go without
having bound his Holiness to his own interests by stronger bonds.

In the task of tracing the annals of the Borgias, the honest seeker
after truth is compelled to proceed axe in hand that he may hack himself
a way through the tangle of irresponsible or malicious statements that
have grown up about this subject, driving their roots deep into the
soil of history. Not a single chance does malignity, free or chartered,
appear to have missed for the invention of flagitious falsehoods
concerning this family, or for the no less flagitious misinterpretation
of known facts.

Amid a mass of written nonsense dealing with Cesare’s sojourn in France
is the oft-repeated, totally unproven statement that he withheld from
Louis the dispensation enabling the latter to marry Anne of Brittany,
until such time as he should have obtained from Louis all that he
desired of him--in short, that he sold him the dispensation for the
highest price he could extract. The only motive served by this statement
is once more to show Alexander and his son in the perpetration of
simoniacal practices, and the statement springs, beyond doubt, from a
passage in Macchiavelli’s Extracts from Dispatches to the Ten. Elsewhere
has been mentioned the confusion prevailing in those extracts, and their
unreliability as historical evidences. That circumstance can be now
established. The passage in question runs as follows:

“This dispensation was given to Valentinois when he went to France
without any one being aware of its existence, with orders to sell it
dearly to the king, and not until satisfied of the wife and his other
desires. And, whilst these things were toward, the king learnt from the
Bishop of Ceuta that the dispensation already existed, and so, without
having received or even seen it the marriage was celebrated, and
for revealing this the Bishop of Ceuta was put to death by order of
Valentinois.”

Now, to begin with, Macchiavelli admits that what passed between Pope
and duke was secret. How, then, does he pretend to possess these
details of it? But, leaving that out of the question, his statement--so
abundantly repeated by later writers--is traversed by every one of the
actual facts of the case.

That there can have been no secret at all about the dispensation is made
plain by the fact that Manfredi, the Ferrarese ambassador, writes of it
to Duke Ercole on October 2--the day after Cesare’s departure from Rome.
And as for the death of Fernando d’Almeida Bishop of Ceuta, this did not
take place then, nor until two years later (on January 7, 1499) at the
siege of Forli, whither he had gone in Cesare’s train--as is related in
Bernardi’s Chronicles and Bonoli’s history of that town.

To return to the matter of Cesare’s imminent departure unwed from
France, Louis XII was not the only monarch to whom this was a source
of anxiety. Keener far was the anxiety experienced on that score by the
King of Naples, who feared that its immediate consequence would be to
drive the Holy Father into alliance with Venice, which was paying its
court to him at the time and with that end in view. Eager to conciliate
Alexander in this hour of peril, Federigo approached him with
alternative proposals, and offered to invest Cesare in the
principalities of Salerno and Sanseverino, which had been taken from the
rebel barons. To this the Pope might have consented, but that, in the
moment of considering it, letters reached him from Cesare which made him
pause.

Louis XII had also discovered an alternative to the marriage of Cesare
with Carlotta, and one that should more surely draw the Pope into the
alliance with Venice and himself.

Among the ladies of the Court of Queen Anne--Louis had now been wedded
a month--there were, besides Carlotta, two other ladies either of whom
might make Cesare a suitable duchess. One of these was a niece of the
king’s, the daughter of the Comte de Foix; the other was Charlotte
d’Albret, a daughter of Alain d’Albret, Duc de Guyenne, and sister to
the King of Navarre. Between these two Cesare was now given to choose by
Louis, and his choice fell upon Charlotte.

She was seventeen years of age and said to be the most beautiful maid
in France, and she had been reared at the honourable and pious Court of
Jeanne de Valois, whence she had passed into that of Anne of Brittany,
which latter, says Hilarion de Coste,(1) was “a school of virtue, an
academy of honour.”


  1  Éloges et vies des Reynes, Princesses, etc.


Negotiations for her hand were opened with Alain, who, it is said, was
at first unwilling, but in the end won over to consent. Navarre had need
of the friendship of the King of France, that it might withstand the
predatory humours of Castille; and so, for his son’s sake, Alain could
not long oppose the wishes of Louis. Considering closely the pecuniary
difficulties under which this Alain d’Albret was labouring and his
notorious avarice, one is tempted to conclude that such difficulties
as he may have made were dictated by his reduced circumstances, his
impossibility, or unwillingness, to supply his daughter with a dowry
fitting her rank, and an unworthy desire to drive in the matter the best
bargain possible. And this is abundantly confirmed by the obvious care
and hard-headed cunning with which the Sieur d’Albret investigated
Cesare’s circumstances and sources of revenue to verify their values to
be what was alleged.

Eventually he consented to endow her with 30,000 livres Tournois (90,000
francs) to be paid as follows: 6,000 livres on the celebration of the
marriage, and the balance by annual instalments of 1,500 livres until
cleared off. This sum, as a matter of fact, represented her portion of
the inheritance from her deceased mother, Françoise de Bretagne, and it
was tendered subject to her renouncing all rights and succession in any
property of her father’s or her said deceased mother’s.

Thus is it set forth in the contract drawn up by Alain at Castel-Jaloux
on March 23, 1499, which contract empowers his son Gabriel and one
Regnault de St. Chamans to treat and conclude the marriage urged by the
king between the Duke of Valentinois and Alain’s daughter, Charlotte
d’Albret. But that was by no means all. Among other conditions imposed
by Alain, he stipulated that the Pope should endow his daughter with
100,000 livres Tournois, and that for his son, Amanieu d’Albret,
there should be a cardinal’s hat--for the fulfilment of both of which
conditions Cesare took it upon himself to engage his father.

On April 15 the treaty between France and Venice was signed at Blois.
It was a defensive and offensive alliance directed against all, with the
sole exception of the reigning Pontiff, who should have the faculty to
enter into it if he so elected. This was the first decisive step against
the House of Sforza, and so secretly were the negotiations conducted
that Lodovico Sforza’s first intimation of them resulted from the
capture in Milanese territory of a courier from the Pope with letters to
Cesare in France. From these he learnt, to his dismay, not only of the
existence of the league, but that the Pope had joined it. The immediate
consequence of this positive assurance that Alexander had gone over to
Sforza’s enemies was Ascanio Sforza’s hurried departure from Rome on
July 13.

In the meantime Cesare’s marriage had followed almost immediately upon
the conclusion of the treaty. The nuptials were celebrated on May 12,
and on the 19th he received at the hands of the King of France the
knightly Order of St. Michael, which was then the highest honour
that France could confer. When the news of this reached the Pope he
celebrated the event in Rome with public festivities and illuminations.

Of Cesare’s courtship we have no information. The fact that the marriage
was purely one of political expediency would tend to make us conceive it
as invested with that sordid lovelessness which must so often attend the
marriages of princes. But there exists a little data from which we may
draw certain permissible inferences. This damsel of seventeen was said
to be the loveliest in France, and there is more than a suggestion in
Le Feron’s De Gestis Regnum Gallorum, that Cesare was by no means
indifferent to her charms. He tells us that the Duke of Valentinois
entered into the marriage very heartily, not only for the sake of its
expediency, but for “the beauty of the lady, which was equalled by her
virtues and the sweetness of her nature.”

Cesare, we have it on more than one authority, was the handsomest man
of his day. The gallantry of his bearing merited the approval of so
fastidious a critic in such matters as Baldassare Castiglione, who
mentions it in his Il Cortigiano. Of his personal charm there is also no
lack of commendation from those who had his acquaintance at this time.
Added to this, his Italian splendour and flamboyance may well have
dazzled a maid who had been reared amid the grey and something stern
tones of the Court of Jeanne de Valois.

And so it may well be that they loved, and that they were blessed in
their love for the little space allotted them in each other’s company.
The sequel justifies in a measure the assumption. Just one little summer
out of the span of their lives--brief though those lives were--did they
spend together, and it is good to find some little evidence that, during
that brief season at least, they inhabited life’s rose-garden.

In September--just four short months after the wedding-bells had pealed
above them--the trumpets of war blared out their call to arms. Louis’s
preparations for the invasion of Milan were complete and he poured his
troops through Piedmont under the command of Giangiacomo Trivulzio.

Cesare was to accompany Louis into Italy. He appointed his
seventeen-year-old duchess governor and administrator of his lands and
lordships in France and Dauphiny under a deed dated September 8, and
he made her heiress to all his moveable possessions in the event of his
death. Surely this bears some witness, not only to the prevailing of
a good understanding between them, but to his esteem of her and the
confidence he reposed in her mental qualities. The rest her later
mourning of him shows.

Thus did Cesare take leave of the young wife whom he was never to see
again. Their child--born in the following spring--he was never to see at
all. The pity of it! Ambition-driven, to fulfil the destiny expected of
him, he turned his back upon that pleasant land of Dauphiny where the
one calm little season of his manhood had been spent, where happiness
and peace might have been his lifelong portion had he remained. He set
his face towards Italy and the storm and stress before him, and in the
train of King Louis he set out upon the turbulent meteoric course that
was to sear so deep and indelible a brand across the scroll of history.




CHAPTER II. THE KNELL OF THE TYRANTS


In the hour of his need Lodovico Sforza found himself without friends
or credit, and he had to pay the price of the sly, faithless egotistical
policy he had so long pursued with profit.

His far-reaching schemes were flung into confusion because a French king
had knocked his brow against a door, and had been succeeded by one who
conceived that he had a legal right to the throne of Milan, and the
intent and might to enforce it, be the right legal or not. It was in
vain now that Lodovico turned to the powers of Italy for assistance,
in vain that his cunning set fresh intrigues afoot. His neighbours had
found him out long since; he had played fast and loose with them too
often, and there was none would trust him now.

Thus he found himself isolated, and in no case to withstand the French
avalanche which rolled down upon his duchy. The fall of Milan was a
matter of days; of resistance there was practically none. Town after
town threw up its gates to the invaders, and Lodovico, seeing himself
abandoned on all sides, sought in flight the safety of his own person.

Cesare took no part in the war, which, after all, was no war--no more
than an armed progress. He was at Lyons with the King, and he did not
move into Italy until Louis went to take possession of his new duchy.

Amid the acclamations of the ever-fickle mob, hailing him as its
deliverer, Louis XII rode triumphantly into Milan on October 6, attended
by a little host of princes, including the Prince of Savoy, the Dukes
of Montferrat and Ferrara, and the Marquis of Mantua. But the place of
honour went to Cesare Borgia, who rode at the king’s side, a brilliant
and arresting figure. This was the occasion on which Baldassare
Castiglione--who was in the Marquis of Mantua’s suite--was moved to such
praise of the appearance and gallant bearing of the duke, and of the
splendid equipment of his suite, which outshone those of all that little
host of attendant princes.

From this time onward Cesare signs himself “Cesare Borgia of France,”
 and quarters on his shield the golden lilies of France with the red bull
of the House of Borgia.

The conditions on which Alexander VI joined the league of France and
Venice became apparent at about this time. They were to be gathered from
the embassy of his nephew, the Cardinal Giovanni Borgia, to Venice in
the middle of September. There the latter announced to the Council of
Ten that the Pope’s Holiness aimed at the recovery to the Church of
those Romagna tyrannies which originally were fiefs of the Holy See
and held by her vicars, who, however, had long since repudiated the
Pontifical authority, refused the payment of their tributes, and in some
instances had even gone so far as to bear arms against the Church.

With one or two exceptions the violent and evil misgovernment of these
turbulent princelings was a scandal to all Italy. They ruled by rapine
and murder, and rendered Romagna little better than a nest of brigands.
Their state of secession from the Holy See arose largely out of the
nepotism practised by the last Popes--a nepotism writers are too prone
to overlook when charging Alexander with the same abuse. Such Popes as
Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII had broken up the States of the Church that
they might endow their children and their nephews. The nepotism of such
as these never had any result but to impoverish the Holy See; whilst, on
the other hand, the nepotism of Alexander--this Pope who is held up
to obloquy as the archetype of the nepotist--had a tendency rather to
enrich it. It was not to the States of the Church, not by easy ways
of plundering the territories of the Holy See, that he turned to found
dominions and dynasties for his children. He went beyond and outside of
them, employing princely alliances as the means to his ends. Gandia
was a duke in Spain; Giuffredo a prince in Naples, and Cesare a duke
in France. For none of these could it be said that territories had
been filched from Rome, whilst the alliances made for them were such
as tended to strengthen the power of the Pope, and, therefore, of the
Church.

The reconsolidation of the States of the Church, the recovery of
her full temporal power, which his predecessors had so grievously
dissipated, had ever been Alexander’s aim; Louis XII afforded him, at
last, his opportunity, since with French aid the thing now might be
attempted.

His son Cesare was the Hercules to whom was to be given the labour of
cleaning out the Augean stable of the Romagna.

That Alexander may have been single-minded in his purpose has never
been supposed. It might, indeed, be to suppose too much; and the general
assumption that, from the outset, his chief aim was to found a powerful
State for his son may be accepted. But let us at least remember that
such had been the aims of several Popes before him. Sixtus IV and
Innocent VIII had similarly aimed at founding dynasties in Romagna for
their families, but, lacking the talents and political acuteness of
Alexander and a son of the mettle and capacity of Cesare Borgia, the
feeble trail of their ambition is apt to escape attention. It is also to
be remembered that, whatever Alexander’s ulterior motive, the immediate
results of the campaign with which he inspired his son were to reunite
to the Church the States which had fallen away from her, and to
re-establish her temporal sway in the full plenitude of its dominion.
However much he may have been imbued with the desire to exalt and
aggrandize his children politically, he did nothing that did not at the
same time make for the greater power and glory of the Church.

His formidable Bull published in October set forth how, after trial, it
had been found that the Lords or Vicars of Rimini, Pesaro, Imola, Forli,
Camerino and Faenza, with other feudatories of the Holy See (including
the duchy of Urbino) had never paid the yearly tribute due to the
Church, wherefore he, by virtue of his apostolic authority, deprived
them of all their rights, and did declare them so deprived.

It has been said again and again that this Bull amounting to a
declaration of war, was no more than a pretext to indulge his rapacity;
but surely it bears the impress of a real grievance, and, however
blameable the results that followed out of it, for the measure itself
there were just and ample grounds.

The effect of that Bull, issued at a moment when Cesare stood at arms
with the might of France at his back, ready to enforce it, was naturally
to throw into a state of wild dismay these Romagna tyrants whose
acquaintance we shall make at closer quarters presently in the course of
following Cesare’s campaign. Cesare Borgia may have been something of a
wolf; but you are not to suppose that the Romagna was a fold of lambs.

Giovanni Sforza--Cesare’s sometime brother-in­law, and Lord of
Pesaro--flies in hot haste to Venice for protection. There are no
lengths to which he will not go to thwart the Borgias in their purpose,
to save his tyranny from falling into the power of this family which he
hates most rabidly, and of which he says that, having robbed him of his
honour, it would now deprive him of his possessions. He even offers to
make a gift of his dominions to the Republic.

There was much traders’ blood in Venice, and, trader-like, she was avid
of possessions. You can surmise how she must have watered at the mouth
to see so fine a morsel cast thus into her lap, and yet to know that
the consumption of it might beget a woeful indigestion. Venice shook her
head regretfully. She could not afford to quarrel with her ally, King
Louis, and so she made answer--a thought contemptuously, it seems--that
Giovanni should have made his offer while he was free to do so.

The Florentines exerted themselves to save Forli from the fate that
threatened it. They urged a league of Bologna, Ferrara, Forli, Piombino,
and Siena for their common safety--a proposal which came to nothing,
probably because Ferrara and Siena, not being threatened by the Bull,
saw no reason why, for the sake of others, they should call down upon
themselves the wrath of the Borgias and their mighty allies.

Venice desired to save Faenza, whose tyrant, Manfredi, was also
attainted for non-payment of his tributes, and to this end the Republic
sent an embassy to Rome with the moneys due. But the Holy Father refused
the gold, declaring that it was too late for payment.

Forli’s attempt to avert the danger was of a different sort, and not
exerted until this danger--in the shape of Cesare himself--stood in
arms beneath her walls. Two men, both named Tommaso--though it does not
transpire that they were related--one a chamberlain of the Palace
of Forli, the other a musician, were so devoted to the Countess
Sforza-Riario, the grim termagant who ruled the fiefs of her murdered
husband, Girolamo Riario, as to have undertaken an enterprise from which
they cannot have hoped to emerge with their lives. It imported no less
than the murder of the Pope. They were arrested on November 21, and
in the possession of one of them was found a hollow cane containing
a letter “so impregnated with poison that even to unfold it would be
dangerous.” This letter was destined for the Holy Father.

The story reads like a gross exaggeration emanating from men who, on the
subject of poisoning, display the credulity of the fifteenth century, so
ignorant in these matters and so prone to the fantastic. And our minds
receive a shock upon learning that, when put to the question,
these messengers actually made a confession--upon which the story
rests--admitting that they had been sent by the countess to slay the
Pope, in the hope that thus Forli might be saved to the Riarii. At first
we conclude that those wretched men, examined to the accompaniment
of torture, confessed whatever was required of them, as so frequently
happened in such cases. Such, indeed, is the very explanation advanced
by more than one writer, coupled with the suggestion, in some instances,
that the whole affair was trumped up by the Pope to serve his own ends.

They will believe the wildest and silliest of poisoning stories (such as
those of Djem and Cardinal Giovanni Borgia) which reveal the Borgias
as the poisoners; but, let another be accused and the Borgias be the
intended victims, and at once they grow rational, and point out to you
the wildness of the statement, the impossibility of its being true. Yet
it is a singular fact that a thorough investigation of this case of the
Countess Sforza-Riario’s poisoned letter reveals it to be neither wild
nor impossible but simply diabolical. The explanation of the matter
is to be found in Andrea Bernardi’s Chronicles of Forli. He tells us
exactly how the thing was contrived, with a precision of detail which we
could wish to see emulated by other contemporaries of his who so lightly
throw out accusations of poisoning. He informs us that a deadly and
infectious disease was rampant in Forli in that year 1499, and that,
before dispatching her letter to the Pope, the Countess caused it to be
placed upon the body of one who was sick of this infection--thus hoping
to convey it to his Holiness.(1)


  1  “Dite litre lei le aveva fate tocare et tenere adose ad uno nostro
infetado.”--Andrea Bernardi (Cronache di Forli).


Alexander held a thanksgiving service for his escape at Santa Maria
della Pace, and Cardinal Raffaele Riario fled precipitately from Rome,
justly fearful of being involved in the papal anger that must fall upon
his house.

By that time, however, Cesare had already taken the field. The support
of Louis, conqueror of Milan, had been obtained, and in this Cardinal
Giuliano della Rovere had once more been helpful to the Borgias.

His reconciliation with the Pope, long since deserved by the services he
had rendered the House of Borgia in forwarding Cesare’s aims, as we
have seen, was completed now by an alliance which bound the two families
together. His nephew, Francesco della Rovere, had married Alexander’s
niece, Angela Borgia.

There is a letter from Giuliano to the Pope, dated October 12, 1499, in
which he expresses his deep gratitude in the matter of this marriage,
which naturally redounded to the advantage of his house, and pledges
himself to exert all the influence which he commands with Louis XII for
the purpose of furthering the Duke of Valentinois’ wishes. So well does
he keep this promise that we see him utterly abandoning his cousins
the Riarii, who were likely to be crushed under the hoofs of the now
charging bull, and devoting himself strenuously to equip Cesare for
that same charge. So far does he go in this matter that he is one of the
sureties--the other being the Cardinal Giovanni Borgia--for the loan
of 45,000 ducats raised by Cesare in Milan towards the cost of his
campaign.

This is the moment in which to pause and consider this man, who, because
he was a bitter enemy of Alexander’s, and who, because earlier he had
covered the Pope with obloquy and insult and is to do so again later, is
hailed as a fine, upright, lofty, independent, noble soul.

Not so fine, upright, or noble but that he can put aside his rancour
when he finds that there is more profit in fawning than in snarling; not
so independent but that he can become a sycophant who writes panegyrics
of Cesare and letters breathing devotion to the Pope, once he has
realized that thus his interests will be better served. This is the
man, remember, who dubbed Alexander a Jew and a Moor; this the man who
agitated at the Courts of France and Spain for Alexander’s deposition
from the Pontificate on the score of the simony of his election; this
the man whose vituperations of the Holy Father are so often quoted,
since--coming from lips so honest--they must, from the very moment that
he utters them, be merited. If only the historian would turn the medal
about a little, and allow us a glimpse of the reverse as well as of the
obverse, what a world of trouble and misconceptions should we not be
spared!

Della Rovere had discovered vain his work of defamation, vain his
attempts to induce the Kings of France and Spain to summon a General
Council and depose the man whose seat he coveted, so he had sought to
make his peace with the Holy See. The death of Charles VIII, and the
succession of a king who had need of the Pope’s friendship and who found
a friend in Alexander, rendered it all the more necessary that della
Rovere should set himself to reconquer, by every means in his power, the
favour of Alexander.

And so you see this honourable, upright man sacrificing his very
family to gain that personal end. Where now is that stubbornly honest
conscience of his which made him denounce Alexander as no Christian and
no Pope? Stifled by self-interest. It is as well that this should be
understood, for this way lies the understanding of many things.

The funds for the campaign being found, Cesare received from Louis
three hundred lances captained by Yves d’Allègre and four thousand
foot, composed of Swiss and Gascons, led by the Bailie of Dijon. Further
troops were being assembled for him at Cesena--the one fief of Romagna
that remained faithful to the Church--by Achille Tiberti and Ercole
Bentivogli, and to these were to be added the Pontifical troops that
would be sent to him; so that Cesare found himself ultimately at the
head of a considerable army, some ten thousand strong, well-equipped and
supported by good artillery.

Louis XII left Milan on November 7--one month after his triumphal
entrance--and set out to return to France, leaving Trivulzio to
represent him as ruler of the Milanese. Two days later Cesare’s army
took the road, and he himself went with his horse by way of Piacenza,
whilst the foot, under the Bailie of Dijon, having obtained leave of
passage through the territories of Ferrara and Cremona, followed the Po
down to Argenta.

Thus did Cesare Borgia--personally attended by a caesarian guard,
wearing his livery--set out upon the conquest of the Romagna. Perhaps
at no period of his career is he more remarkable than at this moment. To
all trades men serve apprenticeships, and to none is the apprenticeship
more gradual and arduous than to the trade of arms. Yet Cesare
Borgia served none. Like Minerva, springing full-grown and armed into
existence, so Cesare sprang to generalship in the hour that saw him made
a soldier. This was the first army in which he had ever marched, yet he
marched at the head of it. In his twenty-four years of life he had never
so much as witnessed a battle pitched; yet here was he riding to
direct battles and to wrest victories. Boundless audacity and swiftest
intelligence welded into an amazing whole!




CHAPTER III. IMOLA AND FORLI


Between his departure from Milan and his arrival before Imola, where his
campaign was to be inaugurated, Cesare paid a flying visit to Rome and
his father, whom he had not seen for a full year. He remained three days
at the Vatican, mostly closeted with the Pope’s Holiness. At the end of
that time he went north again to rejoin his army, which by now had been
swelled by the forces that had joined it from Cesena, some Pontifical
troops, and a condotta under Vitellozzo Vitelli.

The latter, who was Lord of Castello, had gone to Milan to seek justice
at the hands of Louis XII against the Florentines, who had beheaded his
brother Paolo--deservedly, for treason in the conduct of the war against
Pisa. This Vitellozzo was a valuable and experienced captain. He took
service with Cesare, spurred by the hope of ultimately finding a way
to avenge himself upon the Florentines, and in Cesare’s train he now
advanced upon Imola and Forli.

The warlike Countess Caterina Sforza-Riario had earlier been granted
by her children full administration of their patrimony during their
minority. To the defence of this she now addressed herself with all the
resolution of her stern nature. Her life had been unfortunate, and of
horrors she had touched a surfeit. Her father, Galeazzo Sforza, was
murdered in Milan Cathedral by a little band of patriots; her brother
Giangaleazzo had died, of want or poison, in the Castle of Pavia, the
victim of her ambitious uncle, Lodovico; her husband, Girolamo Riario,
she had seen butchered and flung naked from a window of the very castle
which she now defended; Giacomo Feo, whom she had secretly married in
second nuptials, was done to death in Forli, under her very eyes, by a
party of insurrectionaries. Him she had terribly avenged. Getting her
men-at-arms together, she had ridden at their head into the quarter
inhabited by the murderers, and there ordered--as Macchiavelli tells
us--the massacre of every human being that dwelt in it, women and
children included, whilst she remained at hand to see it done.
Thereafter she took a third husband, in Giovanni di Pierfrancesco
de’Medici, who died in 1498. By him this lusty woman had a son whose
name was to ring through Italy as that of one of the most illustrious
captains of his day--Giovanni delle Bande Nere.

Such was the woman whom Sanuto has called “great-souled, but a most
cruel virago,” who now shut herself into her castle to defy the Borgia.

She had begun by answering the Pope’s Bull of attainder with the
statement that, far from owing the Holy See the tribute which it
claimed, the Holy See was actually in her debt, her husband, Count
Girolamo Riario, having been a creditor of the Church for the provisions
made by him in his office of Captain-General of the Pontifical forces.
This subterfuge, however, had not weighed with Alexander, whereupon,
having also been frustrated in her attempt upon the life of the Pope’s
Holiness, she had proceeded to measures of martial resistance. Her
children and her treasures she had dispatched to Florence that they
might be out of danger, retaining of the former only her son Ottaviano,
a young man of some twenty years; but, for all that she kept him near
her, it is plain that she did not account him worthy of being entrusted
with the defence of his tyranny, for it was she, herself, the daughter
of the bellicose race of Sforza, who set about the organizing of this.

Disposing of forces that were entirely inadequate to take the field
against the invader, she entrenched herself in her fortress of Forli,
provisioning it to withstand a protracted siege and proceeding to
fortify it by throwing up outworks and causing all the gates but one to
be built up.

Whilst herself engaged upon military measures she sent her son Ottaviano
to Imola to exhort the Council to loyalty and the defence of the city.
But his mission met with no success. Labouring against him was a mighty
factor which in other future cases was to facilitate Cesare’s subjection
of the Romagna. The Riarii--in common with so many other of the Romagna
tyrants--had so abused their rule, so ground the people with taxation,
so offended them by violence, and provoked such deep and bitter enmity
that in this hour of their need they found themselves deservedly
abandoned by their subjects. The latter were become eager to try a
change of rulers, in the hope of finding thus an improved condition of
things; a worse, they were convinced, would be impossible.

So detested were the Riarii and so abhorred the memory they left behind
them in Imola that for years afterwards the name of Cesare Borgia was
blessed there as that of a minister of divine justice (“tanquam minister
divina justitiae”) who had lifted from them the harsh yoke by which they
had been oppressed.

And so it came to pass that, before ever Cesare had come in sight of
Imola, he was met by several of its gentlemen who came to offer him
the town, and he received a letter from the pedagogue Flaminio
with assurances that, if it should be at all possible to them, the
inhabitants would throw open the gates to him on his approach. And
Flaminio proceeded to implore the duke that should he, nevertheless, be
constrained to have recourse to arms to win admittance, he should not
blame the citizens nor do violence to the city by putting it to pillage,
assuring him that he would never have a more faithful, loving city than
Imola once this should be in his power.

The duke immediately sent forward Achille Tiberti with a squadron
of horse to demand the surrender of the town. And the captain of the
garrison of Imola replied that he was ready to capitulate, since that
was the will of the people. Three days later--on November 27--Cesare
rode in as conqueror.

The example of the town, however, was not followed by the citadel. Under
the command of Dionigio di Naldo the latter held out, and, as the
duke’s army made its entrance into Imola, the castellan signified
his resentment by turning his cannon upon the town itself, with such
resolute purpose that many houses were set on fire and demolished. This
Naldo was one of the best reputed captains of foot of his day, and he
had seen much service under the Sforza; but his experience could avail
him little here.

On the 28th Cesare opened the attack, training his guns upon the
citadel; but it was not until a week later that, having found a weak
spot in the walls on the side commanding the town, he opened a breach
through which his men were able to force a passage, and so possess
themselves of a half-moon. Seeing the enemy practically within his
outworks, and being himself severely wounded in the head, Naldo
accounted it time to parley. He begged a three-days’ armistice, pledging
himself to surrender at the end of that time should he not receive
reinforcements in the meanwhile; and to this arrangement the duke
consented.

The good faith of Naldo has been questioned, and it has been suggested
that his asking for three days’ grace was no better than a cloak to
cover his treacherous sale of the fortress to the besieger. It seems,
however, to be no more than one of those lightly-uttered, irresponsible
utterances with which the chronicles of the time abound, for Naldo had
left his wife and children at Forli in the hands of the Countess, as
hostages for his good faith, and this renders improbable the unsupported
story of his baseness.

On December 7, no reinforcements having reached him, Naldo made formal
surrender of the citadel, safe-conduct having been granted to his
garrison.

A week later there arrived at Imola Cesare’s cousin, the Cardinal
Giovanni Borgia, whom the Pope had constituted legate in Bologna and the
Romagna in place of the Cardinal Ascanio Sforza, and whom he had sent
to support Cesare’s operations with ecclesiastical authority. Cardinal
Giovanni, as the Pope’s representative, received in the Church of
San Domenico the oath of fealty of the city to the Holy See. This was
pledged by four representative members of the Council of Thirty; and
by that act the conquest and subjection of the town became a fully
accomplished fact.

The lesser strongholds of the territory threw up their gates one by
one before the advancing enemy, until only Forli remained to be taken.
Cesare pushed forward to reduce it.

On his way he passed through Faenza, whose tyrant, Manfredi, deeming
himself secure in the protection of Venice and in view of the
circumstance that the republic had sent to Rome the arrears of tribute
due from his fief, and anxious to conciliate the Pope, received and
entertained Cesare very cordially.

At Forli the case of Imola was practically repeated. Notwithstanding
that the inhabitants were under the immediate eye of the formidable
countess, and although she sent her brother, Alessandro Sforza, to
exhort the people and the Council to stand by her, the latter, weary
as the rest of the oppressive tyranny of her family, dispatched their
representatives to Cesare to offer him the town.

The Countess’s valour was of the sort that waxes as the straits become
more desperate. Since the town abandoned and betrayed her, she would
depend upon her citadel, and by a stubborn resistance make Cesare pay as
dearly as possible for the place. To the danger which she seems almost
eager to incur for her own part, this strong-minded, comely matron will
not subject the son she has kept beside her until now; and so she packs
Ottaviano off to Florence and safety. That done, she gives her mutinous
subjects a taste of her anger by attempting to seize half a dozen of the
principal citizens of Forli. As it happened, not only did this intent
miscarry, but it went near being the means of involving her in battle
even before the duke’s arrival; for the people, getting wind of the
affair, took up arms to defend their threatened fellow-citizens.

She consoled herself, however, by seizing the persons of Nicolo
Tornielli and Lodovico Ercolani, whom the Council had sent to inform
her that their representatives had gone to Cesare with the offer of the
town. Further, to vent her rage and signify her humour, she turned her
cannon upon the Communal Palace and shattered the tower of it.

Meanwhile Cesare advanced. It was again Tiberti who now rode forward
with his horse to demand the surrender of Forli. This was accorded as
readily as had been that of Imola, whereupon Cesare came up to take
possession in person; but, despite the cordial invitation of the
councillors, he refused to enter the gates until he had signed the
articles of capitulation.

On December 19, under a deluge of rain, Cesare, in full armour, the
banner of the Church borne ahead of him, rode into Forli with his
troops. He was housed in the palace of Count Luffo Nomaglie (one of
the gentlemen whom Caterina had hoped to capture), and his men were
quartered through the town. These foreign soldiers of his seem to have
got a little out of hand here at Forli, and they committed a good many
abuses, to the dismay and discomfort of the Citizens.

Sanuto comments upon this with satisfaction, accounting the city well
served for having yielded herself up like a strumpet. It is a comment
more picturesque than just, for obviously Forli did not surrender
through pusillanimity, but to the end that it might be delivered from
the detestable rule of the Riarii.

The city occupied, it now remained to reduce the fortress and bring its
warrior-mistress to terms. Cesare set about this at once, nor allowed
the Christmas festivities to interfere with his labours, but kept his
men at work to bring the siege-guns into position. On Christmas Day the
countess belatedly attempted a feeble ruse in the hope of intimidating
them. She flew from her battlements a banner, bearing the device of the
lion of St. Mark, thinking to trick Cesare into the belief that she had
obtained the protection of Venice, or, perhaps, signifying thus that
she threw herself into the arms of the republic, making surrender of her
fiefs to the Venetians to the end that she might spite a force which she
could not long withstand--as Giovanni Sforza had sought to do.

But Cesare, nowise disturbed by that banner, pursued his preparations,
which included the mounting of seven cannons and ten falconets in the
square before the Church of St. John the Baptist. When all was ready
for the bombardment, he made an effort to cause her to realize the
hopelessness of her resistance and the vain sacrifice of life it must
entail. He may have been moved to this by the valour she displayed, or
it may have been that he obeyed the instincts of generalship which made
him ever miserly in the matter of the lives of his soldiers. Be that as
it may, with intent to bring her to a reasonable view of the situation,
he rode twice to the very edge of the ditch to parley with her; but
all that came of his endeavours was that on the occasion of his second
appeal to her, he had a narrow escape of falling a victim to her
treachery, and so losing his life.

She came down from the ramparts, and, ordering the lowering of the
bridge, invited him to meet her upon it that there they might confer
more at their ease, having, meanwhile, instructed her castellan to
raise the bridge again the moment the duke should set foot upon it. The
castellan took her instructions too literally, for even as the duke did
set one foot upon it there was a grind and clank of machinery, and the
great structure swung up and clattered into place. The duke remained
outside, saved by a too great eagerness on the part of those who worked
the winches, for had they waited but a second longer they must have
trapped him.

Cesare returned angry to Forli, and set a price upon Caterina’s
head--20,000 ducats if taken alive, 10,000 if dead; and on the morrow he
opened fire. For a fortnight this was continued without visible result,
and daily the countess was to be seen upon the walls with her castellan,
directing the defences. But on January 12, Cesare’s cannon having been
concentrated upon one point, a breach was opened at last. Instantly the
waiting citizens, who had been recruited for the purpose, made forward
with their faggots, heaping them up in the moat until a passage was
practicable. Over this went Cesare’s soldiers to force an entrance.

A stubborn fight ensued within the ravelin, where the duke’s men were
held in check by the defenders, and not until some four hundred corpses
choked that narrow space did the besieged give ground before them.

Like most of the Italian fortresses of the period, the castle of Forli
consisted of a citadel within a citadel. In the heart of the main
fabric--but cut off from it again by its own moat--arose the great tower
known as the Maschio. This was ever the last retreat of the besieged
when the fortress itself had been carried by assault, and, in the case
of the Maschio of the Citadel of Forli, so stout was its construction
that it was held to be practically invulnerable.

Had the countess’s soldiers made their retreat in good order to this
tower, where all the munitions and provisions were stored, Cesare would
have found the siege but in the beginning; but in the confusion of that
grim hour, besieged and besiegers, Borgian and Riarian, swept forward
interlocked, a writhing, hacking, bleeding mob of men-at-arms. Thus
they flung themselves in a body across the bridge that spanned the inner
moat, and so into the Maschio, whilst the stream of Cesare’s soldiers
that poured uninterruptedly across in the immediate wake of that
battling mass rendered it impossible for the defenders to take up the
bridge.

Within the tower the carnage went on, and the duke’s men hacked
their way through what remained of the Forlivese until they had made
themselves masters of that inner stronghold whither Caterina had sought
her last refuge.

A Burgundian serving under the Bailie of Dijon was the first to come
upon her in the room to which she had fled with a few attendants and a
handful of men, amongst whom were Alessandro Sforza, Paolo Riario, and
Scipione Riario--this last an illegitimate son of her first husband’s,
whom she had adopted. The Burgundian declared her his prisoner, and held
her for the price that had been set upon her head until the arrival of
Cesare, who entered the citadel with his officers a little while after
the final assault had been delivered.

Cesare received and treated her with the greatest courtesy, and, seeing
her for the moment destitute, he presented her with a purse containing
two hundred ducats for her immediate needs. Under his escort she left
the castle, and was conducted, with her few remaining servants, to the
Nomaglie Palace to remain in the Duke’s care, his prisoner. Her brother
and the other members of her family found with her were similarly made
prisoners.

After her departure the citadel was given over to pillage, and all
hell must have raged in it if we may judge from an incident related
by Bernardi in his chronicles. A young clerk, named Evangelista da
Monsignane, being seized by a Burgundian soldier who asked him if he had
any money, produced and surrendered a purse containing thirteen ducats,
and so got out of the mercenaries’ clutches, but only to fall into the
hands of others, one of whom again declared him a prisoner. The poor
youth, terrified at the violence about him, and eager to be gone from
that shambles, cried out that, if they would let him go, he would pay
them a ransom of a hundred ducats.

Thereupon “Surrender to me!” cried one of the soldiers, and, as the
clerk was about to do so, another, equally greedy for the ransom, thrust
himself forward. “No. Surrender to me, rather,” demanded this one.

The first insisted that the youth was his prisoner, whereupon the second
brandished his sword, threatening to kill Evangelista. The clerk, in a
panic, flung himself into the arms of a monk who was with him, crying
out for mercy, and there in the monk’s arms he was brutally slain, “to
put an end,” said his murderer, “to the dispute.”

Forlimpopoli surrendered a few days later to Yves d’Allègre, whom
Cesare had sent thither, whilst in Forli, as soon as he had reduced the
citadel, and before even attempting to repair the damage done, the
duke set about establishing order and providing for the dispensation of
justice, exerting to that end the rare administrative ability which not
even his bitterest detractors have denied him.

He sent a castellan to Forlimpopoli and fetched from Imola a Podestà for
Forli.(1) He confirmed the Council of Forty that ruled Forli--being
ten for each quarter of the city--and generally made sound and wise
provision for the town’s well-being, which we shall presently see
bearing fruit.


  1  It was customary throughout Italy that the Podestà, or chief
magistrate, should never be a native of the town--rarely of the
State--in which he held his office. Thus, having no local interests or
relationships, he was the likelier to dispense justice with desirable
single-mindedness.


Next the repairing of the fortress claimed his attention, and he
disposed for this, entrusting the execution of his instructions to
Ramiro de Lorqua, whom he left behind as governor. In the place where
the breach was opened by his cannon he ordered the placing of a marble
panel bearing his arms; and there it is to be seen to this day: Dexter,
the sable bars of the House of Lenzol; Sinister, the Borgia bull in
chief, and the lilies of France; and, superimposed, an inescutcheon
bearing the Pontifical arms.

All measures being taken so far as Forli was concerned, Cesare turned
his attention to Pesaro, and prepared to invade it. Before leaving,
however, he awaited the return of his absent cousin, the Cardinal
Giovanni Borgia, who, as papal legate, was to receive the oath of fealty
of the town; but, instead of the cardinal whom he was expecting, came a
messenger with news of his death of fever at Fossombrone.

Giovanni Borgia had left Forli on December 28 to go to Cesena, with
intent, it was said, to recruit to his cousin’s army those men of
Rimini, who, exiled and in rebellion against their tyrant Malatesta,
had sought shelter in that Pontifical fief. Thence he had moved on
to Urbino, where--in the ducal palace--he awaited news of the fall of
Forli, and where, whilst waiting, he fell ill. Nevertheless, when the
tidings of Cesare’s victory reached him, he insisted upon getting to
horse, to repair to Forli; but, discovering himself too ill to keep the
saddle, he was forced to abandon the journey at Fossombrone, whilst the
outcome of the attempt was an aggravation of the fever resulting in the
cardinal’s death.

Cesare appears to have been deeply grieved by the loss of Giovanni,
and there is every cause to suppose that a sincere attachment prevailed
between the cousins. Yet Cesare has been charged with his death, and
accused of having poisoned him, and, amidst the host of silly, baseless
accusations levelled against Cesare, you shall find none more silly or
baseless than this. In other instances of unproven crimes with which he
has been charged there may be some vestiges of matter that may do duty
for evidence or be construed into motives; here there is none that
will serve one purpose or the other, and the appalling and rabid
unscrupulousness, the relentless malice of Borgian chroniclers is in
nothing so completely apparent as in this accusation.

Sanuto mentions the advices received, and the rumours which say that
Cesare murdered him through jealousy, knowing him beloved by the Pope,
seeing him a legate, and fearing that he might come to be given the
governorship of some Romagna fief.

When Gandia died and Cesare was accused of having murdered him, the
motive advanced was that Cesare, a papal legate, resented a brother who
was a duke. Now, Cesare, being a duke, resents a cousin’s being a papal
legate. You will observe that, if this method of discovering motives is
pursued a little further, there is no man who died in Cesare’s life-time
whom Cesare could not be shown to have had motives for murdering.

Sillier even than Sanuto’s is the motive with which Giovio attempts to
bolster up the accusation which he reports: “He [Cesare] poisoned him
because he [Giovanni] favoured the Duke of Gandia.”

That, apparently, was the best that Giovio could think of. It is hardly
intelligible--which is perhaps inevitable, for it is not easy to be
intelligible when you don’t quite know, yourself, what you mean, which
must have been Giovio’s case.

The whole charge is so utterly foolish, stupid, and malicious that it
would scarcely be worth mentioning, were it not that so many modern
writers have included this among the Borgia crimes. As a matter of
fact--and as a comparison of the above-cited dates will show--eighteen
days had elapsed between Giovanni Borgia’s leaving Cesare at Forli and
his succumbing at Urbino--which in itself disposes of the matter. It
may be mentioned that this is a circumstance which those foolish or
deliberately malicious calumniators either did not trouble to ascertain
or else thought it wiser to slur over. Although, had they been pressed,
there was always the death of Djem to be cited and the fiction of the
slow-working poison specially invented to meet and explain his case.

The preparations for the invasion of Pesaro were complete, and it was
determined that on January 22 the army should march out of Forli; but on
the night of the 21st a disturbance occurred. The Swiss under the
Bailie of Dijon became mutinous--they appear throughout to have been an
ill-conditioned lot--and they clamoured now for higher pay if they were
to go on to Pesaro, urging that already they had served the Duke of
Valentinois as far as they had pledged themselves to the King of France.

Towards the third hour of the night the Bailie himself, with these
mutineers at his heels, presented himself at the Nomaglie Palace to
demand that the Countess Sforza-Riario should be delivered into his
hands. His claim was that she was his prisoner, since she had been
arrested by a soldier of his own, and that her surrender was to France,
to which he added--a thought inconsequently, it seems--that the French
law forbade that women should be made prisoners. Valentinois, taken
utterly by surprise, and without the force at hand to resist the Bailie
and his Swiss, was compelled to submit and to allow the latter to carry
the countess off to his own lodging; but he dispatched a messenger to
Forlimpopoli with orders for the immediate return of Allègre and his
horse, and in the morning, after Mass, he had the army drawn up in the
market-place; and so, backed by his Spanish, French, and Italian troops,
he faced the threatening Swiss.

The citizens were in a panic, expecting to see battle blaze out at any
moment, and apprehensive of the consequences that might ensue for the
town.

The Swiss had grown more mutinous than ever overnight, and they now
refused to march until they were paid. It was Cesare’s to quell and
restore them to obedience. He informed them that they should be paid
when they reached Cesena, and that, if they were retained thereafter
in his employ, their pay should be on the improved scale which they
demanded. Beyond that he made no concessions. The remainder of his
harangue was matter to cow them into submission, for he threatened to
order the ringing of the alarm-bells, and to have them cut to pieces by
the people of Forli whom their gross and predatory habits had already
deeply offended.

Order was at last restored, and the Bailie of Dijon was compelled to
surrender back the countess to Cesare. But their departure was postponed
until the morrow. On that day, January 23, after receiving the oath
of fealty from the Anziani in the Church of San Mercuriale, the duke
marched his army out of Forli and took the road to Pesaro.

Caterina Sforza Riario went with him. Dressed in black and mounted upon
a white horse, the handsome amazon rode between Cesare Borgia and Yves
d’Allègre.

At Cesena the duke made a halt, and there he left the countess in the
charge of d’Allègre whilst he himself rode forward to overtake the main
body of his army, which was already as far south as Cattolica. As for
Giovanni Sforza, despite the fact that the Duke of Urbino had sent some
foot to support him, he was far more likely to run than to fight, and
in fact he had already taken the precaution of placing his money and
valuables in safety and was disposing, himself, to follow them. But
it happened that there was not yet the need. Fate--in the shape of his
cousin Lodovico of Milan--postponed the occasion.

On the 26th Cesare lay at Montefiori, and there he was reached by
couriers sent at all speed from Milan by Trivulzio. Lodovico Sforza
had raised an army of Swiss and German mercenaries to reconquer his
dominions, and the Milanese were opening their arms to receive him back,
having already discovered that, in exchanging his rule for that of the
French, they had but exchanged King Log for King Stork. Trivulzio begged
for the instant return of the French troops serving under Cesare,
and Cesare, naturally compelled to accede, was forced to postpone the
continuance of his campaign, a matter which must have been not a little
vexatious at such a moment.

He returned to Cesena, where, on the 27th, he dismissed Yves d’Allègre
and his men, who made all haste back to Milan, so that Cesare was left
with a force of not more than a thousand foot and five hundred horse.
These, no doubt, would have sufficed him for the conquest of Pesaro, but
Giovanni Sforza, encouraged by his cousin’s return, and hopeful now of
assistance, would certainly entrench himself and submit to a siege which
must of necessity be long-drawn, since the departure of the French had
deprived Cesare of his artillery.

Therefore the duke disposed matters for his return to Rome instead,
and, leaving Ercole Bentivogli with five hundred horse and Gonsalvo de
Mirafuente with three hundred foot to garrison Forli, he left Cesena
with the remainder of his forces, including Vitelli’s horse, on January
30. With him went Caterina Sforza-Riario, and of course there were not
wanting those who alleged that, during the few days at Cesena he
had carried his conquest of her further than the matter of her
territories(1)--a rumour whose parent was, no doubt, the ribald jest
made in Milan by Trivulzio when he heard of her capture.


  1  “Teneva detta Madona (la qual é belissima dona, fiola del Ducha
Galeazo di Milan) di zorno e di note in la sna camera, con la
quale--judicio omnium--si deva piacer” (Sanuto’s Diarii).


He conducted her to Rome--in golden chains, “like another Palmyra,” it
is said--and there she was given the beautiful Belvedere for her prison
until she attempted an escape in the following June; whereupon, for
greater safety, she was transferred to the Castle of Sant’ Angelo. There
she remained until May of 1501, when, by the intervention of the King of
France, she was set at liberty and permitted to withdraw to Florence
to rejoin her children. In the city of the lilies she abode, devoting
herself to good works until she ended her turbulent, unhappy life in
1509.

The circumstance that she was not made to pay with her life for her
attempt to poison the Pope is surely something in favour of the Borgias,
and it goes some way towards refuting the endless statements of their
fierce and vindictive cruelty. Of course, it has been urged that they
spared her from fear of France; but, if that is admitted, what then
becomes of the theory of that secret poison which might so well have
been employed in such a case as this?




CHAPTER IV. GONFALONIER OF THE CHURCH


Although Cesare Borgia’s conquest of Imola and Forli cannot seriously be
accounted extraordinary military achievements--save by consideration of
the act that this was the first campaign he had conducted--yet in Rome
the excitement caused by his victory was enormous. Possibly this is to
be assigned to the compelling quality of the man’s personality, which
was beginning to manifest and assert itself and to issue from the shadow
into which it had been cast hitherto by that of his stupendous father.

The enthusiasm mounted higher and higher whilst preparations were being
made for his reception, and reached its climax on February 26, when,
with overpowering pomp, he made an entrance into Rome that was a
veritable triumph.

Sanuto tells us that, as news came of his approach, the Pope, in
his joyous impatience and excitement, became unable to discharge the
business of his office, and no longer would give audience to any one.
Alexander had ever shown himself the fondest of fathers to his children,
and now he overflowed with pride in this son who already gave such
excellent signs of his capacity as a condottiero, and justified his
having put off the cassock to strap a soldier’s harness to his lithe and
comely body.

Cardinals Farnese and Borgia, with an imposing suite, rode out some way
beyond the gates of Santa Maria del Popolo to meet the duke. At the gate
itself a magnificent reception had been prepared him, and the entire
Pontifical Court, prelates, priests, ambassadors of the Powers, and
officials of the city and curia down to the apostolic abbreviators and
secretaries, waited to receive him.

It was towards evening--between the twenty-second and the twenty-third
hours--when he made his entrance. In the van went the baggage-carts, and
behind these marched a thousand foot in full campaign apparel, headed
by two heralds in the duke’s livery and one in the livery of the King
of France. Next came Vitellozzo’s horse followed by fifty mounted
gentlemen-at-arms--the duke’s Caesarean guard--immediately preceding
Cesare himself.

The handsome young duke--“bello e biondo”--was splendidly mounted, but
very plainly dressed in black velvet with a simple gold chain for only
ornament, and he had about him a hundred guards on foot, also in black
velvet, halbert on shoulder, and a posse of trumpeters in a livery
that displayed his arms. In immediate attendance upon him came several
cardinals on their mules, and behind these followed the ambassadors of
the Powers, Cesare’s brother Giuffredo Borgia, and Alfonso of Aragon,
Duke of Biselli and Prince of Salerno--Lucrezia’s husband and the father
of her boy Roderigo, born some three months earlier. Conspicuous,
too, in Cesare’s train would be the imposing figure of the formidable
Countess Sforza-Riario, in black upon her white horse, riding in her
golden shackles between her two attendant women.

As the procession reached the Bridge of Sant’ Angelo a salute was
thundered forth by the guns from the castle, where floated the banners
of Cesare and of the Church. The press of people from the Porta del
Popolo all the way to the Vatican was enormous. It was the year of
the Papal Jubilee, and the city was thronged, with pilgrims from
all quarters of Europe who had flocked to Rome to obtain the plenary
indulgence offered by the Pope. So great was the concourse on this
occasion that the procession had the greatest difficulty in moving
forward, and the progress through the streets, packed with shouting
multitudes, was of necessity slow. At last, however, the Bridge of Sant’
Angelo being crossed, the procession pushed on to the Vatican along
the new road inaugurated for the Jubilee by Alexander in the previous
December.

From the loggia above the portals of the Vatican the Pope watched his
son’s imposing approach, and when the latter dismounted at the steps his
Holiness, with his five attendant cardinals, descended to the Chamber
of the Papagallo--the papal audience­chamber, contiguous to the Borgia
apartments--to receive the duke. Thither sped Cesare with his multitude
of attendants, and at sight of him now the Pope’s eyes were filled with
tears of joy. The duke advanced gravely to the foot of the throne, where
he fell upon his knees, and was overheard by Burchard to express to
his father, in their native Spanish, all that he owed to the Pope’s
Holiness, to which Alexander replied in the same tongue. Then Cesare
stooped and kissed the Pope’s feet and then his hand, whereupon
Alexander, conquered no doubt by the paternal instincts of affection
that were so strong in him, raised his son and took him fondly in his
arms.

The festivities in honour of Cesare’s return were renewed in Rome upon
the morrow, and to this the circumstance that the season was that of
carnival undoubtedly contributed and lent the displays a threatrical
character which might otherwise have been absent. In these the duke’s
victories were made the subject of illustration. There was a procession
of great chariots in Piazza Navona, with groups symbolizing the triumphs
of the ancient Caesar, in the arrangement of which, no doubt, the
assistance had been enlisted of that posse of valiant artists who were
then flocking to Rome and the pontifical Court.

Yriarte, mixing his facts throughout with a liberal leaven of fiction,
tells us that “this is the precise moment in which Cesare Borgia, fixing
his eyes upon the Roman Caesar, takes him definitely for his model and
adopts the device ‘Aut Caesar, aut nihil.’”

Cesare Borgia never adopted that device, and never displayed it. In
connection with him it is only to be found upon the sword of honour
made for him when, while still a cardinal, he went to crown the King
of Naples. It is not at all unlikely that the inscription of the device
upon that sword--which throughout is engraved with illustrations of the
career of Julius Caesar--may have been the conceit of the sword-maker
as a rather obvious play upon Cesare’s name.(1) Undoubtedly, were the
device of Cesare’s own adoption we should find it elsewhere, and nowhere
else is it to be found.


  1  The scabbard of this sword is to be seen in the South Kensington
Museum; the sword itself is in the possession of the Caetani family.


Shortly after Cesare’s return to Rome, Imola and Forli sent their
ambassadors to the Vatican to beseech his Holiness to sign the articles
which those cities had drawn up and by virtue of which they created
Cesare their lord in the place of the deposed Riarii.

It is quite true that Alexander had announced that, in promoting the
Romagna campaign, he had for object to restore to the Church the States
which had rebelliously seceded from her. Yet there is not sufficient
reason to suppose that he was flagrantly breaking his word in acceding
to the request of which those ambassadors were the bearers and in
creating his son Count of Imola and Forli. Admitted that this was to
Cesare’s benefit and advancement, it is still to be remembered that
those fiefs must be governed for the Church by a Vicar, as had ever been
the case.

That being so, who could have been preferred to Cesare for the dignity,
seeing that not only was the expulsion of the tyrants his work, but that
the inhabitants themselves desired him for their lord? For the rest,
granted his exceptional qualifications, it is to be remembered that the
Pope was his father, and--setting aside the guilt and scandal of that
paternity--it is hardly reasonable to expect a father to prefer some
other to his son for a stewardship for which none is so well equipped
as that same son. That Imola and Forli were not free gifts to Cesare,
detached, for the purpose of so making them, from the Holy See, is clear
from the title of Vicar with which Cesare assumed control of them, as
set forth in the Bull of investiture.

In addition to his receiving the rank of Vicar and Count of Imola and
Forli, it was in this same month of March at last--and after Cesare may
be said to have earned it--that he received the Gonfalon of the
Church. With the unanimous concurrence of the Sacred College, the Pope
officially appointed him Captain-General of the Pontifical forces--the
coveting of which position was urged, it will be remembered, as one of
his motives for his alleged murder of the Duke of Gandia three years
earlier.

On March 29 Cesare comes to St. Peter’s to receive his new dignity and
the further honour of the Golden Rose which the Pope is to bestow upon
him--the symbol of the Church Militant and the Church Triumphant.

Having blessed the Rose, the Pope is borne solemnly into St. Peter’s,
preceded by the College of Cardinals. Arrived before the High Altar,
he puts off his tiara--the conical, richly jewelled cap, woven from the
plumage of white peacocks--and bareheaded kneels to pray; whereafter he
confesses himself to the Cardinal of Benevento, who was the celebrant
on this occasion. That done, he ascends and takes his seat upon the
Pontifical Throne, whither come the cardinals to adore him, while the
organ peals forth and the choir gives voice. Last of all comes Cesare,
dressed in cloth of gold with ermine border, to kneel upon the
topmost step of the throne, whereupon the Pope, removing his tiara and
delivering it to the attendant Cardinal of San Clemente, pronounces the
beautiful prayer of the investiture. That ended, the Pope receives
from the hands of the Cardinal of San Clemente the splendid mantle of
gonfalonier, and sets it about the duke’s shoulders with the prescribed
words: “May the Lord array thee in the garment of salvation and surround
thee with the cloak of happiness.” Next he takes from the hands of the
Master of the Ceremonies--that same Burchard whose diary supplies us
with these details--the gonfalonier’s cap of scarlet and ermine richly
decked with pearls and surmounted by a dove--the emblem of the Holy
Spirit--likewise wrought in pearls. This he places upon Cesare’s
auburn head; whereafter, once more putting off his tiara, he utters the
prescribed prayer over the kneeling duke.

That done, and the Holy Father resuming his seat and his tiara, Cesare
stoops to kiss the Pope’s feet, then rising, goes in his gonfalonier
apparel, the cap upon his head, to take his place among the cardinals.
The organ crashes forth again; the choir intones the “Introito ad altare
Deum”; the celebrant ascends the altar, and, having offered incense,
descends again and the Mass begins.

The Mass being over, and the celebrant having doffed his sacred
vestments and rejoined his brother cardinals, the Cardinal of San
Clemente repairs once more to the Papal Throne, preceded by two
chamberlains who carry two folded banners, one bearing the Pope’s
personal arms, the other the arms of Holy Church. Behind the cardinal
follows an acolyte with the censer and incense-boat and another with the
holy water and the aspersorio, and behind these again two prelates with
a Missal and a candle. The Pope rises, blesses the folded banners and
incenses them, having received the censer from the hands of a priest who
has prepared it. Then, as he resumes his seat, Cesare steps forward once
more, and, kneeling, places both hands upon the Missal and pronounces in
a loud, clear voice the words of the oath of fealty to St. Peter and the
Pope, swearing ever to protect the latter and his successors from harm
to life, limb, or possessions. Thereafter the Pope takes the blessed
banners and gives the charge of them to Cesare, delivering into his
hands the white truncheon symbolic of his office, whilst the Master of
Ceremonies hands the actual banners to the two deputies, who in full
armour have followed to receive them, and who attach them to the lances
provided for the purpose.

The investiture is followed by the bestowal of the Golden Rose,
whereafter Cesare, having again kissed the Pope’s feet and the Ring of
the Fisherman on his finger, has the cap of office replaced upon his
head by Burchard himself, and so the ceremonial ends.

The Bishop of Isernia was going to Cesena to assume the governorship of
that Pontifical fief, and, profiting by this, Cesare appointed him
his lieutenant-general in Romagna, with authority over all his other
officers there and full judicial powers. Further, he desired him to act
as his deputy and receive the oath of fealty of the duke’s new subjects.

Meanwhile, Cesare abode in Rome, no doubt impatient of the interruption
which his campaign had suffered, and which it seemed must continue yet
awhile. Lodovico Sforza had succeeded in driving the French out of his
dominions as easily as he, himself, had been driven out by them a
few months earlier. But Louis XII sent down a fresh army under La
Trémouille, and Lodovico, basely betrayed by his Swiss mercenaries at
Novara in April, was taken prisoner.

That was the definite end of the Sforza rule in Milan. For ten years the
crafty, scheming Lodovico was left to languish a prisoner in the Castle
of Loches, at the end of which time he miserably died.

Immediately upon the return of the French to Milan, the Pope asked for
troops that Cesare might resume his enterprise not only against Pesaro,
Faenza, and Rimini, but also against Bologna, where Giovanni Bentivogli
had failed to support--as in duty bound--the King of France against
Lodovico Sforza. But Bentivogli repurchased the forfeited French
protection at the price of 40,000 ducats, and so escaped the impending
danger; whilst Venice, it happened, was growing concerned to see no
profit accruing to herself out of this league with France and Rome; and
that was a matter which her trader spirit could not brook. Therefore,
Venice intervened in the matter of Rimini and Faenza, which she
protected in somewhat the same spirit as the dog protected the straw in
the manger. Next, when, having conquered the Milanese, Louis XII turned
his thoughts to the conquest of Naples, and called upon Venice to march
with him as became a good ally, the Republic made it quite clear that
she was not disposed to move unless there was to be some profit to
herself. She pointed out that Mantua and Ferrara were in the same case
as Bologna, for having failed to lend assistance to the French in the
hour of need, and proposed to Louis XII the conquest and division of
those territories.

Thus matters stood, and Cesare had perforce to await the conclusion
of the Pisan War in which the French were engaged, confident, however,
that, once that was at an end, Louis, in his anxiety to maintain
friendly relations with the Pope, would be able to induce Venice to
withdraw her protection from Rimini and Faenza. So much accomplished for
him, he was now in a position to do the rest without the aid of French
troops if necessary. The Jubilee--protracted for a further year, so vast
and continuous was the concourse of the faithful, 200,000 of whom knelt
in the square before St. Peter’s on Easter Day to receive the Pope’s
blessing--was pouring vast sums of money into the pontifical coffers,
and for money men were to be had in plenty by a young condottiero whose
fame had been spreading ever since his return from the Romagna. He was
now the hope of the soldiers of fortune who abounded in Italy, attracted
thither from all quarters by the continual opportunities for employment
which that tumultuous land afforded.

It is in speaking of him at about this time, and again praising his
personal beauty and fine appearance, that Capello says of him that, if
he lives, he will be one of Italy’s greatest captains.

Such glimpses as in the pages of contemporary records we are allowed
of Cesare during that crowded time of the Papal Jubilee are slight and
fleeting. On April 13 we see him on horseback accompanying the Pope
through Rome in the cavalcade that visited the four Basilicas to win the
indulgence offered, and, as usual, he is attended by his hundred armed
grooms in black.

On another occasion we behold him very differently engaged--giving an
exhibition of his superb physical gifts, his strength, his courage, and
his matchless address. On June 24, at a bull-fight held in Rome--Spanish
tauromachia having been introduced from Naples, where it flourished
under the Aragon dominion--he went down into the arena, and on
horseback, armed only with a light lance, he killed five wild bulls.
But the master-stroke he reserved for the end. Dismounting, and taking
a double­handed sword to the sixth bull that was loosed against him, he
beheaded the great beast at one single stroke, “a feat which all Rome
considered great.”

Thus sped the time of waiting, and meanwhile he gathered about him a
Court not only of captains of fortune, but of men of art and letters,
whom he patronized with a liberality--indeed, a prodigality--so
great that it presently became proverbial, and, incidentally, by its
proportions provoked his father’s disapproval. In the brilliant group of
men of letters who enjoyed his patronage were such writers as Justolo,
Sperulo, and that unfortunate poet Serafino Cimino da Aquila, known to
fame and posterity as the great Aquilano. And it would be, no doubt,
during these months that Pier di Lorenzo painted that portrait of Cesare
which Vasari afterwards saw in Florence, but which, unfortunately, is
not now known to exist. Bramante, too, was of his Court at this time, as
was Michelangelo Buonarroti, whose superb group of “Mercy,” painted for
Cardinal de Villiers, had just amazed all Rome. With Pinturicchio, and
Leonardi da Vinci--whom we shall see later beside Cesare--Michelangelo
was ever held in the highest esteem by the duke.

The story of that young sculptor’s leap into fame may not be so widely
known but that its repetition may be tolerated here, particularly since,
remotely at least, it touches Cesare Borgia.

When, in 1496, young Buonarroti, at the age of twenty-three, came from
Florence to Rome to seek his fortune at the opulent Pontifical Court, he
brought a letter of recommendation to Cardinal Sforza-Riario. This was
the time of the great excavations about Rome; treasures of ancient art
were daily being rescued from the soil, and Cardinal Sforza-Riario was a
great dilletante and collector of the antique. With pride of possession,
he conducted the young sculptor through his gallery, and, displaying his
statuary to him, inquired could he do anything that might compare with
it. If the cardinal meant to use the young Florentine cavalierly, his
punishment was immediate and poetic, for amid the antiques Michelangelo
beheld a sleeping Cupid which he instantly claimed as his own work.
Riario was angry; no doubt suspicious, too, of fraud. This Cupid
was--as its appearance showed--a genuine antique, which the cardinal had
purchased from a Milanese dealer for two hundred ducats. Michelangelo,
in a passion, named the dealer--one Baldassare--to whom he had sent
the statue after treating it, with the questionable morality of the
cinquecentist, so as to give it the appearance of having lain in the
ground, to the end that Baldassare might dispose of it as an antique.

His present fury arose from his learning the price paid by the cardinal
to Baldassare, from whom Michelangelo had received only thirty ducats.
In his wrath he demanded--very arbitrarily it seems--the return of his
statue. But to this the cardinal would not consent until Baldassare had
been arrested and made to disgorge the money paid him. Then, at last,
Sforza-Riario complied with Michelangelo’s demands and delivered him his
Cupid--a piece of work whose possession had probably ceased to give any
pleasure to that collector of the antique.

But the story was bruited abroad, and cultured Rome was agog to see the
statue which had duped so astute a judge as Sforza-Riario. The fame of
the young sculptor spread like a ripple over water, and it was Cesare
Borgia--at that time still Cardinal of Valencia who bought the Cupid.
Years later he sent it to Isabella d’Este, assuring her that it had not
its equal among contemporary works of art.




CHAPTER V. THE MURDER OF ALFONSO OF ARAGON


We come now to the consideration of an event which, despite the light
that so many, and with such assurance, have shed upon it, remains
wrapped in uncertainty, and presents a mystery second only to that of
the murder of the Duke of Gandia.

It was, you will remember, in July of 1498 that Lucrezia took a second
husband in Alfonso of Aragon, the natural son of Alfonso II of Naples
and nephew of Federigo, the reigning king. He was a handsome boy
of seventeen at the time of his marriage--one year younger than
Lucrezia--and, in honour of the event and in compliance with the Pope’s
insistence, he was created by his uncle Duke of Biselli and Prince of
Salerno. On every hand the marriage was said to be a love-match, and of
it had been born, in November of 1499, the boy Roderigo.

On July 15, 1500, at about the third hour of the night, Alfonso was
assaulted and grievously wounded--mortally, it was said at first--on the
steps of St. Peter’s.

Burchard’s account of the affair is that the young prince was assailed
by several assassins, who wounded him in the head, right arm, and knee.
Leaving him, no doubt, for dead, they fled down the steps, at the foot
of which some forty horsemen awaited them, who escorted them out of the
city by the Pertusa Gate. The prince was residing in the palace of the
Cardinal of Santa Maria in Portico, but so desperate was his condition
that those who found him upon the steps of the Basilica bore him into
the Vatican, where he was taken to a chamber of the Borgia Tower, whilst
the Cardinal of Capua at once gave him absolution in articulo mortis.

The deed made a great stir in Rome, and was, of course, the subject
of immediate gossip, and three days later Cesare issued an edict
forbidding, under pain of death, any man from going armed between Sant’
Angelo and the Vatican.

News of the event was carried immediately to Naples, and King Federigo
sent his own physician, Galieno, to treat and tend his nephew. In the
care of that doctor and a hunchback assistant, Alfonso lay ill of his
wounds until August 17, when suddenly be died, to the great astonishment
of Rome, which for some time had believed him out of danger. In
recording his actual death, Burchard is at once explicit and reticent to
an extraordinary degree. “Not dying,” he writes, “from the wound he had
taken, he was yesterday strangled in his bed at the nineteenth hour.”

Between the chronicling of his having been wounded on the steps of St.
Peter’s and that of his death, thirty-three days later, there is no
entry in Burchard’s diary relating to the prince, nor anything that can
in any way help the inquirer to a conclusion; whilst, on the subject of
the strangling, not another word does the Master of Ceremonies add
to what has above been quoted. That he should so coldly--almost
cynically--state that Alfonso was strangled, without so much as
suggesting by whom, is singular in one who, however grimly laconic, is
seldom reticent--notwithstanding that he may have been so accounted by
those who despaired of finding in his diary the confirmation of such
points of view as they happen to have chosen and of such matters as it
pleased them to believe and propagate.

That same evening Alfonso’s body was borne, without pomp, to St.
Peter’s, and placed in the Chapel of Santa Maria delle Febbre. It was
accompanied by Francesco Borgia, Archbishop of Cosenza.

The doctor who had been in attendance upon the deceased and the
hunchback were seized, taken to Sant’ Angelo and examined, but shortly
thereafter set at liberty.

So far we are upon what we may consider safe ground. Beyond that we
cannot go, save by treading the uncertain ways of speculation, and by
following the accounts of the various rumours circulated at the time.
Formal and absolutely positive evidence of the author of Alfonso’s
murder there is none.

The Venetian ambassador, the ineffable, gossip­mongering Paolo Capello,
whom we have seen possessed of the fullest details concerning the Duke
of Gandia’s death--although he did not come to Rome until two and a half
years after the crime--is again as circumstantial in this instance. You
see in this Capello the forerunner of the modern journalist of the baser
sort, the creature who prowls in quest of scraps of gossip and items of
scandal, and who, having found them, does not concern himself greatly
in the matter of their absolute truth so that they provide him with
sensational “copy.” It is this same Capello, bear in mind, who gives
us the story of Cesare’s murdering in the Pope’s very arms that Pedro
Caldes who is elsewhere shown to have fallen into Tiber and been
drowned, down to the lurid details of the blood’s spurting into the
Pope’s face.

His famous Relazione to the Senate in September of 1500 is little better
than an epitome of all the scandal current in Rome during his sojourn
there as ambassador, and his resurrection of the old affair of the
murder of Gandia goes some way towards showing the spirit by which he
was actuated and his love of sensational matter. It has pleased most
writers who have dealt with the matter of the murder of Alfonso of
Aragon to follow Capello’s statements; consequently these must be
examined.

He writes from Rome--as recorded by Sanuto--that on July 16 Alfonso of
Biselli was assaulted on the steps of St. Peter’s, and received four
wounds, “one in the head, one in the arm, one in the shoulder, and one
in the back.” That was all that was known to Capello at the time he
wrote that letter, and you will observe already the discrepancy between
his statement, penned upon hearsay, and Burchard’s account--which,
considering the latter’s position at the Vatican, must always be
preferred. According to Burchard the wounds were three, and they were in
the head, right arm, and knee.

On the 19th Capello writes again, and, having stated that Lucrezia--who
was really prostrate with grief at her husband’s death--was stricken
with fever, adds that “it is not known who has wounded the Duke of
Biselli, but it is said that it was the same who killed and threw into
Tiber the Duke of Gandia. My Lord of Valentinois has issued an edict
that no one shall henceforth bear arms between Sant’ Angelo and the
Vatican.”

On the face of it, that edict of Valentinois’ seems to argue vexation at
what had happened, and the desire to provide against its repetition--a
provision hardly likely to be made by the man who had organized the
assault, unless he sought, by this edict, to throw dust into the eyes
of the world; and one cannot associate after the event and the fear of
criticism with such a nature as Cesare’s or with such a character as
is given him by those who are satisfied that it was he who murdered
Biselli.

The rumour that Alfonso had been assailed by the murderer of Gandia is a
reasonable enough rumour, so long as the latter remains unnamed, for
it would simply point to some enemy of the House of Borgia who, having
slain one of its members, now attempts to slay another. Whether Capello
actually meant Cesare when he penned those words on July 19, is not as
obvious as may be assumed, for it is to be borne in mind that, at this
date, Capello had not yet compiled the “relation” in which he deals with
Gandia’s murder.

On July 23 he wrote that the duke was very ill, indeed, from the wound
in his head, and on the 28th that he was in danger owing to the same
wound although the fever had abated.

On August 18 he announces Alfonso’s death in the following terms: “The
Duke of Biselli, Madonna Lucrezia’s husband, died to-day because he
was planning the death of the Duke [of Valentinois] by means of an
arbalest-bolt when he walked in the garden; and the duke has had him cut
to pieces in his room by his archers.”

This “cutting-to-pieces” form of death is one very dear to
the imagination of Capello, and bears some witness to his
sensation-mongering proclivities.

Coming to matters more public, and upon which his evidence is more
acceptable, he writes on the 20th that some servants of the prince’s
have been arrested, and that, upon being put to the question, they
confessed to the prince’s intent to kill the Duke of Valentinois,
adding that a servant of the duke’s was implicated. On the 23rd Capello
circumstantially confirms this matter of Alfonso’s attempt upon Cesare’s
life, and states that this has been confessed by the master of Alfonso’s
household, “the brother of his mother, Madonna Drusa.”

That is the sum of Capello’s reports to the Senate, as recorded by
Sanuto. The rest, the full, lurid, richly-coloured, sensational
story, is contained in his “relation” of September 20. He prefaces the
narrative by informing the Senate that the Pope is on very bad terms
with Naples, and proceeds to relate the case of Alfonso of Aragon as
follows:

“He was wounded at the third hour of night near the palace of the Duke
of Valentinois, his brother­in-law, and the prince ran to the Pope,
saying that he had been wounded and that he knew by whom; and his wife
Lucrezia, the Pope’s daughter, who was in the room, fell into anguish.
He was ill for thirty-three days, and his wife and sister, who is the
wife of the Prince of Squillace, another son of the Pope’s, were with
him and cooked for him in a saucepan for fear of his being poisoned, as
the Duke of Valentinois so hated him. And the Pope had him guarded by
sixteen men for fear that the duke should kill him. And when the
Pope went to visit him Valentinois did not accompany him, save on one
occasion, when he said that what had not been done at breakfast might be
done at supper.... On August 17 he [Valentinois] entered the room where
the prince was already risen from his bed, and, driving out the wife and
sister, called in his man, named Michieli, and had the prince strangled;
and that night he was buried.”

Now the following points must arise to shake the student’s confidence
in this narrative, and in Capello as an authority upon any of the other
matters that he relates:

  (i)  “He was wounded near the palace of the Duke of Valentinois.”  This
looks exceedingly like an attempt to pile up evidence against Cesare,
and shows a disposition to resort to the invention of it. Whatever may
not have been known about Alfonso’s death, it was known by everybody
that he was wounded on the steps of St. Peter’s, and Capello himself,
in his dispatches, had said so at the time. A suspicion that Capello’s
whole relation is to serve the purpose of heaping odium upon Cesare at
once arises and receives confirmation when we consider that, as we have
already said, it is in this same relation that the fiction about Pedro
Caldes finds place and that the guilt of the murder of the Duke of
Gandia is definitely fixed upon Cesare.

  (ii)  “He ran to the Pope ['Corse dal Papa'] saying that he had been
wounded, and that he knew by whom.” A man with a wound in his head
which endangered his life for over a week would hardly be conscious on
receiving it, nor is it to be supposed that, had he been conscious, his
assailants would have departed. It cannot be doubted that they left him
for dead. He was carried into the palace, and we know, from Burchard,
that the Cardinal of Capua gave him absolution in articulo mortis, which
abundantly shows his condition. It is unthinkable that he should have
been able to “run to the Pope,” doubtful that he should have been able
to speak; and, if he did, who was it reported his words to the Venetian
ambassador? Capello wisely refrains from saying.

  (iii)  Lucrezia and Sancia attempt to protect him from poison by
cooking his food in his room. This is quite incredible. Even admitting
the readiness to do so on the part of these princesses, where was the
need, considering the presence of the doctor--admitted by Capello--sent
from Naples and his hunchback assistant?

  (iv)  “The Pope had him guarded by sixteen men for fear the duke should
kill him.” Yet when, according to Capello, the duke comes on his
murderous errand, attended only by Michieli (who has been generally
assumed by writers to have been Don Michele da Corella, one of Cesare’s
captains), where were these sixteen guards? Capello mentions the
dismissal only of Lucrezia and Sancia.

  (v)  “Valentinois...said that what had not been done at breakfast might
be done at supper.” It will be observed that Capello never once
considers it necessary to give his authorities for anything that he
states. It becomes, perhaps, more particularly noteworthy than usual in
the case of this reported speech of Cesare’s. He omits to say to whom
Cesare addressed those sinister words, and who reported them to him.
The statement is hardly one to be accepted without that very necessary
mention of authorities, nor can we conceive Capello omitting them had he
possessed them.

It will be seen that it is scarcely necessary to go outside of Capello’s
own relation for the purpose of traversing the statements contained in
it, so far as the death of Alfonso of Aragon is concerned.

It is, however, still to be considered that, if Alfonso knew who had
attempted his life--as Capello states that he told the Pope--and knew
that he was in hourly danger of death from Valentinois, it may surely
be taken for granted that he would have imparted the information to
the Neapolitan doctor sent him by his uncle, who must have had his
confidence.

We know that, after the prince’s death, the physician and his hunchback
assistant were arrested, but subsequently released. They returned
to Naples, and in Naples, if not elsewhere, the truth must have been
known--definite and authentic facts from the lips of eye-witnesses, not
mere matters of rumour, as was the case in Rome. It is to Neapolitan
writings, then, that we must turn for the truth of this affair; and
yet from Naples all that we find is a rumour--the echo of the Roman
rumour--“They say,” writes the Venetian ambassador at the Court of King
Federigo, “that he was killed by the Pope’s son.”

A more mischievous document than Capello’s Relazione can seldom have
found its way into the pages of history; it is the prime source of
several of the unsubstantiated accusations against Cesare Borgia upon
which subsequent writers have drawn--accepting without criticism--and
from which they have formed their conclusions as to the duke’s
character. Even in our own times we find the learned Gregorovius
following Capello’s relation step by step, and dealing out this matter
of the murder of the Duke of Biselli in his own paraphrases, as so much
substantiated, unquestionable fact. We find in his Lucrezia Borgia the
following statement: “The affair was no longer a mystery. Cesare himself
publicly declared that he had killed the duke because his life had been
attempted by the latter.”

To say that Cesare “publicly declared that he had killed the duke” is to
say a very daring thing, and is dangerously to improve upon Capello. If
it is true that Cesare made this public declaration how does it happen
that no one but Capello heard him? for in all other documents there is
no more than offered us a rumour of how Alfonso died. Surely it is to
be supposed that, had Cesare made any such declaration, the letters from
the ambassadors would have rung with it. Yet they will offer you nothing
but statements of what is being rumoured!

Nor does Gregorovius confine himself to that in his sedulous following
of Capello’s Relation. He serves up out of Capello the lying story of
the murder of Pedro Caldes. “What,” he says of Cesare, to support his
view that Cesare murdered Alfonso of Aragon, “could be beyond this
terrible man who had poignarded the Spaniard Pedro Caldes...under the
Pope’s very cloak, so that his blood spurted up into the Pope’s face?”
 This in his History of Rome. In his Lucrezia Borgia he almost improves
upon it when he says that “The Venetian ambassador, Paolo Capello,
reports how Cesare Borgia stabbed the chamberlain Perotto, etc., but
Burchard makes no mention of the fact.” Of the fact of the stabbing,
Burchard certainly makes no mention; but he does mention that the man
was accidentally drowned, as has been considered. It is again--and more
flagrantly than ever--a case of proving Cesare guilty of a crime of
which there is no conclusive evidence by charging him with another,
which--in this instance--there is actually evidence that he did not
commit.

But this is by the way.

Burchard’s entries in his diary relating to the assault upon Alfonso
of Aragon can no more escape the criticism of the thoughtful than can
Capello’s relation. His forty horsemen, for instance, need explaining.
Apart from the fact that this employment of forty horsemen would be
an altogether amazing and incredible way to set about the murder of a
single man, it is to be considered that such a troop, drawn up in
the square before St. Peter’s, must of necessity have attracted some
attention. It was the first hour of the night, remember--according to
Burchard--that is to say, at dusk. Presumably, too, those horsemen
were waiting when the prince arrived. How then, did he--and why was
he allowed--to pass them, only to be assailed in ascending the steps?
Burchard, presumably, did not himself see these horsemen; certainly
he cannot have seen them escorting the murderers to the Pertusa Gate.
Therefore he must have had the matter reported to him. Naturally enough,
had the horsemen existed, they must have been seen. How, then, does it
happen that Capello did not hear of them? nor the Florentine ambassador,
who says that the murderers were four, nor any one else apparently?

To turn for a moment to the Florentine ambassador’s letters upon the
subject, we find in this other Capello--Francesco Capello was his
name--accounts which differ alike from Paolo Capello’s and from
Burchard’ stories.  But he is careful to say that he is simply repeating
the rumours that are abroad, and cites several different versions that
are current, adding that the truth of the affair is not known to
anybody. His conclusions, however, particularly those given in cipher,
point to Cesare Borgia as the perpetrator of the deed, and hint at some
such motive of retaliation for an attempt upon his own life as that
which is given by the ambassador of Venice.

There is much mystery in the matter, despite Gregorovius’s assertion
to the contrary--mystery which mere assertion will not dissipate. This
conclusion, however, it is fair to draw: if, on Capello’s evidence,
we are to accept it that Cesare Borgia is responsible for the death of
Alfonso of Aragon, then, on the same evidence, we must accept the motive
as well as the deed. We must accept as equally exact his thrice-repeated
statement in letters to the Senate that the prince had planned Cesare’s
death by posting crossbow-men to shoot him.(1)


  1  It is extremely significant that Capello’s Relazione contains no
mention of Alfonso’s plot against Cesare’s life, a matter which, as we
have seen, had figured so repeatedly in that ambassador’s dispatches
from Rome at the time of the event. This omission is yet another proof
of the malicious spirit by which the “relation” was inspired. The
suppression of anything that might justify a deed attributed to Cesare
reveals how much defamation and detraction were the aims of this
Venetian.


Either we must accept all, or we must reject all, that Capello tells us.
If we reject all, then we are left utterly without information as to how
Alfonso of Aragon died. If we accept all, then we find that it was as
a measure of retaliation that Cesare compassed the death of
his brother-in-law, which made it not a murder, but a private
execution--justifiable under the circumstances of the provocation
received and as the adjustment of these affairs was understood in the
Cinquecento.




CHAPTER VI. RIMINI AND PESARO


In the autumn of 1500, fretting to take the field again, Cesare was
occupied in raising and equipping an army--an occupation which received
an added stimulus when, towards the end of August, Louis de Villeneuve,
the French ambassador, arrived in Rome with the articles of agreement
setting forth the terms upon which Louis XII was prepared further
to assist Cesare in the resumption of his campaign. In these it was
stipulated that, in return for such assistance, Cesare should engage
himself, on his side, to aid the King of France in the conquest of
Naples when the time for that expedition should be ripe. Further, Loius
XII was induced to make representations to Venice to the end that the
Republic should remove her protection from the Manfredi of Faenza and
the Malatesta of Rimini.

Venice being at the time in trouble with the Turk, and more anxious than
ever to conciliate France and the Pope, was compelled to swallow her
reluctance and submit with the best grace she could assume. Accordingly
she dispatched her ambassadors to Rome to convey her obedience to the
Pope’s Holiness, and formally to communicate the news that she withdrew
her protection from the proscribed fiefs.

Later in the year--in the month of October--the Senate was to confer
upon Cesare Borgia the highest honour in her gift, the honour of which
the Venetians were jealous above all else--the honour of Venetian
citizenship, inscribing his name in the Golden Book, bestowing upon him
a palace in Venice and conferring the other marks of distinction usual
to the occasion. One is tempted to ask, Was it in consequence of
Paolo Capello’s lurid Relation that the proud Republic considered him
qualified for such an honour?

To return, however, to the matter of the Republic’s removal of her
shield from Rimini and Faenza, Alexander received the news of this with
open joy and celebrated it with festivities in the Vatican, whilst from
being angry with Venice and from declaring that the Republic need never
again look to him for favour, he now veered round completely and assured
the Venetian envoys, in a burst of gratitude, that he esteemed no Power
in the world so highly. Cesare joined in his father’s expressions
of gratitude and appreciation, and promised that Alexander should be
succeeded in St. Peter’s Chair by such a Pope as should be pleasing to
Venice, and that, if the cardinals but remained united, the Pontificate
should go to none but a Venetian.

Thus did Cesare, sincerely or otherwise, attempt to lessen the
Republic’s chagrin to see him ride lance-on-thigh as conqueror into the
dominions which she so long had coveted.

France once more placed Yves d’Allègre at Cesare’s disposal, and with
him went six hundred lances and six hundred Swiss foot. These swelled
the forces which already Cesare had assembled into an army some ten
thousand strong. The artillery was under the command of Vitellozzo
Vitelli, whilst Bartolomeo da Capranica was appointed camp-master.
Cesare’s banner was joined by a condotta under Paolo Orsini--besides
whom there were several Roman gentlemen in the duke’s following,
including most of those who had formed his guard of honour on the
occasion of his visit to France, and who had since then continued to
follow his fortunes. Achille Tiberti came to Rome with a condotta which
he had levied in the Romagna of young men who had been moved by Cesare’s
spreading fame to place their swords at his disposal. A member of the
exiled Malvezzi family of Bologna headed a little troop of fellow-exiles
which came to take service with the duke, whilst at Perugia a strong
body of foot awaited him under Gianpaolo Baglioni.

In addition to these condotte, numerous were the adventurers who came
to offer Cesare their swords; indeed he must have possessed much of that
personal magnetism which is the prime equipment of every born leader,
for he stirred men to the point of wild enthusiasm in those days,
and inspired other than warriors to bear arms for him. We see men of
letters, such as Justolo, Calmeta, Sperulo, and others throwing
down their quills to snatch up swords and follow him. Painters, and
sculptors, too, are to be seen abandoning the ideals of art to pursue
the ugly realities of war in this young condottiero’s train. Among these
artists, bulks the great Pietro Torrigiani. The astounding pen of his
brother-sculptor, Benvenuto Cellini, has left us a sharp portrait of
this man, in which he speaks of his personal beauty and tells us that
he had more the air of a great soldier than a sculptor (which must have
been, we fancy, Cellini’s own case). Torrigiani lives in history chiefly
for two pieces of work widely dissimilar in character--the erection
of the tomb of Henry VII of England, and the breaking of the nose of
Michelangelo Buonarroti in the course of a quarrel which he had with him
in Florence when they were fellow-students under Masaccio. Of nothing
that he ever did in life was he so proud--as we may gather from
Cellini--as of having disfigured Michelangelo, and in that sentiment the
naïve spirit of his age again peeps forth.

We shall also see Leonardo da Vinci joining the duke’s army as
engineer--but that not until some months later.

Meanwhile his forces grew daily in Rome, and his time was consumed in
organizing, equipping, and drilling these, to bring about that perfect
unity for which his army was to be conspicuous in spite of the variety
of French, Italian, Spanish, and Swiss elements of which it was
composed. So effectively were his troops armed and so excellent was the
discipline prevailing among them, that their like had probably never
before been seen in the peninsula, and they were to excite--as much
else of Cesare’s work--the wonder and admiration of that great critic
Macchiavelli.

So much, however, was not to be achieved without money, and still more
would be needed for the campaign ahead. For this the Church provided.
Never had the coffers of the Holy See been fuller than at this moment.
Additional funds accrued from what is almost universally spoken of as
“the sale of twelve cardinals’ hats.”

In that year--in September--twelve new cardinals were appointed, and
upon each of those was levied, as a tax, a tithe of the first year’s
revenues of the benefices upon which they entered. The only justifiable
exception that can be taken to this lies in the number of cardinals
elected at one time, which lends colour to the assumption that the
sole aim of that election was to raise additional funds for Cesare’s
campaign. Probably it was also Alexander’s aim further to strengthen his
power with the Sacred College, so that he could depend upon a majority
to ensure his will in all matters. But we are at the moment concerned
with the matter of the levied tax.

It has been dubbed “an atrocious act of simony;” but the reasoning that
so construes it is none so clear. The cardinals’ hats carried with them
vast benefices. These benefices were the property of the Church; they
were in the gift and bestowal of the Pope, and in the bestowing of them
the Pope levied a proportionate tax. Setting aside the argument that
this tax was not an invention of Alexander’s, does such a proceeding
really amount to a “sale” of benefices? A sale presupposes bargaining, a
making of terms between two parties, an adjusting of a price to be paid.
There is evidence of no such marketing of these benefices; indeed one
cardinal, vowed to poverty, received his hat without the imposition of a
tax, another was Cesare’s brother-in-law, Amanieu d’Albret, who had been
promised the hat a year ago. It is further to be borne in mind that,
four months earlier, the Pope had levied a similar decima, or tax, upon
the entire College of Cardinals and every official in the service of the
Holy See, for the purposes of the expedition against the Muslim, who was
in arms against Christianity. Naturally that tax was not popular with
luxurious, self-seeking, cinquecento prelates, who in the main
cared entirely for their own prosperity and not at all for that of
Christianity, and you may realize how, by levying it, Alexander laid
himself open to harsh criticism.

The only impugnable matter in the deed lies, as has been said, in the
number of cardinals so created at a batch. But the ends to be served
may be held to justify, if not altogether, at least in some measure,
the means adopted. The Romagna war for which the funds were needed was
primarily for the advancement of the Church, to expunge those faithless
vicars who, appointed by the Holy See and holding their fiefs in trust
for her, refused payment of just tribute and otherwise so acted as to
alienate from the Church the States which she claimed for her own. Their
restoration to the Church--however much it might be a means of founding
a Borgia dynasty in the Romagna--made for the greater power and glory of
the Holy See. Let us remember this, and that such was the end which
that tax, levied upon those newly elected cardinals, went to serve. The
aggrandizement of the House of Borgia was certainly one of the results
to be expected from the Romagna campaign, but we are not justified in
accounting it the sole aim and end of that campaign.

Alexander had this advantage over either Sixtus IV or Innocent VIII--not
to go beyond those Popes whom he had served as Vice-Chancellor, for
instances of flagrant nepotism--that he at least served two purposes
at once, and that, in aggrandizing his own family, he strengthened the
temporal power of the Church, whereas those others had done nothing but
undermine it that they might enrich their progeny.

And whilst on this subject of the “sale” of cardinals’ hats, it may not
be amiss to say a word concerning the “sale” of indulgences with which
Alexander has been so freely charged. Here again there has been too loud
an outcry against Alexander--an outcry whose indignant stridency leads
one to suppose that the sale of indulgences was a simony invented by
him, or else practised by him to an extent shamefully unprecedented.
Such is very far from being the case. The arch-type of
indulgence-seller--as of all other simoniacal practices--is Innocent
VIII. In his reign we have seen the murderer commonly given to choose
between the hangman and the purchase of a pardon, and we have seen the
moneys so obtained providing his bastard, the Cardinal Francesco Cibo,
with the means for the luxuriously licentious life whose gross disorders
prematurely killed him.

To no such flagitious lengths as these can it be shown that Alexander
carried the “sale” of the indulgences he dispensed. He had no lack of
precedent for the practice, and, so far as the actual practice itself
is concerned, it would be difficult to show that it was unjustifiable or
simoniacal so long as confined within certain well-defined bounds, and
so long as the sums levied by it were properly employed to the benefit
of Christianity. It is a practice comparable to the mulcting of a civil
offender against magisterial laws. Because our magistrates levy fines,
it does not occur to modern critics to say that they sell pardons
and immunity from gaol. It is universally recognized as a wise and
commendable measure, serving the two­fold purpose of punishing the
offender and benefiting the temporal State against which he has
offended. Need it be less commendable in the case of spiritual offences
against a spiritual State? It is more useful than the imposition of the
pattering of a dozen prayers at bedtime, and since, no doubt, it falls
more heavily upon the offender, it possibly makes to an even greater
extent for his spiritual improvement.

Thus considered, this “sale” of indulgences loses a deal of the
heinousness with which it has been invested. The funds so realized go
into the coffers of the Church, which is fit and proper. What afterwards
becomes of them at the hands of Alexander opens up another matter
altogether, one in which we cannot close our eyes to the fact that he
was as undutiful as many another who wore the Ring of the Fisherman
before him. Yet this is to be said for him: that, if he plunged his
hands freely into the treasury of the Holy See, at least he had the
ability to contrive that this treasury should be well supplied; and the
circumstance that, when he died, he left the church far wealthier and
more powerful than she had been for centuries, with her dominions which
his precursors had wantonly alienated reconsolidated into that powerful
State that was to endure for three hundred years, is an argument to the
credit of his pontificate not lightly to be set aside.

Imola and Forli had, themselves, applied to the Pontiff to appoint
Cesare Borgia their ruler in the place of the deposed Riarii. To these
was now added Cesena. In July disturbances occurred there between
Guelphs and Ghibellines. Swords were drawn and blood flowed in the
streets, until the governor was constrained to summon Ercole Bentivogli
and his horse from Forli to quell the rioting. The direct outcome of
this was that--the Ghibellines predominating in council--Cesena sent an
embassy to Rome to beg his Holiness to give the lordship of the fief
to the Duke of Valentinois. To this the Pope acceded, and on August
2 Cesare was duly appointed Lord Vicar of Cesena. He celebrated his
investiture by remitting a portion of the taxes, abolishing altogether
the duty on flour, and by bringing about a peace between the two
prevailing factions.

By the end of September Cesare’s preparations for the resumption of the
campaign were completed, and early in October (his army fortified in
spirit by the Pope’s blessing) he set out, and made his first halt at
Nepi. Lucrezia was there, with her Court and her child Roderigo, having
withdrawn to this her castle to mourn her dead husband Alfonso; and
there she abode until recalled to Rome by her father some two months
later.

Thence Cesare pushed on, as swiftly as the foul weather would allow him,
by way of Viterbo, Assisi, and Nocera to cross the Apennines at Gualdo.
Here he paused to demand the release of certain prisoners in the hill
fortress of Fossate, and to be answered by a refusal. Angered by this
resistance of his wishes and determined to discourage others from
following the example of Fossate, he was swift and terrible in his
rejoinder. He seized the Citadel, and did by force what had been refused
to his request. Setting at liberty the prisoners in durance there, he
gave the territory over to devastation by fire and pillage.

That done he resumed his march, but the weather retarded him more and
more. The heavy and continuous rains had reduced the roads to such a
condition that his artillery fell behind, and he was compelled to call
a halt once more, at Deruta, and wait there four days for his guns to
overtake him.

In Rimini the great House of Malatesta was represented by
Pandolfo--Roberto Malatesta’s bastard and successor--a degenerate so
detested by his subjects that he was known by the name of Pandolfaccio
(a contumelious augmentative, expressing the evil repute in which he was
held).

Among his many malpractices and the many abuses to which he resorted
for the purposes of extorting money from his long-suffering subjects
was that of compelling the richer men of Rimini to purchase from him the
estates which he confiscated from the fuorusciti--those who had sought
in exile safety from the anger provoked by their just resentment of his
oppressive misrule. He was in the same case as other Romagna tyrants,
and now that Venice had lifted from him her protecting aegis, he had no
illusions as to the fate in store for him. So when once more the
tramp of Cesare Borgia’s advancing legions rang through the Romagna,
Pandolfaccio disposed himself, not for battle, but for surrender on the
best terms that he might succeed in making.

He was married to Violante, the daughter of Giovanni Bentivogli of
Bologna, and in the first week of October he sent her, with their
children, to seek shelter at her father’s Court. Himself, he withdrew
into his citadel--the famous fortress of his terrible grandfather
Sigismondo. The move suggested almost that he was preparing to resist
the Duke of Valentinois, and it may have prompted the message sent him
by the Council to inquire what might be his intention.

Honour was a thing unknown to this Pandolfaccio--even so much honour
as may be required for a dignified retreat. Since all was lost it but
remained--by his lights--to make the best bargain that he could and get
the highest possible price in gold for what he was abandoning. So he
replied that the Council must do whatever it considered to its best
advantage, whilst to anticipate its members in any offer of surrender,
and thus seek the favour and deserve good terms at the hands of this
man who came to hurl him from the throne of his family, he dispatched a
confidential servant to Cesare to offer him town and citadel.

In the meantime--as Pandolfo fully expected--the Council also sent
proposals of surrender to Cesare, as well as to his lieutenant-general
of Romagna, Bishop Olivieri, at Cesena. The communications had the
effect of bringing Olivieri immediately to Rimini, and there, on October
10, the articles of capitulation were signed by the bishop, as the
duke’s representative, and by Pandolfo Malatesta. It was agreed in these
that Malatesta should have safe-conduct for himself and his familiars,
3,000 ducats and the value--to be estimated--of the artillery which he
left in the citadel. Further, for the price of 5,500 ducats he abandoned
also the strongholds of Sarsina and Medola and the castles of the
Montagna.

His tyranny thus disposed of, Pandolfaccio took ship to Ravenna, where
the price of his dishonour was to be paid him, and in security for
which he took with him Gianbattista Baldassare, the son of the ducal
commissioner.

On the day of his departure, to celebrate the bloodless conquest of
Rimini, solemn High Mass was sung in the Cathedral, and Bishop Olivieri
received the city’s oath of allegiance to the Holy See, whither very
shortly afterwards Rimini sent her ambassadors to express to the Pope
her gratitude for her release from the thraldom of Pandolfaccio.

Like Rimini, Pesaro too fell without the striking of a blow, for all
that it was by no means as readily relinquished on the part of its
ruler. Giovanni Sforza had been exerting himself desperately for the
past two months to obtain help that should enable him to hold his
tyranny against the Borgia might. But all in vain. His entreaties to the
emperor had met with no response, whilst his appeal to Francesco Gonzaga
of Mantua--whose sister, it will be remembered, had been his first
wife--had resulted in the Marquis’s sending him a hundred men under an
Albanian, named Giacopo.

What Giovanni was to do with a hundred men it is difficult to conceive,
nor are the motives of Gonzaga’s action clear. We know that at this time
he was eagerly seeking Cesare’s friendship, sorely uneasy as to the
fate that might lie in store for his own dominions, once the Duke of
Valentinois should have disposed of the feudatories of the Church. Early
in that year 1500 he had asked Cesare to stand godfather for his child,
and Cesare had readily consented, whereby a certain bond of relationship
and good feeling had been established between them, which everything
shows Gonzaga most anxious to preserve unsevered. The only reasonable
conclusion in the matter of that condotta of a hundred men is that
Gonzaga desired to show friendliness to the Lord of Pesaro, yet was
careful not to do so to any extent that might be hurtful to Valentinois.

As for Giovanni Sforza of whom so many able pens have written so
feelingly as the constant, unfortunate victim of Borgia ambition, there
is no need to enter into analyses for the purpose of judging him here.
His own subjects did so in his own day. When a prince is beloved by all
classes of his people, it must follow that he is a good prince and a
wise ruler; when his subjects are divided into two factions, one to
oppose and the other to support him, he may be good or bad, or good
and bad; but when a prince can find none to stand by him in the hour of
peril, it is to be concluded that he has deserved little at the hands of
those whom he has ruled. The latter is the case of Giovanni Sforza--this
prince whom, Yriarte tells us, “rendered sweet the lives of his
subjects.” The nobility and the proletariate of Pesaro abhorred him;
the trader classes stood neutral, anxious to avoid the consequences of
partisanship, since it was the class most exposed to those consequences.

On Sunday, October 11--the day after Pandolfo Malatesta had relinquished
Rimini--news reached Pesaro that Ercole Bentivogli’s horse was marching
upon the town, in advance of the main body of Cesare’s army. Instantly
there was an insurrection against Giovanni, and the people, taking
to arms, raised the cry of “Duca!” in acclamation of the Duke of
Valentinois, under the very windows of their ruler’s palace.

Getting together the three hundred men that constituted his army,
Giovanni beat a hasty retreat to Pesaro’s magnificent fortress, and that
same night he secretly took ship to Ravenna accompanied by the Albanian
Giacopo, and leaving his half-brother, Galeazzo Sforza di Cotignola,
in command of the citadel. Thence Giovanni repaired to Bologna, and,
already repenting his precipitate flight, he appealed for help to
Bentivogli, who was himself uneasy, despite the French protection
he enjoyed. Similarly, Giovanni addressed fresh appeals to Francesco
Gonzaga; but neither of these tyrants could or dared avail him, and,
whilst he was still imploring their intervention his fief had fallen
into Cesare’s power.

Ercole Bentivogli, with a small body of horse, had presented himself at
the gates of Pesaro on October 21, and Galeazzo Sforza, having obtained
safe-conduct for the garrison, surrendered.

Cesare, meanwhile, was at Fano, where he paused to allow his army to
come up with him, for he had outridden it from Fossate, through foul
wintry weather, attended only by his light horse. It was said that
he hoped that Fano might offer itself to him as other fiefs had done,
and--if Pandolfo Collenuccio is correct--he had been counselled by the
Pope not to attempt to impose himself upon Fano, but to allow the town
a free voice in the matter. If his hopes were as stated, he was
disappointed in them, for Fano made no offer to him, and matters
remained for the present as they were.

On the 27th, with the banners of the bull unfurled, he rode into Pesaro
at the head of two thousand men, making his entrance with his wonted
pomp, of whose dramatic values he was so fully aware. He was met at the
gates by the Council, which came to offer him the keys of the town, and,
despite the pouring rain under which he entered the city, the people of
Pesaro thronged the streets to acclaim him as he rode.

He took up his lodgings at the Sforza Palace, so lately vacated by
Giovanni--the palace where Lucrezia Borgia had held her Court when, as
Giovanni’s wife, she had been Countess of Pesaro and Cotignola. Early on
the morrow he visited the citadel, which was one of the finest in Italy,
rivalling that of Rimini for strength. On his arrival there, a flourish
of trumpets imposed silence, while the heralds greeted him formally as
Lord of Pesaro. He ordered one of the painters in his train to draw up
plans of the fortress to be sent to the Pope, and issued instructions
for certain repairs and improvements which he considered desirable.

Here in Pesaro came to him the famous Pandolfo Collenuccio, as envoy
from the Duke of Ferrara, to congratulate Cesare upon the victory.
In sending Collenuccio at such a time Ercole d’Este paid the Duke of
Valentinois a subtle, graceful compliment. This distinguished poet,
dramatist, and historian was a native of Pesaro who had been exiled ten
years earlier by Giovanni--which was the tyrant’s way of showing his
gratitude to the man who, more than any other, had contributed to
the bastard Sforza’s succession to his father as Lord of Pesaro and
Cotignola.

Collenuccio was one of the few literary men of his day who was not above
using the Italian tongue, treating it seriously as a language and not
merely as a debased form of Latin. He was eminent as a juris­consult,
and, being a man of action as well as a man of letters, he had filled
the office of Podestá in various cities; he had found employment under
Lorenzo dei Medici, and latterly under Ercole d’Este, whom we now see
him representing.

Cesare received him with all honour, sending the master of his
household, Ramiro de Lorqua, to greet him on his arrival and to bear
him the usual gifts of welcome, of barley, wine, capons, candles,
sweet-meats, etc., whilst on the morrow the duke gave him audience,
treating him in the friendliest manner, as we see from Collenuccio’s
own report to the Duke of Ferrara. In this he says of Cesare: “He is
accounted valiant, joyous, and open-handed, and it is believed that he
holds honest men in great esteem. Harsh in his vengeance, according to
many, he is great of spirit and of ambition, athirst for eminence and
fame.”

Collenuccio was reinstated by Cesare in the possessions of which
Giovanni had stripped him, a matter which so excited the resentment of
the latter that, when ultimately he returned to his dominions, one of
his first acts was to avenge it. Collenuccio, fearing that he might not
stand well with the tyrant, had withdrawn from Pesaro. But Giovanni,
with all semblance of friendliness, treacherously lured him back to cast
him into prison and have him strangled--a little matter which those who,
to the detriment of the Borgia, seek to make a hero of this Giovanni
Sforza, would do well not to suppress.

A proof of the splendid discipline prevailing in Cesare’s army is
afforded during his brief sojourn in Pesaro. In the town itself, some
two thousand of his troops were accommodated, whilst some thousands
more swarmed in the surrounding country. Occupation by such an army was,
naturally enough, cause for deep anxiety on the part of a people who
were but too well acquainted with the ways of the fifteenth­century
men-at-arms. But here was a general who knew how to curb and control his
soldiers. Under the pain of death his men were forbidden from indulging
any of the predations or violences usual to their kind; and, as a
consequence, the inhabitants of Pesaro had little to complain of.

Justolo gives us a picture of the Duke of Valentinois on the banks of
the River Montone, which again throws into relief the discipline which
his very presence--such was the force of his personality--was able to
enforce. A disturbance arose among his soldiers at the crossing of this
river, which was swollen with rains and the bridge of which had been
destroyed. It became necessary to effect the crossing in one small
boat--the only craft available--and the men, crowding to the bank,
stormed and fought for precedence until the affair grew threatening.
Cesare rode down to the river, and no more than his presence was
necessary to restore peace. Under that calm, cold eye of his the men
instantly became orderly, and, whilst he sat his horse and watched them,
the crossing was soberly effected, and as swiftly as the single craft
would permit.

The duke remained but two days in Pesaro. On the 29th, having appointed
a lieutenant to represent him, and a captain to the garrison, he marched
out again, to lie that night at Cattolica and enter Rimini on the
morrow.

There again he was received with open arms, and he justified the
people’s welcome of him by an immediate organization of affairs which
gave universal satisfaction. He made ample provision for the proper
administration of justice and the preservation of the peace; he recalled
the fuorusciti exiled by the unscrupulous Pandolfaccio, and he saw them
reinstated in the property of which that tyrant had dispossessed them.
As his lieutenant in Rimini, with strict injunctions to preserve law
and order, he left Ramiro de Lorqua, when, on November 2, he departed to
march upon Faenza, which had prepared for resistance.

What Cesare did in Rimini was no more than he was doing throughout the
Romagna, as its various archives bear witness. They bear witness no less
to his vast ability as an administrator, showing how he resolved the
prevailing chaos into form and order by his admirable organization and
suppression of injustice. The same archives show us also that he found
time for deeds of beneficence which endeared him to the people, who
everywhere hailed him as their deliverer from thraldom. It would not be
wise to join in the chorus of those who appear to have taken Cesare’s
altruism for granted. The rejection of the wild stories that picture
him as a corrupt and murderous monster, utterly inhuman, and lay a dozen
ghastly crimes to his account need not entail our viewing Cesare as an
angel of deliverance, a divine agent almost, rescuing a suffering people
from oppression out of sheer humanitarianism.

He is the one as little as the other. He is just--as Collenuccio wrote
to Ercole d’Este--“great of spirit and of ambition, athirst for
eminence and fame.” He was consumed by the desire for power and worldly
greatness, a colossus of egotism to whom men and women were pieces to
be handled by him on the chess-board of his ambition, to be sacrificed
ruthlessly where necessary to his ends, but to be husbanded and guarded
carefully where they could serve him.

With his eyes upon the career of Cesare Borgia, Macchiavelli was anon to
write of principalities newly-acquired, that “however great may be the
military resources of a prince, he will discover that, to obtain firm
footing in a province, he must engage the favour and interest of the
inhabitants.”

That was a principle self-evident to Cesare--the principle upon which
he acted throughout in his conquest of the Romagna. By causing his new
subjects to realize at once that they had exchanged an oppressive for a
generous rule, he attached them to himself.




CHAPTER VII. THE SIEGE OF FAENZA


The second campaign of the Romagna had opened for Cesare as easily as
had the first. So far his conquest had been achieved by little more than
a processional display of his armed legions. Like another Joshua, he
reduced cities by the mere blare of his trumpets. At last, however,
he was to receive a check. Where grown men had fled cravenly at his
approach, it remained for a child to resist him at Faenza, as a woman
had resisted him at Forli.

His progress north from Pesaro was of necessity slow. He paused, as
we have seen, at Rimini, and he paused again, and for a rather longer
spell, at Forli, so that it was not until the second week of November
that Astorre Manfredi--the boy of sixteen who was to hold Faenza--caught
in the distance the flash of arms and the banners with the bull device
borne by the host which the Duke of Valentinois led against him.

At first it had been Astorre’s intent to follow the examples set him by
Malatesta and Sforza, and he had already gone so far as to remove his
valuables to Ravenna, whither he, too, meant to seek refuge. But he was
in better case than any of the tyrants so far deposed inasmuch as his
family, which had ruled Faenza for two hundred years, had not provoked
the hatred of its subjects, and these were now ready and willing to
stand loyally by their young lord. But loyalty alone can do little,
unless backed by the might of arms, against such a force as Cesare was
prepared to hurl upon Faenza. This Astorre realized, and for his own
and his subjects’ sake was preparing to depart, when, to his undoing,
support reached him from an unexpected quarter.

Bologna--whose ruler, Giovanni Bentivogli, was Astorre’s grandfather--in
common with Florence and Urbino, grew daily more and more alarmed at
the continual tramp of armed multitudes about her frontiers, and at the
steady growth in numbers and in capacity of this splendid army which
followed Casare--an army captained by such enemies of the Bentivogli as
the Baglioni, the Orsini, and the exiled Malvezzi.

Bentivogli had good grounds for his anxiety, not knowing how long he
might depend upon the protection of France, and well aware that, once
that protection was removed, there would be no barrier between Bologna
and Cesare’s manifest intentions concerning her.

Next to Cesare’s utter annihilation, to check his progress was the
desire dearest just then to the heart of Bentivogli, and with this end
in view he dispatched Count Guido Torella to Faenza, in mid-October,
with an offer to assist Astorre with men and money.

Astorre, who had succeeded Galeotto Manfredi in the tyranny of Faenza at
the age of three, had been and still continued under the tutelage of
the Council which really governed his territories. To this Council came
Count Torella with Bentivogli’s offer, adding the proposal that young
Astorre should be sent to Venice for his personal safety. But to this
the Council replied that it would be useless, if that course were
adopted, to attempt resistance, as the people could only be urged to it
by their affection for their young lord, and that, if he were removed
from their midst, they would insist upon surrender.

News of these negotiations reached Rome, and on October 24 Alexander
sent Bentivogli his commands to refrain, under pain of excommunication,
from interfering in the affairs of Faenza. Bentivogli made a feeble
attempt to mask his disobedience. The troops with which he intended to
assist his grandson were sent ostensibly to Castel Bolognese, but with
instructions to desert thence and make for Faenza. This they did, and
thus was Astorre strengthened by a thousand men, whilst the work of
preparing his city for resistance went briskly forward.

Meanwhile, ahead of Cesare Borgia, swept Vitellozzo Vitelli with his
horse into Astorre’s dominions. He descended upon the valley of the
Lamone, and commenced hostilities by the capture and occupation of
Brisghella on November 7. The other lesser strongholds and townships
offered no resistance to Cesare’s arms. Indeed they were induced into
ready rebellion against their lord by Dionigio di Naldo--the sometime
defender of Imola, who had now taken service with Cesare.

On November 10 Cesare himself halted his host beneath the walls of
Faenza and called upon the town to surrender. Being denied, he encamped
his army for the siege. He chose the eastern side of the town, between
the rivers Lamone and Marzano, and, that his artillery might have free
play, he caused several houses to be demolished.

In Faenza itself, meanwhile, the easy conquest of the valley had not
produced a good effect. Moreover, the defenders had cause to fear
treachery within their gates, for a paper had been picked up out of the
moat containing an offer of terms of surrender. It had been shot into
the castle attached to an arbalest­bolt, and was intended for the
castellan Castagnini. This Castagnini was arrested, thrown into prison,
and his possessions confiscated, whilst the Council placed the citadel
in the hands of four of its own members together with Gianevangelista
Manfredi--Astorre’s half-brother, and a bastard of Galeotto’s. These
set about defending it against Cesare, who had now opened fire. The duke
caused the guns to be trained upon a certain bastion through which he
judged that a good assault might be delivered and an entrance gained.
Night and day was the bombardment of that bastion kept up, yet without
producing visible effect until the morning of the 20th, when suddenly
one of its towers collapsed thunderously into the moat.

Instantly, and without orders, the soldiers, all eager to be among the
first to enter, flung themselves forward in utter and fierce disorder to
storm the breach. Cesare, at breakfast--as he himself wrote to the Duke
of Urbino--sprang up at the great noise, and, surmising what was taking
place, dashed out to restrain his men. But the task was no easy one,
for, gathering excitement and the frenzy of combat as they ran, they had
already gained the edge of the ditch, and thither Cesare was forced to
follow them, using voice and hands to beat back again.

At last he succeeded in regaining control of them, and in compelling
them to make an orderly retreat, and curb their impatience until the
time for storming should have come, which was not yet. In the affair
Cesare had a narrow escape from a stone-shot fired from the castle,
whilst one of his officers--Onorio Savelli--was killed by a cannon-ball
from the duke’s own guns, whose men, unaware of what was taking place,
were continuing the bombardment.

Hitherto the army had been forced to endure foul weather--rain, fogs,
and wind; but there was worse come. Snow began to fall on the morning of
the 22nd. It grew to a storm, and the blizzard continued all that day,
which was a Sunday, all night, and all the following day, and lashed the
men pitilessly and blindingly. The army, already reduced by shortness of
victuals, was now in a miserable plight in its unsheltered camp, and the
defenders of Faenza, as if realizing this, made a sortie on the 23rd,
from which a fierce fight ensued, with severe loss to both sides. On the
25th the snow began again, whereupon the hitherto unconquerable Cesare,
defeated at last by the elements and seeing that his men could not
possibly continue to endure the situation, was compelled to strike camp
on the 26th and go into winter quarters, no doubt with immense chagrin
at leaving so much work unaccomplished.

So he converted the siege into a blockade, closing all roads that lead
to Faenza, with a view to shutting out supplies from the town; and he
distributed troops throughout the villages of the territory with orders
constantly to harass the garrison and allow it no rest.

He also sent an envoy with an offer of terms of surrender, but the
Council rejected it with the proud answer that its members “had agreed,
in general assembly, to defend the dominions of Manfredi to the death.”

Thereupon Cesare withdrew to Forli with 150 lances and 2,500 foot, and
here he affords a proof of his considerateness. The town had already
endured several occupations and the severities of being the seat of war
during the siege of the citadel. Cesare was determined that it should
feel the present occupation as little as possible; so he issued an order
to the inhabitants upon whom his soldiers were billeted to supply the
men only with bed, light, and fire. What more they required must be
paid for, and, to avoid disputes as to prices of victuals and other
necessaries, he ordered the Council to draw up a tariff, and issued an
edict forbidding his soldiers, under pain of death, from touching any
property of the townsfolk. Lest they should doubt his earnestness,
he hanged two of his soldiers on December 7--a Piedmontese and a
Gascon--and on the 13th a third, all from the windows of his own palace,
and all with a label hanging from their feet proclaiming that they had
been hanged for taking goods of others in spite of the ban of the Lord
Duke, etc.

He remained in Forli until the 23rd, when he departed to Cesena, which
was really his capital in Roomagna, and in the huge citadel of which
there was ample accommodation for the troops that accompanied him. In
Forli he left, as his lieutenants, the Bishop of Trani and Don Michele
da Corella--the “Michieli” of Capello’s Relation and the “Michelotto”
 of so many Borgia fables. That this officer ruled the soldiers left with
him in Forli in accordance with the stern example set him by his master
we know from the chronicles of Bernardi.

In Cesena the duke occupied the splendid palace of Malatesta Novello,
which had been magnificently equipped for him, and there, on Christmas
Eve, he entertained the Council of the town and other important citizens
to a banquet worthy of the repuation for lavishness which he enjoyed. He
was very different in this from his father, whose table habits were of
the most sparing--to which, no doubt, his Holiness owed the wonderful,
almost youthful vigour which he still enjoyed in this his seventieth
year. It was notorious that ambassadors cared little for invitations to
the Pope’s table, where the meal never consisted of more than one dish.

On Christmas Day the duke attended Mass at the Church of San Giovanni
Evangelista with great pomp, arrayed in the ducal chlamys and followed
by his gentlemen. With these young patricians Cesare made merry during
the days that followed. The time was spent in games and joustings,
in all of which the duke showed himself freely, making display of his
physical perfections, fully aware, no doubt, of what a short cut these
afforded him to the hearts of the people, ever ready to worship physical
beauty, prowess, and address.

Yet business was not altogether neglected, for on January 4 he went
to Porto Cesenatico, and there published an edict against all who had
practised with the fuorusciti from his States, forbidding the offence
under pain of death and forfeiture of possessions.

He remained in winter quarters until the following April, from which,
however, it is not to be concluded that Faenza was allowed to be at
peace for that spell. The orders which he had left behind him, that the
town was constantly to be harassed, were by no means neglected. On the
night of January 21, by arrangement with some of the inhabitants of the
beleaguered city, the foot surrounding Faenza attempted to surprise the
garrison by a secret escalade. They were, however, discovered betimes in
the attempt and repulsed, some who had the mischance--as it happened--to
gain the battlements before the alarm was raised being taken and hanged.
The duke’s troops, however, consoled themselves by capturing Russi
and Solarolo, the last two strongholds in the valley that had held for
Astorre.

Meanwhile, Cesare and his merry young patricians spent the time as
agreeably as might be in Cesena during that carnival. The author of
the Diario Cesenate is moved by the duke’s pastimes to criticize him
severely as indulging in amusements unbecoming the dignity of his
station. He is particularly shocked to know that the duke should have
gone forth in disguise with a few companions to repair to carnival
festivities in the surrounding villages and there to wrestle with the
rustics. It is not difficult to imagine the discomfiture suffered by
many a village Hercules at the hands of this lithe young man, who could
behead a bull at a single stroke of a spadoon and break a horseshoe in
his fingers. The diary in question, you will have gathered, is that of
a pedant, prim and easily scandalized. So much being obvious, it is
noteworthy that Cesare’s conduct should have afforded him no subject
for graver strictures than these, Cesare being such a man as has been
represented, and the time being that of carnival when licence was
allowed full play.

The Pope accounted that the check endured by Cesare before Faenza was
due not so much to the foul weather by which his army had been beset as
to the assistance which Giovanni Bentivogli had rendered his grandson
Astorre, and bitter were the complaints of it which he addressed to
the King of France. Alarmed by this, and fearing that he might have
compromised himself and jeopardized the French protection by his action
in the matter, Bentivogli made haste to recall his troops, and did in
fact withdraw them from Faenza early in December, shortly after Cesare
had gone into winter quarters. Nevertheless, the Pope’s complaints
continued, Alexander in his secret, crafty heart no doubt rejoicing that
Bentivogli should have afforded him so sound a grievance. As Louis
XII desired, for several reasons, to stand well with Rome, he sent an
embassy to Bentivogli to express his regret and censure of the latter’s
intervention in the affairs of Faenza. He informed Bentivogli that the
Pope was demanding the return of Bologna to the States of the Church,
and, without expressing himself clearly as to his own view of the
matter, he advised Bentivogli to refrain from alliances with the
enemies of the Holy See and to secure Bologna to himself by some sound
arrangement. This showed Bentivogli in what danger he stood, and his
uneasiness was increased by the arrival at Modena of Yves d’Allègre,
sent by the King of France with a condotta of 500 horse for purposes
which were not avowed but which Bentivogli sorely feared might prove to
be hostile to himself.

At the beginning of February Cesare moved his quarters from Cesena to
Imola, and thence he sent his envoys to demand winter quarters for his
troops in Castel Bolognese. This flung Bentivogli into positive terror,
as he interpreted the request as a threat of invasion. Castel Bolognese
was too valuable a stronghold to be so lightly placed in the duke’s
hands. Thence Bentivogli might, in case of need, hold the duke in check,
the fortress commanding, as it did, the road from Imola to Faenza.
He had the good sense, however, to compromise the matter by returning
Cesare an offer of accommodation for his men with victuals, artillery,
etc., but without the concession of Castel Bolognese. With this Cesare
was forced to be content, there being no reasonable grounds upon which
he could decline so generous an offer. It was a cunning concession on
Bentivogli’s part, for, without strengthening the duke’s position, it
yet gave the latter what he ostensibly required, and left no cause for
grievance and no grounds upon which to molest Bologna. So much was this
the case that on February 26 the Pope wrote to Bentivogli expressing his
thanks at the assistance which he had thus given Cesare in the Faenza
emprise.

It was during this sojourn of Cesare’s at Imola that the abduction took
place of Dorotea Caracciolo, the young wife of Gianbattista Caracciolo,
a captain of foot in the Venetian service. The lady, who was attached to
the Duchess of Urbino, had been residing at the latter’s Court, and in
the previous December Caracciolo had begged leave of the Council of Ten
that he might himself go to Urbino for the purpose of escorting her to
Venice. The Council, however, had replied that he should send for her,
and this the captain had done. Near Cervia, on the confines of the
Venetian territory, towards evening of February 14, the lady’s escort
was set upon by ten well­armed men, and rudely handled by them, some
being wounded and one at least killed, whilst the lady and a woman who
was with her were carried off.

The Podestá of Cervia reported to the Venetian Senate that the abductors
were Spaniards of the army of the Duke of Valentinois, and it was feared
in Venice--according to Sanuto--that the deed might be the work of
Cesare.

The matter contained in that Relation of Capello’s to the Senate must
by now have been widespread, and of a man who could perpetrate the
wickednesses therein divulged anything could be believed. Indeed, it
seems to have followed that, where any act of wickedness was brought to
light, at once men looked to see if Cesare might not be responsible,
nor looked close enough to make quite sure. To no other cause can it be
assigned that, in the stir which the Senate made, the name of Cesare
was at once suggested as that of the abductor, and this so broadly that
letters poured in upon him on all sides begging him to right this
cruel wrong. So much do you see assumed, upon no more evidence than
was contained in that letter from the Podestá of Cervia, which went no
further than to say that the abductors were “Spaniards of the Duke of
Valentinois’ army.” The envoy Manenti was dispatched at once to Cesare
by the Senate, and he went persuaded, it is clear, that Cesare Borgia
was the guilty person. He enlisted the support of Monsieur de Trans (the
French ambassador then on his way to Rome) and that of Yves d’Allègre,
and he took them with him to the Duke at Imola.

There, acting upon his strong suspicions, Manenti appears to have taken
a high tone, representing to the duke that he had done an unworthy
thing, and imploring him to restore the lady to her husband. Cesare’s
patience under the insolent assumption in justification of which Manenti
had not a single grain of evidence to advance, is--guilty or innocent--a
rare instance of self-control. He condescended to take oath that he had
not done this thing which they imputed to him. He admitted that he had
heard of the outrage, and he expressed the belief that it was the work
of one Diego Ramires--a captain of foot in his service. This Ramires, he
explained, had been in the employ of the Duke of Urbino, and in Urbino
had made the acquaintance and fallen enamoured of the lady; and he added
that the fellow had lately disappeared, but that already he had set on
foot a search for him, and that, once taken, he would make an example of
him.

In conclusion he begged that the Republic should not believe this thing
against him, assuring the envoy that he had not found the ladies of the
Romagna so difficult that he should be driven to employ such rude and
violent measures.

The French ambassador certainly appears to have attached implicit faith
to Cesare’s statement, and he privately informed Manenti that Ramires
was believed to be at Medola, and that the Republic might rest assured
that, if he were taken, exemplary justice would be done.

All this you will find recorded in Sanuto. After that his diary
entertains us with rumours which were reaching Venice, now that the
deed was the duke’s, now that the lady was with Ramires. Later the two
rumours are consolidated into one, in a report of the Podestá of Cervia
to the effect that “the lady is in the Castle of Forli with Ramires, and
that he took her there by order of the duke.” The Podestá says that a
man whom he sent to gather news had this story from one Benfaremo. But
he omits to say who and what is this Benfaremo, and what the source of
his information.

Matters remaining thus, and the affair appearing in danger of being
forgotten, Caracciolo goes before the Senate on March 16 and implores
permission to deal with it himself. This permission is denied him, the
Doge conceiving that the matter will best be dealt with by the Senate,
and Caracciolo is ordered back to his post at Gradisca. Thence he writes
to the Senate on March 30 that he is certain his wife is in the citadel
of Forli.

After this Sanuto does not mention the matter again until December of
1503--nearly three years later--when we gather that, under pressure
of constant letters from the husband, the Venetian ambassador at the
Vatican makes so vigorous a stir that the lady is at last delivered up,
and goes for the time being into a convent. But we are not told where or
how she is found, nor where the convent in which she seeks shelter. That
is Sanuto’s first important omission.

And now an odd light is thrown suddenly upon the whole affair, and
it begins to look as if the lady had been no unwilling victim of an
abduction, but, rather, a party to an elopement. She displays a positive
reluctance to return to her husband; she is afraid to do so--“in
fear for her very life”--and she implores the Senate to obtain from
Caracciolo some security for her, or else to grant her permission to
withdraw permanently to a convent.

The Senate summons the husband, and represents the case to him. He
assures the Senate that he has forgiven his wife, believing her to be
innocent. This, however, does not suffice to allay her uneasiness--or
her reluctance--for on January 4, 1504, Sanuto tells us that the Senate
has received a letter of thanks from her in which she relates her
misfortunes, and in which again she begs that her husband be compelled
to pledge security to treat her well (“darli buona vita”) or else that
she should be allowed to return to her mother. Of the nature of the
misfortunes which he tells us she related in her letter, Sanuto says
nothing. That is his second important omission.

The last mention of the subject in Sanuto relates to her restoration to
her husband. He tells us that Caracciolo received her with great joy;
but he is silent on the score of the lady’s emotions on that occasion.

There you have all that is known of Dorotea Caracciolo’s abduction,
which later writers--including Bembo in his Historiae--have positively
assigned to Cesare Borgia, drawing upon their imagination to fill up the
lacunae in the story so as to support their point of view.

Those lacunae, however, are invested with a certain eloquence which it
is well not to disregard. Admitting that the construing of silence into
evidence is a dangerous course, all fraught with pitfalls, yet it seems
permissible to pose the following questions:

If the revelation of the circumstances under which she was found, the
revelations contained in her letters to the Senate, and the revelations
which one imagines must have followed her return to her husband, confirm
past rumours and convict Cesare of the outrage, how does it happen that
Sanuto--who has never failed to record anything that could tell against
Cesare--should be silent on the matter? And how does it happen that so
many pens that busied themselves greedily with scandal that touched the
Borgias should be similarly silent? Is it unreasonable to infer that
those revelations did not incriminate him--that they gave the lie to all
the rumours that had been current? If that is not the inference, then
what is?

It is further noteworthy that on January 16--after Dorotea’s letter to
the Senate giving the details of her misfortunes, which details Sanuto
has suppressed--Diego Ramires, the real and known abductor, is still the
object of a hunt set afoot by some Venetians. Would that be the case had
her revelations shown Ramires to be no more than the duke’s instrument?
Possibly; but not probably. In such a case he would not have been worth
the trouble of pursuing.

Reasonably may it be objected: How, if Cesare was not guilty, does it
happen that he did not carry out his threat of doing exemplary justice
upon Ramires when taken--since Ramires obviously lay in his power for
years after the event? The answer to that you will find in the lady’s
reluctance to return to Caracciolo, and the tale it tells. It is not
in the least illogical to assume that, when Cesare threatened that
vengeance upon Ramires for the outrage which it was alleged had been
committed, he fully intended to execute it; but that, upon taking
Ramires, and upon discovering that here was no such outrage as had been
represented, but just the elopement of a couple of lovers, he found
there was nothing for him to avenge. Was it for Cesare Borgia to set up
as a protector and avenger of cuckolds? Rather would it be in keeping
with the feelings of his age and race to befriend the fugitive pair who
had planted the antlers upon the brow of the Venetian captain.

Lastly, Cesare’s attitude towards women may be worth considering, that
we may judge whether such an act as was imputed to him is consistent
with it. Women play no part whatever in his history. Not once shall
you find a woman’s influence swaying him; not once shall you see
him permitting dalliance to retard his advancement or jeopardize his
chances. With him, as with egotists of his type, governed by cold will
and cold intellect, the sentimental side of the relation of the sexes
has no place. With him one woman was as another woman; as he
craved women, so he took women, but with an almost contemptuous
undiscrimination. For all his needs concerning them the lupanaria
sufficed.

Is this mere speculation, think you? Is there no evidence to support
it, do you say? Consider, pray, in all its bearings the treatise on
pudendagra dedicated to a man of Cesare Borgia’s rank by the physician
Torella, written to meet his needs, and see what inference you draw
from that. Surely such an inference as will invest with the ring of
truth--expressing as it does his intimate nature, and confirming further
what has here been said--that answer of his to the Venetian envoy, “that
he had not found the ladies of Romagna so difficult that he should be
driven to such rude and violent measures.”




CHAPTER VIII. ASTORRE MANFREDI


On March 29 Cesare Borgia departed from Cesena--whither, meanwhile, he
had returned--to march upon Faenza, resume the attack, and make an end
of the city’s stubborn resistance.

During the past months, however, and notwithstanding the presence of the
Borgia troops in the territory, the people of Faenza had been able to
increase their fortifications by the erection of out-works and a stout
bastion in the neighbourhood of the Osservanza Hospital, well beyond the
walls. This bastion claimed Cesare’s first attention, and it was carried
by assault on April 12. Thither he now fetched his guns, mounted them,
and proceeded to a steady bombardment of the citadel. But the resistance
continued with unabated determination--a determination amounting to
heroism, considering the hopelessness of their case and the straits to
which the Faentini were reduced by now. Victuals and other necessaries
of life had long since been running low. Still the men of Faenza
tightened their belts, looked to their defences, and flung defiance
at the Borgia. The wealthier inhabitants distributed wine and flour at
prices purely nominal, and lent Astorre money for the payment of his
troops. It is written that to the same end the very priests, their
patriotism surmounting their duty to the Holy Father in whose name
this war was waged, consented to the despoiling of the churches and the
melting down of the sacred vessels.

Even the women of Faenza bore their share of the burden of defence,
carrying to the ramparts the heavy stones that were to be hurled down
upon the besiegers, or actually donning casque and body-armour and doing
sentry duty on the walls while the men rested.

But the end was approaching. On April 18 the Borgia cannon opened at
last a breach in the walls, and Cesare delivered a terrible assault upon
the citadel. The fight upon the smoking ruins was fierce and determined
on both sides, the duke’s men pressing forward gallantly under showers
of scalding pitch and a storm of boulders, launched upon them by the
defenders, who used the very ruins of the wall for ammunition. For four
hours was that assault maintained; nor did it cease until the deepening
dusk compelled Cesare to order the retreat, since to continue in the
failing light was but to sacrifice men to no purpose.

Cesare’s appreciation of the valour of the garrison ran high. It
inspired him with a respect which shows his dispassionate breadth of
mind, and he is reported to have declared that with an army of such men
as those who held Faenza against him he would have conquered all Italy.
He did not attempt a second assault, but confined himself during the
three days that followed to continuing the bombardment.

Within Faenza men were by now in desperate case. Weariness and hunger
were so exhausting their endurance, so sapping their high valour that
nightly there were desertions to the duke’s camp of men who could bear
no more. The fugitives from the town were well received, all save one--a
man named Grammante, a dyer by trade--who, in deserting to the duke,
came in to inform him that at a certain point of the citadel the
defences were so weak that an assault delivered there could not fail to
carry it.

This man afforded Cesare an opportunity of marking his contempt for
traitors and his respect for the gallant defenders of Faenza. The
duke hanged him for his pains under the very walls of the town he had
betrayed.

On the 21st the bombardment was kept up almost without interruption for
eight hours, and so shattered was the citadel by that pitiless cannonade
that the end was in sight at last. But the duke’s satisfaction was
tempered by his chagrin at the loss of Achille Tiberti, one of the most
valiant of his captains, and one who had followed his fortunes from the
first with conspicuous devotion. He was killed by the bursting of a gun.
A great funeral at Cesena bore witness to the extent to which Cesare
esteemed and honoured him.

Astorre, now seeing the citadel in ruins and the possibility of further
resistance utterly exhausted, assembled the Council of Faenza to
determine upon their course of action, and, as a result of their
deliberations, the young tyrant sent his ambassadors to the duke to
propose terms of surrender. It was a belated proposal, for there was no
longer on Cesare’s part the necessity to make terms. The city’s defences
were destroyed, and to talk of surrender now was to talk of giving
something that no longer existed. Yet Cesare met the ambassadors in a
spirit of splendid generosity.

The terms proposed were that the people of Faenza should have immunity
for themselves and their property; that Astorre should have freedom to
depart and to take with him his moveable possessions, his immoveables
remaining at the mercy of the Pope. By all the laws of war Cesare was
entitled to a heavy indemnity for the losses he had sustained through
the resistance opposed to him. Considering those same laws and the
application they were wont to receive in his day, no one could have
censured him had he rejected all terms and given the city over to
pillage. Yet not only does he grant the terms submitted to him, but in
addition he actually lends an ear to the Council’s prayer that out of
consideration for the great suffering of the city in the siege he should
refrain from exacting any indemnity. This was to be forbearing indeed;
but he was to carry his forbearance even further. In answer to the
Council’s expressed fears of further harm at the hands of his troopers
once these should be in Faenza, he actually consented to effect no
entrance into the town.

We are not for a moment to consider Cesare as actuated in all this by
any lofty humanitarianism. He was simply pursuing that wise policy of
his, in refraining from punishing conquered States which were to
be subject henceforth to his rule, and which, therefore, must be
conciliated that they might be loyal to him. But it is well that you
should at least appreciate this policy and the fruit it bore when you
read that Cesare Borgia was a blood-glutted monster of carnage who
ravaged the Romagna, rending and devouring it like some beast of prey.

On the 26th the Council waited upon Cesare at the Hospital of the
Osservanza--where he was lodged--to tender the oath of fealty. That same
evening Astorre himself, attended by a few of his gentlemen, came to the
duke.

To this rather sickly and melancholy lad, who had behind him a terrible
family history of violence, and to his bastard brother, Gianevangelista,
the duke accorded the most gracious welcome. Indeed, so amiable did
Astorre find the duke that, although the terms of surrender afforded
him perfect liberty to go whither he listed, he chose to accept the
invitation Cesare extended to him to remain in the duke’s train.

It is eminently probable, however, that the duke’s object in keeping the
young man about him was prompted by another phase of that policy of
his which Macchiavelli was later to formulate into rules of conduct,
expedient in a prince:

“In order to preserve a newly acquired State particular attention should
be given to two points. In the first place care should be taken entirely
to extinguish the family of the ancient sovereign; in the second, laws
should not be changed, nor taxes increased.”

Thus Macchiavelli. The second point is all that is excellent; the first
is all that is wise--cold, horrible, and revolting though it be to our
twentieth-century notions.

Cesare Borgia, as a matter of fact, hardly went so far as Macchiavelli
advises. He practised discrimination. He did not, for instance, seek the
lives of Pandolfaccio Malatesta, or of Caterina Sforza-Riario. He saw
no danger in their living, no future trouble to apprehend from them. The
hatred borne them by their subjects was to Cesare a sufficient guarantee
that they would not be likely to attempt a return to their dominions,
and so he permitted them to keep their lives. But to have allowed
Astorre Manfredi, or even his bastard brother, to live would have been
bad policy from the appallingly egotistical point of view which was
Cesare’s--a point of view, remember, which receives Macchiavelli’s
horribly intellectual, utterly unsentimental, revoltingly practical
approval.

So--to anticipate a little--we see Cesare taking Astorre and
Gianevangelista Manfredi to Rome when he returned thither in the
following June. A fortnight later--on June 26--the formidable amazon of
Forli, the Countess Sforza-Riario, was liberated, as we know, from the
Castle of Sant’ Angelo, and permitted to withdraw to Florence. But the
gates of that grim fortress, in opening to allow her to pass out, opened
also for the purpose of admitting Astorre and Gianevangelista, upon whom
they closed.

All that is known positively of the fate of these unfortunate young men
is that they never came forth again alive.

The record in Burchard (June 9, 1502) of Astorre’s body having been
found in the Tiber with a stone round his neck, suffers in probability
from the addition that, “together with it were found the bodies of two
young men with their arms tied, a certain woman, and many others.”

The dispatch of Giustiniani to the effect that: “It is said that
this night were thrown into Tiber and drowned the two lords of Faenza
together with their seneschal,” was never followed up by any other
dispatch confirming the rumour, nor is it confirmed by any dispatch so
far discovered from any other ambassador, nor yet does the matter find
place in the Chronicles of Faenza.

But that is of secondary importance. The ugliest feature of the case is
not the actual assassination of the young men, but the fact that Cesare
had pledged himself that Astorre should go free, and yet had kept him
by him--at first, it would seem, in his train, and later as a
prisoner--until he put an end to his life. It was an ugly, unscrupulous
deed; but there is no need to exaggerate its heinousness, as is
constantly done, upon no better authority than Guicciardini’s, who
wrote that the murder had been committed “saziata prima la libidine di
qualcuno.”

Of all the unspeakable calumnies of which the Borgias have been the
subject, none is more utterly wanton than this foul exhalation of
Guicciardini’s lewd invention. Let the shame that must eternally attach
to him for it brand also those subsequent writers who repeated and
retailed that abominable and utterly unsupported accusation, and more
particularly those who have not hesitated to assume that Guicciardini’s
“qualcuno” was an old man in his seventy-second year--Pope Alexander VI.

Others a little more merciful, a little more careful of physical
possibilities (but no whit less salacious) have taken it that Cesare was
intended by the Florentine historian.

But, under one form or another, the lie has spread as only such foulness
can spread. It has become woven into the warp of history; it has grown
to be one of those “facts” which are unquestioningly accepted, but it
stands upon no better foundation than the frequent repetition which a
charge so monstrous could not escape. Its source is not a contemporary
one. It is first mentioned by Guicciardini; and there is no logical
conclusion to be formed other than that Guicciardini invented it.
Another story which owes its existence mainly, and its particulars
almost entirely, to Guicciardini’s libellous pen--the story of the death
of Alexander VI, which in its place shall be examined--provoked the
righteous anger of Voltaire. Atheist and violent anti-clerical though
he was, the story’s obvious falseness so revolted him that he penned his
formidable indictment in which he branded Guicciardini as a liar who had
deceived posterity that he might vent his hatred of the Borgias. Better
cause still was there in this matter of Astorre Manfredi for Voltaire’s
indignation, as there is for the indignation of all conscientious
seekers after truth.




CHAPTER IX. CASTEL BOLOGNESE AND PIOMBINO


To return to the surrender of Faenza on April 26, 1501, we see Cesare
on the morrow of that event, striking camp with such amazing suddenness
that he does not even pause to provide for the government of the
conquered tyranny, but appoints a vicar four days later to attend to it.

He makes his abrupt departure from Faenza, and is off like a whirlwind
to sweep unexpectedly into the Bolognese territory, and, by striking
swiftly, to terrify Bentivogli into submission in the matter of Castel
Bolognese.

This fortress, standing in the duke’s dominions, on the road between
Faenza and Imola, must be a menace to him whilst in the hands of a power
that might become actively hostile.

Ahead of him Cesare sent an envoy to Bentivogli, to demand its
surrender.

The alarmed Lord of Bologna, having convened his Council (the
Reggimento), replied that they must deliberate in the matter; and two
days later they dispatched their ambassador to lay before Cesare the
fruits of these deliberations. They were to seek the duke at Imola; but
they got no farther than Castel S. Pietro, which to their dismay they
found already in the hands of Vitellozzo Vitelli’s men-at­arms. For,
what time Bentivogli had been deliberating, Cesare Borgia had
been acting with that promptness which was one of his most salient
characteristics, and, in addition to Castel S. Pietro he had already
captured Casalfiuminense, Castel Guelfo, and Medecina, which were now
invested by his troops.

When the alarming news of this swift action reached Bologna it caused
Bentivogli to bethink him at last of Louis XII’s advice, that he should
come to terms with Cesare Borgia, and he realized that the time to do
so could no longer be put off. He made haste, therefore, to agree to the
surrender of Castel Bolognese to the duke, to concede him stipend for
one hundred lances of three men each, and to enter into an undertaking
to lend him every assistance for one year against any power with which
he might be at war, the King of France excepted. In return, Cesare
was to relinquish the captured strongholds and undertake that the Pope
should confirm Bentivogli in his ancient privileges. On April 29 Paolo
Orsini went as Cesare’s plenipotentiary to Bologna to sign this treaty.

It was a crafty arrangement on Bentivogli’s part, for, over and above
the pacification of Cesare and the advantage of an alliance with him, he
gained as a result the alliance also of those famous condottieri Vitelli
and Orsini, both bitter enemies of Florence--the latter intent upon
the restoration of the Medici, the former impatient to avenge upon the
Signory the execution of his brother Paolo. As an instalment, on account
of that debt, Vitelli had already put to death Pietro da Marciano--the
brother of Count Rinuccio da Marciano--when this gentleman fell into his
hands at Medicina.

Two days before the treaty was signed, Bentivogli had seized four
members of the powerful House of Marescotti. This family was related to
the exiled Malvezzi, who were in arms with Cesare, and Bentivogli feared
that communications might be passing between the two to his undoing.
On that suspicion he kept them prisoners for the present, nor did be
release them when the treaty was signed, nor yet when, amid public
rejoicings expressing the relief of the Bolognese, it was published on
May 2.

Hermes Bentivogli--Giovanni’s youngest son--was on guard at the palace
with several other young Bolognese patricians, and he incited these to
go with him to make an end of the traitors who had sought to destroy the
peace by their alleged plottings with Bentivogli’s enemies in Cesare’s
camp. He led his companions to the chamber where the Marescotti were
confined, and there, more or less in cold blood, those four gentlemen
were murdered for no better reason--ostensibly--than because it was
suspected they had been in communication with their relatives in the
Duke of Valentinois’s army. That was the way of the Cinquecento, which
appears to have held few things of less account than human life.

In passing, it may be mentioned that Guicciardini, of course, does his
ludicrous best to make this murder appear--at least indirectly, since
directly it would be impossible--the work of Cesare Borgia.

As for Castel Bolognese itself, Cesare Borgia sent a thousand
demolishers in the following July to raze it to the ground. It is said
to have been the most beautiful castle in the Romagna; but Cesare had
other qualities than beauty to consider in the matter of a stronghold.
Its commanding position rendered it almost in the nature of a gateway
controlling, as we know, the road from Faenza to Imola, and its
occupation by the Bolognese or other enemies in time of disturbance
might be of serious consequence to Cesare. Therefore he ruthlessly
ordered Ramiro de Lorqua to set about its demolition.

The Council of Castel Bolognese made great protest, and implored Ramiro
to stay his hand until they should have communicated with the duke
petitioning for the castle’s preservation; but Ramiro--a hard, stern
man, and Cesare’s most active officer in the Romagna--told them bluntly
that to petition the duke in such a matter would be no better than a
waste of time. He was no more than right; for Cesare, being resolved
upon the expediency of the castle’s destruction, would hardly be likely
to listen to sentimental reasonings for its preservation. Confident of
this, Ramiro without more ado set about the execution of the orders he
had received. He pulled down the walls and filled up the moat, until
nothing remained so much as to show the place where the fortress had
stood.

Another fortress which shared the fate of Castel Bolognese was the
Castle of Sant’ Arcangelo, and similarly would Cesare have disposed
of Solarolo, but that, being of lesser importance and the inhabitants
offering, in their petition for its preservation, to undertake,
themselves, the payment of the Castellan, he allowed it to remain.

Scarcely was the treaty with Bologna signed than Cesare received letters
from the Pope recalling him to Rome, and recommending that he should not
molest the Florentines in his passage--a recommendation which Alexander
deemed very necessary considering the disposition towards Florence
of Vitelli and Orsini. He foresaw that they would employ arguments to
induce Valentinois into an enterprise of which all the cost would be
his, and all the possible profit their own.

The duke would certainly have obeyed and avoided Tuscany, but
that--precisely as the shrewd Pope had feared--Vitelli and Orsini
implored him to march through Florentine territory. Vitelli, indeed,
flung himself on his knees before Cesare in the vehemence of his
supplications, urging that his only motive was to effect the deliverance
from his unjust imprisonment of Cerbone, who had been his executed
brother’s chancellor. Beyond that, he swore he would make no demands
upon Florence, that he would not attempt to mix himself in the affairs
of the Medici, and that he would do no violence to town or country.

Thus implored, Cesare gave way. Probably he remembered the very
circumstances under which Vitelli had joined his banner, and considered
that he could not now oppose a request backed by a promise of so much
moderation; so on May 7 he sent his envoys to the Signory to crave leave
of passage for his troops through Florentine territory.

Whilst still in the Bolognese he was sought out by Giuliano de’Medici,
who begged to be allowed to accompany him, a request which Cesare
instantly refused, as being contrary to that to which he had engaged
himself, and he caused Giuliano to fall behind at Lojano. Nor would he
so much as receive in audience Piero de’Medici, who likewise sought to
join him in Siennese territory, as soon as he perceived what was toward.
Yet, however much the duke protested that he had no intention to make
any change in the State of Florence, there were few who believed him.
Florence, weary and sorely reduced by the long struggle of the Pisan
war, was an easy prey. Conscious of this, great was her anxiety and
alarm at Cesare’s request for passage. The Signory replied granting him
the permission sought, but imposing the condition that he should keep to
the country, refraining from entering any town, nor bring with him into
Florentine territory Vitelli, Orsini, or any other enemy of the existing
government. It happened, however, that when the Florentine ambassador
reached him with this reply the duke was already over the frontier of
Tuscany with the excluded condottieri in his train.

It was incumbent upon him, as a consequence, to vindicate this
high-handed anticipation of the unqualified Florentine permission which
had not arrived. So he declared that he had been offended last year by
Florence in the matter of Forli, and again this year in the matter of
Faenza, both of which cities he charged the Signory with having assisted
to resist him, and he announced that, to justify his intentions so far
as Florence was concerned, he would explain himself at Barberino.

There, on May 12, he gave audience to the ambassador. He declared to him
that he desired a good understanding with Florence, and that she should
offer no hindrance to the conquest of Piombino, upon which he was now
bound; adding that since he placed no trust in the present government,
which already had broken faith with him, he would require some good
security for the treaty to be made. Of reinstating the Medici he said
nothing; but he demanded that some satisfaction be given Vitelli and
Orsini, and, to quicken Florence in coming to a decision, he pushed
forward with his army as far as Forno dei Campi--almost under her very
walls.

The Republic was thrown into consternation. Instantly she got together
what forces she disposed of, and proceeded to fling her artillery into
the Arno, to the end that she should be constrained neither to refuse it
to Cesare upon his demand, nor yet to deliver it.

Macchiavelli censures the Signory’s conduct of this affair as impolitic.
He contends that the duke, being in great strength of arms, and Florence
not armed at all, and therefore in no case to hinder his passage, it
would have been wiser and the Signory would better have saved its face
and dignity, had it accorded Cesare the permission to pass which he
demanded, rather than have been subjected to behold him enforce that
passage by weight of arms. But all that now concerned the Florentines
was to be rid of an army whose presence in their territory was a
constant menace. And to gain that end they were ready to give any
undertakings, just as they were resolved to fulfil none.

Similarly, it chanced that Cesare was in no less a hurry to be gone; for
he had received another letter from the Pope commanding his withdrawal,
and in addition, he was being plagued by Vitelli and Orsini--grown
restive--with entreaties for permission to go into either Florence or
Pistoja, where they did not lack for friends. To resist them Cesare had
need of all the severity and resolution he could command; and he even
went so far as to back his refusal by a threat himself to take up arms
against them if they insisted.

On the 15th, at last, the treaty--which amounted to an offensive and
defensive alliance--was signed. By the terms of this, Florence undertook
to give Cesare a condotta of 300 lances for three years, to be used in
Florentine service, with a stipend of 36,000 ducats yearly. How much
this really meant the duke was to discover two days later, when he
sent to ask the Signory to lend him some cannon for the emprise against
Piombino, and to pay him the first instalment of one quarter of the
yearly stipend before he left Florentine territory. The Signory replied
that, by the terms of the agreement, there was no obligation for
the immediate payment of the instalment, whilst in the matter of the
artillery they put him off from day to day, until Cesare understood that
their only aim in signing the treaty had been the immediate one of being
rid of his army.

The risk Florence incurred in so playing fast-and-loose with such a
man, particularly in a moment of such utter unfitness to resist him, is,
notwithstanding the French protection enjoyed by the Signory, amazing
in its reckless audacity. It was fortunate for Florence that the Pope’s
orders tied the duke’s hands--and it may be that of this the Signory
had knowledge, and that it was upon such knowledge, in conjunction with
France’s protection, that it was presuming. Cesare took the matter in
the spirit of an excellent loser.

Not a hint of his chagrin and resentment did he betray; instead, he set
about furnishing his needs elsewhere, sending Vitelli to Pisa with a
request for artillery, a request to which Pisa very readily responded,
as much on Vitelli’s account as on the duke’s. As for Florence, if
Cesare Borgia could be terribly swift in punishing, he could also be
formidably slow. If he could strike upon the instant where the opening
for a blow appeared, he could also wait for months until the opening
should be found. He waited now.

It would be at about this time that young Loenardo da Vinci sought
employment in Cesare Borgia’s service. Leonardo had been in Milan until
the summer of 1500, when he repaired to Florence in quest of better
fortune; but, finding little or no work to engage him there, he took the
chance of the duke of Valentinois’s passage to offer his service to one
whose liberal patronage of the arts was become proverbial. Cesare
took him into his employ as engineer and architect, leaving him in the
Romagna for the present. Leonardo may have superintended the repairs of
the Castle of Forli, whilst he certainly built the canal from Cesena to
the Porto Cesenatico, before rejoining the duke in Rome.

On May 25 Cesare moved by the way of the valley of Cecina to try
conclusions with Giacomo d’Appiano, Tyrant of Piombino, who with some
Genoese and some Florentine aid, was disposed to offer resistance to the
duke. The first strategic movement in this affair must be the capture
of the Isle of Elba, whence aid might reach Piombino on its promontory
thrusting out into the sea. For this purpose the Pope sent from Civita
Vecchia six galleys, three brigantines, and two galleons under the
command of Lodovico Mosca, captain of the papal navy, whilst Cesare
was further reinforced by some vessels sent him from Pisa together with
eight pieces of cannon. With these he made an easy capture of Elba and
Pianosa. That done, he proceeded to lay siege to Piombino, which, after
making a gallant resistance enduring for two months, was finally pressed
to capitulate.

Long before that happened, however, Cesare had taken his departure.
Being awaited in Rome, he was unable to conduct the siege operations
in person. So he quitted Piombino in June to join the French under
d’Aubigny, bound at last upon the conquest of Naples, and claiming--as
their treaty with him provided--Cesare’s collaboration.




CHAPTER X. THE END OF THE HOUSE OF ARAGON


Cesare arrived in Rome on June 13. There was none of the usual pomp on
this occasion. He made his entrance quietly, attended only by a small
body of men-at-arms, and he was followed, on the morrow, by Yves
d’Allègre with the army--considerably reduced by the detachments which
had been left to garrison the Romagna, and to lay siege to Piombino.

Repairing to his quarters in the Vatican, the duke remained so close
there for the few weeks that he abode in Rome on this occasion(1) that,
from now onward, it became a matter of the utmost difficulty to obtain
audience from him. This may have been due to his habit of turning night
into day and day into night, whether at work or at play, which in fact
was the excuse offered by the Pope to certain envoys sent to Cesare
from Rimini, who were left to cool their heels about the Vatican
ante-chambers for a fortnight without succeeding in obtaining an
audience.


  1 “Mansit in Palatio secrete,” says Burchard.


Cesare Borgia was now Lord of Imola, Forli, Rimini, Faenza and Piombino,
warranting his assumption of the inclusive title of Duke of Romagna
which he had taken immediately after the fall of Faenza.

As his State grew, so naturally did the affairs of government; and,
during those four weeks in Rome, business claimed his attention and an
enormous amount of it was dispatched. Chiefly was he engaged upon the
administration of the affairs of Faenza, which he had so hurriedly
quitted. In this his shrewd policy of generosity is again apparent. As
his representative and lieutenant he appointed a prominent citizen of
Faenza named Pasi, one of the very members of that Council which had
been engaged in defending the city and resisting Cesare. The duke gave
it as his motive for the choice that the man was obviously worthy of
trust in view of his fidelity to Astorre.

And there you have not only the shrewdness of the man who knows how
to choose his servants--which is one of the most important factors of
success--but a breadth of mind very unusual indeed in the Cinquecento.

In addition to the immunity from indemnity provided for by the terms
of the city’s capitulation, Cesare actually went so far as to grant the
peasantry of the valley 2,000 ducats as compensation for damage done in
the war. Further, he supported the intercessions of the Council to the
Pope for the erection of a new convent to replace the one that had been
destroyed in the bombardment. In giving his consent to this--in a brief
dated July 12, 1501--the Pope announces that he does so in response to
the prayers of the Council and of the duke.

Giovanni Vera, Cesare’s erstwhile preceptor--and still affectionately
accorded this title by the duke--was now Archbiship of Salerno, Cardinal
of Santa Balbina, and papal legate in Macerata, and he was chosen by the
Pope to go to Pesaro and Fano for the purpose of receiving the oath of
fealty. With him Cesare sent, as his own personal representative, his
secretary, Agabito Gherardi, who had been in his employ in that capacity
since the duke’s journey into France, and who was to follow his fortunes
to the end.

However the people of Fano may have refrained from offering themselves
to the duke’s dominion when, in the previous October, he had afforded
them by his presence the opportunity of doing so, their conduct
now hardly indicated that the earlier abstention had been born of
reluctance, or else their minds had undergone, in the meanwhile, a
considerable change. For, when they received the brief appointing
him their lord, they celebrated the event by public rejoicings and
illuminations; whilst on July 21 the Council, representing the people,
in the presence of Vera and Gherardi, took oath upon the Gospels of
allegiance to Cesare and his descendants for ever.

In the Consistory of June 25 of that year the French and Spanish
ambassadors came formally to notify the Holy Father of the treaty of
Granada, entered into in the previous November by Louis XII of the one
part, and Ferdinand and Isabella of the other, concerning the conquest
and division of the Kingdom of Naples. The rival claimants had come to
a compromise by virtue of which they were to undertake together the
conquest and thereafter share the spoil--Naples and the Abruzzi going to
France, and Calabria and Puglia to Spain.

Alexander immediately published his Bull declaring Federigo of Naples
deposed for disobedience to the Church, and for having called the Turk
to his aid, either of which charges it would have taxed Alexander’s
ingenuity--vast though it was--convincingly to have established; or,
being established, to censure when all the facts were considered.
The charges were no better than pretexts for the spoliation of the
unfortunate king who, in the matter of his daughter’s alliance with
Cesare, had conceived that he might flout the Borgias with impunity.

On June 28 d’Aubigny left Rome with the French troops, accompanied by
the bulk of the considerable army with which Cesare supported his French
ally, besides 1,000 foot raised by the Pope and a condotta of 100 lances
under Morgante Baglioni. As the troops defiled before the Castle of
Sant’ Angelo they received the apostolic benediction from the Pope, who
stood on the lower ramparts of the fortress.

Cesare himself cannot have followed to join the army until after July
10, for as late as that date there is an edict indited by him against
all who should offer injury to his Romagna officers. At about the same
time that he quitted Rome to ride after the French, Gonsalo de Cordoba
landed a Spanish army in Calabria, and the days of the Aragon dominion
in Naples were numbered.

King Federigo prepared to face the foe. Whilst himself remaining in
Naples with Prospero Colonna, he sent the bulk of his forces to Capua
under Fabrizio Colonna and Count Rinuccio Marciano--the brother of that
Marciano whom Vitelli had put to death in Tuscany.

Ravaging the territory and forcing its strongholds as they came, the
allies were under the walls of Capua within three weeks of setting out;
but on July 17, when within two miles of the town, they were met by six
hundred lances under Colonna, who attempted to dispute their passage.
It was Cesare Borgia himself who led the charge against them. Jean
d’Auton--in his Chronicles of Louis XII--speaks in warm terms of the
duke’s valour and of the manner in which, by words and by example, he
encouraged his followers to charge the Colonna forces, with such good
effect that they utterly routed the Neapolitans, and drove them headlong
back to the shelter of Capua’s walls.

The allies brought up their cannon, and opened the bombardment. This
lasted incessantly from July 17--which was a Monday--until the following
Friday, when two bastions were so shattered that the French were able
to gain possession of them, putting to the sword some two hundred
Neapolitan soldiers who had been left to defend those outworks. Thence
admittance to the town itself was gained four days later--on the
25th--through a breach, according to some, through the treacherous
opening of a gate, according to others. Through gate or breach the
besiegers stormed to meet a fierce resistance, and the most horrible
carnage followed. Back and back they drove the defenders, fighting their
way through the streets and sparing none in the awful fury that beset
them. The defence was shattered; resistance was at an end; yet still
the bloody work went on. The combat had imperceptibly merged into a
slaughter; demoralized and panic-stricken in the reaction from their
late gallantry, the soldiers of Naples flung down their weapons and
fled, shrieking for quarter. But none was given. The invader butchered
every human thing he came upon, indiscriminant of age or sex, and the
blood of some four thousand victims flowed through the streets of Capua
like water after a thundershower. That sack of Capua is one of the most
horrid pages in the horrid history of sacks. You will find full details
in d’Auton’s chronicle, if you have a mind for such horrors. There is
a brief summary of the event in Burchard’s diary under date of July 26,
1501, which runs as follows:

“At about the fourth hour last night the Pope had news of the capture of
Capua by the Duke of Valentinois. The capture was due to the treason of
one Fabrizio--a citizen of Capua--who secretly introduced the besiegers
and was the first to be killed by them. After him the same fate was
met by some three thousand foot and some two hundred horse-soldiers, by
citizens, priests, conventuals of both sexes, even in the very churches
and monasteries, and all the women taken were given in prey to the
greatest cruelty. The total number of the slain is estimated at four
thousand.”

D’Auton, too, bears witness to this wholesale violation of the women,
“which,” he adds, “is the very worst of all war’s excesses.” He informs
us further that “the foot-soldiers of the Duke of Valentinois acquitted
themselves so well in this, that thirty of the most beautiful women went
captive to Rome,” a figure which is confirmed by Burchard.

“What an opportunity was not this for Guicciardini! The foot-soldiers
of the Duke of Valentinois acquitted themselves so well in this, that
thirty of the most beautiful women went captive to Rome.”

Under his nimble, malicious, unscrupulous pen that statement is
re-edited until not thirty but forty is the number of the captured
victims taken to Rome, and not Valentinois’s foot, but Valentinois
himself the ravisher of the entire forty! But hear the elegant
Florentine’s own words:

“It was spread about [divulgossi]” he writes, “that, besides other
wickednesses worthy of eternal infamy, many women who had taken refuge
in a tower, and thus escaped the first fury of the assault, were found
by the Duke of Valentinois, who, with the title of King’s Lieutenant,
followed the army with no more people than his gentlemen and his
guards.(1) He desired to see them all, and, after carefully examining
them [consideratele diligentemente] he retained forty of the most
beautiful.”


  1  This, incidentally, is another misstatement.  Valentinois had with
him, besides the thousand foot levied by the Pope and the hundred lances
under Morgante Baglioni, an army some thousands strong led for him by
Yves d’Allègre.


Guicciardini’s aim is, of course, to shock you; he considers it
necessary to maintain in Cesare the character of ravenous wolf which he
had bestowed upon him. The marvel is not that Guicciardini should have
penned that utterly ludicrous accusation, but that more or less serious
subsequent writers--and writers of our own time even--instead of being
moved to contemptuous laughter at the wild foolishness of the story,
instead of seeking in the available records the germ of true fact from
which it was sprung, should sedulously and unblushingly have carried
forward its dissemination.

Yriarte not only repeats the tale with all the sober calm of one utterly
destitute of a sense of the ridiculous, but he improves upon it by a
delicious touch, worthy of Guicciardini himself, when he assures us that
Cesare took these forty women for his harem!

It is a nice instance of how Borgia history has grown, and is still
growing.

If verisimilitude itself does not repudiate Guicciardini’s story, there
are the Capuan chronicles to do it--particularly that of Pellegrini, who
witnessed the pillage. In those chronicles from which Guicciardini drew
the matter for this portion of his history of Italy, you will seek in
vain for any confirmation of that fiction with which the Florentine
historian--he who had a pen of gold for his friends and one of iron for
his foes--thought well to adorn his facts.

If the grotesque in history-building is of interest to you, you may turn
the pages of the Storia Civile di Capua, by F. Granata, published in
1752. This writer has carefully followed the Capuan chroniclers in their
relation of the siege; but when it comes to these details of the forty
ladies in the tower (in which those chroniclers fail him) he actually
gives Guicciardini as his authority, setting a fashion which has not
lacked for unconscious, and no less egregious, imitators.

To return from the criticism of fiction to the consideration of fact,
Fabrizio Colonna and Rinuccio da Marciano were among the many captains
of the Neapolitan army that were taken prisoners. Rinuccio was the
head of the Florentine faction which had caused the execution of Paolo
Vitelli, and Giovio has it that Vitellozzo Vitelli, who had already
taken an instalment of vengeance by putting Pietro da Marciano to death
in Tuscany, caused Rinuccio’s wounds to be poisoned, so that he died two
days later.

The fall of Capua was very shortly followed by that of Gaeta, and,
within a week, by that of Naples, which was entered on August 3 by
Cesare Borgia in command of the vanguard of the army. “He who had come
as a cardinal to crown King Federigo, came now as a condottiero to
depose him.”

Federigo offered to surrender to the French all the fortresses that
still held for him, on condition that he should have safe-conduct to
Ischia and liberty to remain there for six months. This was agreed, and
Federigo was further permitted to take with him his moveable possessions
and his artillery, which latter, however, he afterwards sold to the
Pope.

Thus the last member of the House of Aragon to sit upon the throne of
Naples took his departure, accompanied by the few faithful ones who
loved him well enough to follow him into exile; amongst these was that
poet Sanazzaro, who, to avenge the wrong suffered by the master whom he
loved, was to launch his terrible epigrams against Alexander, Cesare,
and Lucrezia, and by means of those surviving verses enable the enemies
of the House of Borgia to vilify their memories through centuries to
follow.

Federigo’s captains Prospero and Fabrizio Colonna, upon being ransomed,
took their swords to Gonzalo de Cordoba, hoping for the day when they
might avenge upon the Borgia the ruin which, even in this Neapolitan
conquest they attributed to the Pope and his son.

And here, so far as Naples is concerned, closes the history of the House
of Aragon. In Italy it was extinct; and it was to become so, too, in
Spain within the century.




CHAPTER XI. THE LETTER TO SILVIO SAVELLI


By September 15 Cesare was back in Rome, the richer in renown, in French
favour, and in a matter of 40,000 ducats, which is estimated as the
total of the sums paid him by France and Spain for the support which his
condotta had afforded them.

During his absence two important events had taken place: the betrothal
of his widowed sister Lucrezia to Alfonso d’Este, son of Duke Ercole of
Ferrara, and the publication of the Bull of excommunication (of August
20) against the Savelli and Colonna in consideration of all that they
had wrought against the Holy See from the pontificate of Sixtus IV
to the present time. By virtue of that Bull the Pope ordered the
confiscation of the possessions of the excommunicated families, whilst
the Caetani suffered in like manner at the same time.

These possessions were divided into two parts, and by the Bull of
September 17 they were bestowed, one upon Lucrezia’s boy Roderigo, and
with them the title of Duke of Sermoneta; the other to a child, Giovanni
Borgia (who is made something of a mystery) with the title of Duke of
Nepi and Palestrina.

The entire proceeding is undoubtedly open to grave censure, since the
distribution of the confiscated fiefs subjects to impeachment the purity
of the motives that prompted this confiscation. It was on the part
of Alexander a gross act of nepotism, a gross abuse of his pontifical
authority; but there is, at least, this to be said, that in perpetrating
it he was doing no more than in his epoch it was customary for Popes to
do. Alexander, it may be said again in this connection, was part of a
corrupt system, not the corrupter of a pure one.

Touching the boy Giovanni Borgia, the mystery attaching to him concerns
his parentage, and arises out of the singular circumstance that there
are two papal Bulls, both dated September 1, 1501, in each of which a
different father is assigned to him, the second appearing to supplement
and correct the first.

The first of these Bulls, addressed to “Dilecto Filio Nobili Joanni de
Borgia, Infanti Romano,” declares him to be a child of three years of
age, the illegitimate son of Cesare Borgia, unmarried (as Cesare was at
the time of the child’s birth) and of a woman (unnamed, as was usual in
such cases) also unmarried.

The second declares him, instead, to be the son of Alexander, and runs:
“Since you bear this deficiency not from the said duke, but from us and
the said woman, which we for good reasons did not desire to express in
the preceding writing.”

That the second Bull undoubtedly contains the truth of the matter is the
only possible explanation of its existence, and the “good reasons”
 that existed for the first one are, no doubt, as Gregorovius says, that
officially and by canon law the Pope was inhibited from recognizing
children. (His other children, be it remembered, were recognized by him
during his cardinalate and before his elevation to St. Peter’s throne.)
Hence the attempt by these Bulls to circumvent the law to the end that
the child should not suffer in the matter of his inheritance.

Burchard, under date of November 3 of that year, freely mentions this
Giovanni Borgia as the son of the Pope and “a certain Roman woman”
 (“quadam Romana”).

On the same date borne by those two Bulls a third one was issued
confirming the House of Este perpetually in the dominion of Ferrara and
its other Romagna possessions, and reducing by one-third the tribute of
4,000 ducats yearly imposed upon that family by Sixtus IV; and it was
explicitly added that these concessions were made for Lucrezia and her
descendants.

Three days later a courier from Duke Ercole brought the news that the
marriage contract had been signed in Ferrara, and it was in salvoes
of artillery that day and illuminations after dark that the Pope gave
expression to the satisfaction afforded him by the prospect of his
daughter’s entering one of the most ancient families and ascending one
of the noblest thrones in Italy.

It would be idle to pretend that the marriage was other than one of
convenience. Love between the contracting parties played no part in this
transaction, and Ercole d’Este was urged to it under suasion of the
King of France, out of fear of the growing might of Cesare, and out of
consideration for the splendid dowry which he demanded and in the matter
of which he displayed a spirit which Alexander contemptuously described
as that of a tradesman. Nor would Ercole send the escort to Rome for the
bride until he had in his hands the Bull of investiture in the fiefs
of Cento and Pieve, which, with 100,000 ducats, constituted Lucrezia’s
dowry. Altogether a most unromantic affair.

The following letter from the Ferrarese ambassador in Rome, dated
September 23, is of interest in connection with this marriage:


“MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE AND MOST NOBLE LORD,

“His Holiness the Pope, taking into consideration such matters as
might occasion displeasure not only to your Excellency and to the Most
Illustrious Don Alfonso, but also to the duchess and even to himself,
has charged us to write to your Excellency to urge you so to contrive
that the Lord Giovanni of Pesaro, who, as your Excellency is aware,
is in Mantua, shall not be in Ferrara at the time of the nuptials.
Notwithstanding that his divorce from the said duchess is absolutely
legitimate and accomplished in accordance with pure truth, as is
publicly known not only from the proceedings of the trial but also from
the free confession of the said Don Giovanni, it is possible that he may
still be actuated by some lingering ill-will; wherefore, should he
find himself in any place where the said lady might be seen by him, her
Excellency might, in consequence, be compelled to withdraw into privacy,
to be spared the memory of the past. Wherefore, his Holiness exhorts
your Excellency to provide with your habitual prudence against such a
contingency.”


Meanwhile, the festivities wherewith her betrothal was celebrated went
merrily amain, and into the midst of them, to bear his share, came
Cesare crowned with fresh laurels gained in the Neapolitan war. No
merry-makings ever held under the auspices of Pope Alexander VI at the
Vatican had escaped being the source of much scandalous rumour, but none
had been so scandalous and disgraceful as the stories put abroad on
this occasion. These found a fitting climax in that anonymous Letter to
Silvio Savelli, published in Germany--which at the time, be it borne in
mind, was extremely inimical to the Pope, viewing with jaundiced eyes
his ever-growing power, and stirred perhaps to this unspeakable burst of
venomous fury by the noble Este alliance, so valuable to Cesare in that
it gave him a friend upon the frontier of his Romagna possessions.

The appalling publication, which is given in full in Burchard, was
fictitiously dated from Gonzola de Cordoba’s Spanish camp at Taranto
on November 25. A copy of this anonymous pamphlet, which is the most
violent attack on the Borgias ever penned, perhaps the most terrible
indictment against any family ever published--a pamphlet which
Gregorovius does not hesitate to call “an authentic document of the
state of Rome under the Borgias”--fell into the hands of the Cardinal of
Modena, who on the last day of the year carried it to the Pope.

Before considering that letter it is well to turn to the entries in
Burchard’s diary under the dates of October 27 and November 11 of that
same year. You will find two statements which have no parallel in the
rest of the entire diary, few parallels in any sober narrative of facts.
The sane mind must recoil and close up before them, so impossible does
it seem to accept them.

The first of these is the relation of the supper given by Cesare in the
Vatican to fifty courtesans--a relation which possibly suggested to
the debauched Regent d’Orléans his fêtes d’Adam, a couple of centuries
later.

Burchard tells us how, for the amusement of Cesare, of the Pope, and of
Lucrezia, these fifty courtesans were set to dance after supper with
the servants and some others who were present, dressed at first and
afterwards not so. He draws for us a picture of those fifty women on all
fours, in all their plastic nudity, striving for the chestnuts flung to
them in that chamber of the Apostolic Palace by Christ’s Vicar--an old
man of seventy--by his son and his daughter. Nor is that all by
any means. There is much worse to follow--matter which we dare not
translate, but must leave more or less discreetly veiled in the decadent
Latin of the Caerimoniarius:

“Tandem exposita dona ultima, diploides de serico, paria caligarum,
bireta ed alia pro illis qui pluries dictas meretrices carnaliter
agnoscerent; que fuerunt ibidem in aula publice carnaliter tractate
arbitrio presentium, dona distributa victoribus.”

Such is the monstrous story!

Gregorovius, in his defence of Lucrezia Borgia, refuses to believe
that she was present; but he is reluctant to carry his incredulity any
further.

“Some orgy of that nature,” he writes, “or something similar may very
well have taken place. But who will believe that Lucrezia, already the
legal wife of Alfonso d’Este and on the eve of departure for Ferrara,
can have been present as a smiling spectator?”

Quite so. Gregorovius puts his finger at once upon one of the obvious
weaknesses of the story. But where there is one falsehood there are
usually others; and if we are not to believe that Lucrezia was present,
why should we be asked to believe in the presence of the Pope? If
Burchard was mistaken in the one, why might he not be mistaken in the
other? But the question is not really one of whom you will believe to
have been present at that unspeakable performance, but rather whether
you can possibly bring yourself to believe that it ever took place as it
is related in the Diarium.

Gregorovius says, you will observe, “Some orgy of that nature, or
something similar, may very well have taken place.” We could credit
that Cesare held “some orgy of that nature.” He had apartments in the
Vatican, and if it shock you to think that it pleased him, with his
gentlemen, to make merry by feasting a parcel of Roman harlots, you
are--if you value justice--to be shocked at the times rather than
the man. The sense of humour of the Cinquecento was primitive, and
in primitive humour prurience plays ever an important part, as is
discernible in the literature and comedies of that age. If you would
appreciate this to the full, consider Burchard’s details of the masks
worn at Carnival by some merry-makers (“Venerunt ad plateam St. Petri
larvati...habentes nasos lungos et grossos in forma priaporum”) and you
must realize that in Cesare’s conduct in this matter there would have
been nothing so very abnormal considered from the point of view of
the Cinquecento, even though it were to approach the details given by
Burchard.

But even so, you will hesitate before you accept the story of that
saturnalia in its entirety, and before you believe that an old man of
seventy, a priest and Christ’s Vicar, was present with Cesare and his
friends. Burchard does not say that he himself was a witness of what he
relates. But the matter shall presently be further considered.

Meanwhile, let us pass to the second of these entries in the diary, and
(a not unimportant detail) on the very next page of it, under the date
of November 11. In this it is related that certain peasants entered Rome
by the Viridarian Gate, driving two mares laden with timber; that, in
crossing the Square of St. Peter’s, some servants of the Pope’s ran
out and cut the cords so that the timber was loosened and the beasts
relieved of their burden; they were then led to a courtyard within the
precincts of the palace, where four stallions were loosed upon them.
“Ascenderunt equas et coierunt cum eis et eas graviter pistarunt et
leserunt,” whilst the Pope at a window above the doorway of the Palace,
with Madonna Lucrezia, witnessed with great laughter and delight, the
show which it is suggested was specially provided for their amusement.

The improbabilities of the saturnalia of the fifty courtesans pale
before the almost utter impossibility of this narrative. To render it
possible in the case of two chance animals as these must have been
under the related circumstances, a biological coincidence is demanded so
utterly unlikely and incredible that we are at once moved to treat the
story with scorn, and reject it as a fiction. Yet not one of those many
writers who have retailed that story from Burchard’s Diarium as a truth
incontestable as the Gospels, has paused to consider this--so blinded
are we when it is a case of accepting that which we desire to accept.

The narrative, too, is oddly--suspiciously--circumstantial, even to the
unimportant detail of the particular gate by which the peasants entered
Rome. In a piece of fiction it is perfectly natural to fill in such
minor details to the end that the picture shall be complete; but they
are rare in narratives of fact. And one may be permitted to wonder how
came the Master of Ceremonies at the Vatican to know the precise gate by
which those peasants came. It is not--as we have seen--the only occasion
on which an excess of detail in the matter of a gate renders suspicious
the accuracy of a story of Burchard’s.

Both these affairs find a prominent place in the Letter to Silvio
Savelli. Indeed Gregorovius cites the pamphlet as one of the authorities
to support Burchard, and to show that what Burchard wrote must have been
true; the other authority he cites is Matarazzo, disregarding not only
the remarkable discrepancy between Matarazzo’s relation and that of
Burchard, but the circumstance that the matter of that pamphlet became
current throughout Italy, and that it was thus--and only thus--that
Matarazzo came to hear of the scandal.(1)


  1  The frequency with which the German historian cites Matarazzo as an
authority is oddly inconsistent, considering that when he finds
Matarazzo’s story of the murder of the Duke of Gandia upsetting the
theory which Gregorovius himself prefers, by fastening the guilt
upon Giovanni Sforza, he devotes some space to showing--with perfect
justice--that Matarazzo is no authority at all.


The Letter to Silvio Savelli opens by congratulating him upon his escape
from the hands of the robbers who had stripped him of his possessions,
and upon his having found a refuge in Germany at the Emperor’s Court.
It proceeds to marvel that thence he should have written letters to
the Pope begging for justice and reinstatement, his wonder being at the
credulity of Savelli in supposing that the Pope--“betrayer of the human
race, who has spent his life in betrayals”--will ever do any just thing
other than through fear or force. Rather does the writer suggest the
adoption of other methods; he urges Savelli to make known to the Emperor
and all princes of the Empire the atrocious crimes of that “infamous
wild beasts” which have been perpetrated in contempt of God and
religion. He then proceeds to relate these crimes. Alexander, Cesare,
and Lucrezia, among others of the Borgia family, bear their share of the
formidable accusations. Of the Pope are related perfidies, simonies, and
ravishments; against Lucrezia are urged the matter of her incest, the
supper of the fifty courtesans, and the scene of the stallions; against
Cesare there are the death of Biselli, the murder of Pedro Caldes, the
ruin of the Romagna, whence he has driven out the legitimate lords, and
the universal fear in which he is held.

It is, indeed, a compendium of all the stories which from Milan, Naples,
and Venice--the three States where the Borgias for obvious reasons are
best hated--have been disseminated by their enemies, and a more violent
work of rage and political malice was never uttered. This malice becomes
particularly evident in the indictment of Cesare for the ruin of the
Romagna. Whatever Cesare might have done, he had not done that--his
bitterest detractor could not (without deliberately lying) say that the
Romagna was other than benefiting under his sway. That is not a matter
of opinion, not a matter of inference or deduction. It is a matter of
absolute fact and irrefutable knowledge.

To return now to the two entries in Burchard’s Diarium when considered
in conjunction with the Letter to Silvio Savelli (which Burchard quotes
in full), it is remarkable that nowhere else in the discovered writings
of absolute contemporaries is there the least mention of either of those
scandalous stories. The affair of the stallions, for instance, must have
been of a fairly public character. Scandal-mongering Rome could not have
resisted the dissemination of it. Yet, apart from the Savelli letter, no
single record of it has been discovered to confirm Burchard.

At this time, moreover, it is to be remembered, Lucrezia’s betrothal to
Alfonso d’Este was already accomplished; preparations for her departure
and wedding were going forward, and the escort from Ferrara was daily
expected in Rome. If Lucrezia had never been circumspect, she must be
circumspect now, when the eyes of Italy were upon her, and there
were not wanting those who would have been glad to have thwarted the
marriage--the object, no doubt, of the pamphlet we are considering. Yet
all that was written to Ferrara was in praise of her--in praise of
her goodness and her modesty, her prudence, her devoutness, and her
discretion, as presently we shall see.

If from this we are to conclude--as seems reasonable--that there was no
gossip current in Rome of the courtesans’ supper and the rest, we may
assume that there was no knowledge in Rome of such matters; for with
knowledge silence would have been impossible. So much being admitted,
it becomes a matter of determining whether the author of the Letter to
Silvio Savelli had access to the diary of Burchard for his facts, or
whether Burchard availed himself of the Letter to Silvio Savelli to
compile these particular entries. The former alternative being out of
the question, there but remains the latter--unless it is possible that
the said entries have crept into the copies of the “Diarium” and are not
present in the original, which is not available.

This theory of interpolation, tentatively put forward, is justified, to
some extent at least, by the following remarkable circumstances: that
two such entries, having--as we have said--absolutely no parallel in the
whole of the Diarium, should follow almost immediately the one upon the
other; and that Burchard should relate them coldly, without reproof or
comment of any kind--a most unnatural reticence in a writer who loosed
his indignation one Easter-tide to see Lucrezia and her ladies occupying
the choir of St. Peter’s, where women never sat.

The Pope read the anonymous libel when it was submitted to him by the
Cardinal of Modena--read it, laughed it to scorn, and treated it with
the contempt which it deserved, yet a contempt which, considering its
nature, asks a certain greatness of mind.

If the libel was true it is almost incredible that he should not have
sought to avenge it, for an ugly truth is notoriously hurtful and
provocative of resentment, far more so than is a lie. Cesare, however,
was not of a temper quite as long-suffering as his father. Enough and
more of libels and lampoons had he endured already. Early in December
a masked man--a Neapolitan of the name of Mancioni--who had been going
through Rome uttering infamies against him was seized and so dealt with
that he should in future neither speak nor write anything in any man’s
defamation. His tongue was cut out and his right hand chopped off, and
the hand, with the tongue attached to its little finger, was hung in
sight of all and as a warning from a window of the Church of Holy Cross.

And towards the end of January, whilst Cesare’s fury at that pamphlet
out of Germany was still unappeased, a Venetian was seized in Rome for
having translated from Greek into Latin another libel against the Pope
and his son. The Venetian ambassador intervened to save the wretch, but
his intervention was vain. The libeller was executed that same night.

Costabili--the Ferrara ambassador--who spoke to the Pope on the matter
of this execution, reported that his Holiness said that more than once
had he told the duke that Rome was a free city, in which any one was at
liberty to say or write what he pleased; that of himself, too, much evil
was being spoken, but that he paid no heed to it.

“The duke,” proceeded Alexander, “is good-natured, but he has not
yet learnt to bear insult.” And he added that, irritated, Cesare had
protested that, “However much Rome may be in the habit of speaking and
writing, for my own part I shall give these libellers a lesson in good
manners.”

The lesson he intended was not one they should live to practise.




CHAPTER XII. LUCREZIA’S THIRD MARRIAGE


At about the same time that Burchard was making in his Diarium those
entries which reflect so grossly upon the Pope and Lucrezia, Gianluca
Pozzi, the ambassador of Ferrara at the Vatican, was writing the
following letter to his master, Duke Ercole, Lucrezia’s father-in-law
elect:

“This evening, after supper, I accompanied Messer Gerardo Saraceni to
visit the Most Illustrious Madonna Lucrezia in your Excellency’s name
and that of the Most Illustrious Don Alfonso. We entered into a long
discussion touching various matters. In truth she showed herself a
prudent, discreet, and good-natured lady.”(1)


  1  See Gregorovius’s Lucrezia Borgia.


The handsome, athletic Cardinal Ippolito d’Este, with his brothers
Sigismondo and Fernando, had arrived in Rome on December 23 with the
imposing escort that was to accompany their brother Alfonso’s bride back
to Ferrara.

Cesare was prominent in the welcome given them. Never, perhaps, had he
made greater display than on the occasion of his riding out to meet the
Ferrarese, accompanied by no fewer than 4,000 men-at-arms, and mounted
on a great war-horse whose trappings of cloth of gold and jewels were
estimated at 10,000 ducats.

The days and nights that followed, until Lucrezia’s departure a
fortnight later, were days and nights of gaiety and merry-making at the
Vatican; in banquets, dancing, the performance of comedies, masques,
etc., was the time made to pass as agreeably as might be for the guests
from Ferrara, and in all Cesare was conspicuous, either for the grace
and zest with which he nightly danced, or for the skill and daring
which he displayed in the daily joustings and entertainments, and more
particularly in the bull-fight that was included in them.

Lucrezia was splendidly endowed, to the extent, it was estimated,
of 300,000 ducats, made up by 100,000 ducats in gold, her jewels and
equipage, and the value of the Castles of Pieve and Cento. Her departure
from Rome took place on January 6, and so she passes out of this
chronicle, which, after all, has been little concerned with her.

Of the honour done her everywhere on that journey to Ferrara, the
details are given elsewhere, particularly in the book devoted to her
history and rehabilitation by Herr Gregorovius. After all, the real
Lucrezia Borgia fills a comparatively small place in the actual history
of her house. It is in the fictions concerning her family that she is
given such unenviable importance, and presented as a Maenad, a poisoner,
and worse. In reality she appears to us, during her life in Rome, as a
rather childish, naïve, and entirely passive figure, important only in
so far as she found employment at her father’s or brother’s hands for
the advancement of their high ambitions and unscrupulous aims.

In the popular imagination she lives chiefly as a terrific poisoner, an
appalling artist in venenation. It is remarkable that this should be the
case, for not even the scandal of her day so much as suggests that
she was connected--directly or even indirectly--with a single case of
poisoning. No doubt that popular conception owes its being entirely to
Victor Hugo’s drama.

Away from Rome and settled in Ferrara from the twenty-second year of her
age, to become anon its duchess, her life is well known and admits of
no argument. The archives of the State she ruled show her devout,
god-fearing, and beloved in life, and deeply mourned in death by a
sorrowing husband and a sorrowing people. Not a breath of scandal
touches her from the moment that she quits the scandalous environment of
the Papal Court.

Cesare continued at the Vatican after her departure. His duchess was to
have come to Rome in that Easter of 1502, and it had been disposed that
the ladies and gentlemen who had gone as escort of honour with Lucrezia
should proceed--after leaving her in Ferrara--to Lombardy, to do the
like office by Charlotte d’Albret, and, meeting her there, accompany her
to Rome. She was coming with her brother, the Cardinal Amanieu d’Albret,
and bringing with her Cesare’s little daughter, Louise de Valentinois,
now two years of age. But the duchess fell ill at the last moment, and
was unable to undertake the journey, of which Cardinal d’Albret brought
word to Rome, where he arrived on February 7.

Ten days later Cesare set out with his father for Piombino, for which
purpose six galleons awaited them at Civita Vecchia under the command
of Lodovico Mosca, the captain of the Pontifical navy. On these the
Pope and his son embarked, upon their visit to the scene of the latest
addition to Cesare’s ever-growing dominions.

They landed at Piombino on February 21, and made a solemn entrance into
the town, the Pope carried in state in the Sedia Gestatoria, under
a canopy, attended by six cardinals and six singers from the Sixtine
Chapel, whilst Cesare was accompanied by a number of his gentlemen.

They abode four days in Piombino, whence they crossed to Elba, for the
purpose of disposing for the erection there of two fortresses--a matter
most probably entrusted to Leonardo da Vinci, who continued in the ducal
train as architect and engineer.

On March 1 they took ship to return to Rome; but they were detained
at sea for five days by a tempest which seems to have imperilled
the vessels. The Pope was on board the captain’s galley with his
cardinals-in-waiting and servants, and when these were reduced by
the storm and the imminent danger to a state of abject terror, the
Pope--this old man of seventy-one--sat calm and intrepid, occasionally
crossing himself and pronouncing the name of Jesus, and encouraging the
very sailors by his example as much as by his words.

In Piombino Cesare had left Michele da Corella as his governor. This
Corella was a captain of foot, a soldier of fortune, who from the
earliest days of Cesare’s military career had followed the duke’s
fortunes--the very man who is alleged to have strangled Alfonso of
Aragon by Cesare’s orders. He is generally assumed to have been a
Spaniard, and is commonly designated as Michelotto, or Don Miguel; but
Alvisi supposes him, from his name of Corella, to have been a Venetian,
and he tells us that by his fidelity to Cesare and the implicit
manner in which he executed his master’s orders, he earned--as is
notorious--considerable hatred. He has been spoken of, indeed, as the
âme damnée of Cesare Borgia; but that is a purely romantic touch akin to
that which gave the same designation to Richelieu’s Father Joseph.

The Romagna was at this time administered for Cesare Borgia by Ramiro
de Lorqua, who, since the previous November, had held the office of
Governor in addition to that of Lieutenant-General in which he had
been earlier invested. His power in the Romagna was now absolute, all
Cesare’s other officers, even the very treasurers, being subject to him.

He was a man of some fifty years of age, violent and domineering, feared
by all, and the dispenser of a harsh justice which had at least the
merit of an impartiality that took no account of persons.

Bernardi gives us an instance of the man’s stern, uncompromising,
pitiless nature. On January 29, 1502, two malefactors were hanged in
Faenza. The rope suspending one of them broke while the fellow was
alive, and the crowd into which he tumbled begged for mercy for him at
first, then, swayed by pity, the people resolved to save him in spite
of the officers of justice who demanded his surrender. Preventing
his recapture, the mob bore him off to the Church of the Cerviti. The
Lieutenant of Faenza came to demand the person of the criminal, but he
was denied by the Prior, who claimed to extend him sanctuary.

But the days of sanctuary were overpast, and the laws of the time held
that any church or consecrated place in which a criminal took refuge
should ipso facto be deemed unconsecrated by his pursuers, and further,
that any ecclesiastic sheltering such a fugitive did so under peril of
excommunication from his bishop. This law Ramiro accounted it his duty
to enforce when news was carried to him at Imola of what had happened.

He came at once to Faenza, and, compelling the Prior by actual force
to yield up the man he sheltered, he hanged the wretch, for the second
time, from a window of the Palace of the Podestá. At the same time he
seized several who were alleged to have been ringleaders of the fellow’s
rescue from the hands of the officers, and made the citizens of Faenza
compromise for the lives of these by payment of a fine of 10,000 ducats,
giving them a month in which to find the money.

The Faentini sent their envoys to Ramiro to intercede with him; but that
harsh man refused so much as to grant them audience--which was well for
them, for, as a consequence, the Council sent ambassadors to Rome to
submit the case to the Pope’s Holiness and to the Duke of Valentinois,
together with a petition that the fine should be remitted--a petition
that was readily granted.

Harsh as it was, however, Ramiro’s rule was salutary, its very harshness
necessary in a province where lawlessness had become a habit through
generations of misgovernment. Under Cesare’s dominion the change already
was remarkable. During his two years of administration--to count from
its commencement--the Romagna was already converted from a seething
hell of dissensions, disorders and crimes--chartered brigandage and
murder--into a powerful State, law-abiding and orderly, where human life
and personal possessions found zealous protection, and where those who
disturbed the peace met with a justice that was never tempered by mercy.

A strong hand was wanted there, and the duke, supreme judge of the tools
to do his work, ruled the Romagna and crushed its turbulence by means of
the iron hand of Ramiro de Lorqua.

It was also under the patronage of Valentinois that the first
printing-press of any consequence came to be established in Italy. This
was set up at Fano by Girolamo Sancino in 1501, and began the issue of
worthy books. One of the earliest works undertaken (says Alvisi) was the
printing of the Statutes of Fano for the first time in January of 1502.
And it was approved by the Council, civil and ecclesiastical, that
Sancino should undertake this printing of the Statutes “Ad perpetuam
memoriam Illmi. Domini nostri Ducis.”




CHAPTER XIII. URBINO AND CAMERINO


It may well be that it was about this time that Cesare, his ambition
spreading--as men’s ambition will spread with being gratified--was
considering the consolidation of Central Italy into a kingdom of which
he would assume the crown.

It was a scheme in the contemplation of which he was encouraged by
Vitellozzo Vitelli, who no doubt conceived that in its fulfilment the
ruin of Florence would be entailed--which was all that Vitelli cared
about. What to Cesare would have been no more than the means, would have
been to Vitelli a most satisfactory end.

Before, however, going so far there was still the work of subjugating
the States of the Church to be completed, as this could not be so
considered until Urbino, Camerino, and Sinigaglia should be under the
Borgia dominion.

For this, no doubt, Cesare was disposing during that Easter of 1502
which he spent in Rome, and during which there were heard from the south
the first rumblings of the storm of war whereof ill-starred Naples was
once more--for the third time within ten years--to be the scene. The
allies of yesterday were become the antagonists of to-day, and France
and Spain were ready to fly at each other’s throats over the division of
the spoil, as a consequence of certain ill-definitions of the matter
in the treaty of Granada. The French Viceroy, Louis d’Armagnac, and the
great Spanish Captain, Gonzalo de Cordoba, were on the point of coming
to blows.

Nor was the menace of disturbance confined to Naples. In Florence, too,
the torch of war was alight, and if--as he afterwards swore--Cesare
Borgia had no hand in kindling it, it is at least undeniable that he
complacently watched the conflagration, conscious that it would make
for the fulfilment of his own ends. Besides, there was still that little
matter of the treaty of Forno dei Campi between Cesare and Florence,
a treaty which the Signory had never fulfilled and never intended to
fulfil, and Cesare was not the man to forget how he had been fooled.

But for the protection of France which she enjoyed, Florence must long
ere this have been called to account by him, and crushed out of
all shape under the weight of his mailed hand. As it was she was to
experience the hurt of his passive resentment, and find this rather more
than she could bear.

Vitellozzo Vitelli, that vindictive firebrand whose original motive in
allying himself with Cesare had been the hope that the duke might help
him to make Florence expiate his brother’s blood, finding that Cesare
withheld the expected help, was bent at last upon dealing, himself,
with Florence. He entered into plots with the exiled Piero de’Medici
to restore the latter to his dominion; he set intrigues afoot in Pisa,
where his influence was vast, and in Siena, whose tyrant, Pandolfo
Petrucci, was ready and willing to forward his designs, and generally
made so disturbing a stir in Tuscany that the Signory became gravely
alarmed.

Cesare certainly took no apparent active part in the affair. He lent
Vitelli no aid; but neither did he attempt to restrain him or any other
of the Borgia condottieri who were allied with him.

The unrest, spreading and growing sullenly a while, burst suddenly forth
in Arezzo on June 4, when the cries of “Medici!” and “Marzocco!” rang
in its streets, to announce that the city was in arms against the
government of Florence. Arezzo followed this up by summoning Vitelli,
and the waiting, watchful condottiero was quick to answer the desired
call. He entered the town three days later at the head of a small body
of foot, and was very shortly afterwards followed by his brother
Giulio Vitelli, Bishop of Città di Castello, with the artillery, and,
presently, by Gianpaolo Baglioni with a condotta of horse.

A few days later Vitelli was in possession of all the strongholds of
the Val di Chiana, and panic-stricken Florence was speeding ambassadors
hot-foot to Rome to lay her complaints of these matters before the Pope.

Alexander was able to reply that, far from supporting the belligerents,
he had launched a Bull against them, provoked by the poisoning of the
Bishop de’Pazzi.

Cesare looked on with the inscrutable calm for which Macchiavelli was
presently to find him so remarkable. Aware as he was of the French
protection which Florence enjoyed and could invoke, he perceived how
vain must ultimately prove Vitelli’s efforts, saw, perhaps, in all
this the grave danger of ultimate ruin which Vitelli was incurring. Yet
Vitelli’s action served Cesare’s own purposes, and, so that his purposes
were served, there were no other considerations likely to weigh with
that cold egotist. Let Vitelli be caught in the toils he was spinning,
and be choked in them. Meanwhile, Florence was being harrowed, and
that was all to Cesare’s satisfaction and advantage. When sufficiently
humbled, it might well befall that the Republic should come on her knees
to implore his intervention, and his pardon for having flouted him.

While matters stood so in Arezzo, Pisa declared spontaneously for
Cesare, and sent (on June 10) to offer herself to his dominion and to
announce to him that his banner was already flying from her turrets--and
the growth of Florence’s alarm at this is readily conceived.

To Cesare it must have been a sore temptation. To accept such a
pied-à-terre in Tuscany as was now offered him would have been the first
great step towards founding that kingdom of his dreams. An impulsive
man had surely gulped the bait. But Cesare, boundless in audacity, most
swift to determine and to act, was not impulsive. Cold reason, foresight
and calculation were the ministers of his indomitable will. He looked
ahead and beyond in the matter of Pisa’s offer, and he perceived the
danger that might await him in the acceptance. The time for that was
not yet. To take what Pisa offered might entail offending France, and
although Cesare was now in case to dispense with French support, he was
in no case to resist her opposition.

And so, the matter being considered and determined, Cesare quitted Rome
on the 12th and left it for the Pope to give answer to the Pisan envoys
in the Consistory of June 14--that neither his Holiness nor the Duke of
Valentinois could assent to the proposals which Pisa made.

From Rome Cesare travelled swiftly to Spoleto, where his army, some ten
thousand strong, was encamped. He was bent at last upon the conquest
of Camerino, and, ever an opportunist, he had seized the moment when
Florence, which might have been disposed to befriend Varano, Tyrant of
Camerino, was over-busy with her own affairs.

In addition to the powerful army awaiting him at Spoleto, the duke had
a further 2,000 men in the Romagna; another 1,000 men held themselves
at his orders between Sinigaglia and Urbino, and Dionigio di Naldo was
arming yet another 1,000 men at Verucchio for his service. Yet further
to increase this force, Cesare issued an edict during his brief sojourn
at Spoleto ordering every house in the Romagna to supply him with one
man-at-arms.

It was whilst here--as he afterwards wrote to the Pope--that news
reached him that Guidobaldo da Montefeltre, Duke of Urbino, was arming
men and raising funds for the assistance of Camerino. He wrote that
he could not at first believe it, but that shortly afterwards--at
Foligni--he took a chancellor of Camerino who admitted that the hopes
of this State were all founded upon Urbino’s assistance; and later, a
messenger from Urbino falling into his hands, he discovered that there
was a plot afoot to seize the Borgia artillery as it passed through
Ugubio, it being known that, as Cesare had no suspicions, the guns would
be guarded only by a small force. Of this treachery the duke strongly
expressed his indignation in his letter to the Pope.

Whether the matter was true--or whether Cesare believed it to be
true--it is impossible to ascertain with absolute conviction. But it
is in the highest degree unlikely that Cesare would have written such
a letter to his father solely by way of setting up a pretext. Had that
been his only aim, letters expressing his simulated indignation would
have been in better case to serve his ends had they been addressed to
others.

If Guidobaldo did engage in such an act, amounting to a betrayal, he was
certainly paid by Cesare in kind and with interest. If the duke had
been short of a pretext for carrying a drawn sword into the dominions
of Guidobaldo, he had that pretext now in this act of enmity against
himself and the Holy See.

First, however, he disposed for the attack upon Camerino. This State,
lying on the Eastern spurs of the Apennines, midway between Spoleto and
Urbino, was ruled by Giulio Cesare Varano, an old war-dog of seventy
years of age, ruthless and bloodthirsty, who owed his throne to his
murder of his own brother.

He was aided in the government of his tyranny by his four sons,
Venanzio, Annibale, Pietro, and Gianmaria.

Several times already had he been menaced by Cesare Borgia, for he was
one of the Vicars proscribed for the non-payment of tribute due to
the Holy See, and at last his hour was come. Against him Cesare now
dispatched an army under the command of Francesco Orsini, Duke of
Gravina, and Oliverotto Eufreducci, another murderous, bloody gentleman
who had hitherto served the duke in Vitelli’s condotta, and who, by an
atrocious act of infamy and brigandage, had made himself Lord of Fermo,
which he pretended--being as sly as he was bloody--to hold as Vicar for
the Holy See.

This Oliverotto Eufreducci--hereafter known as Oliverotto da Fermo--was
a nephew of Giovanni Fogliano, Lord of Fermo. He had returned home to
his uncle’s Court in the early part of that year, and was there received
with great honour and affection by Fogliano and his other relatives.
To celebrate his home-coming, Oliverotto invited his uncle and the
principal citizens of Fermo to a banquet, and at table contrived to turn
the conversation upon the Pope and the Duke of Valentinois; whereupon,
saying that these were matters to be discussed more in private, he rose
from table and begged them to withdraw with him into another room.

All unsuspecting--what should old Fogliano suspect from one so loved and
so deeply in his debt?--they followed him to the chamber where he had
secretly posted a body of his men-at-arms. There, no sooner had the
door closed upon this uncle, and those others who had shown him so
much affection, than he gave the signal for the slaughter that had been
concerted. His soldiers fell upon those poor, surprised victims of his
greed, and made a speedy and bloody end of all.

That first and chief step being taken, Oliverotto flung himself on his
horse, and, gathering his men-at-arms about him, rode through Fermo on
the business of butchering what other relatives and friends of Fogliano
might remain. Among these were Raffaele della Rovere and two of his
children, one of whom was inhumanly slaughtered in its mother’s lap.

Thereafter he confiscated to his own uses the property of those whom he
had murdered, and of those who, more fortunate, had fled his butcher’s
hands. He dismissed the existing Council and replaced it by a government
of his own. Which done--to shelter himself from the consequences--he
sent word to the Pope that he held Fermo as Vicar of the Church.

Whilst a portion of his army marched on Camerino, Cesare, armed with his
pretext for the overthrow of Guidobaldo, set himself deliberately and
by an elaborate stratagem to the capture of Urbino. Of this there can
be little doubt. The cunning of the scheme is of an unsavoury sort, when
considered by the notions that obtain to-day, for the stratagem was no
better than an act of base treachery. Yet, lest even in this you should
be in danger of judging Cesare Borgia by standards which cannot apply to
his age, you will do well to consider that there is no lack of evidence
that the fifteenth century applauded the business as a clever coup.

Guidobaldo da Montefeltre was a good prince. None in all Italy was
more beloved by his people, towards whom he bore himself with a kindly,
paternal bonhomie. He was a cultured, scholarly man, a patron of the
arts, happiest in the splendid library of the Palace of Urbino. It
happened, unfortunately, that he had no heir, which laid his dominions
open to the danger of division amongst the neighbouring greedy tyrants
after his death. To avoid this he had adopted Francesco Maria della
Rovere, hereditary Prefect of Sinigaglia, his sister’s child and
a nephew of Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere’s. There was wisdom and
foresight in the adoption, considering the favour enjoyed in Rome and in
France by the powerful cardinal.

From Nocera Cesare sent Guidobaldo a message calculated to allay
whatever uneasiness he may have been feeling, and to throw him
completely off his guard. The duke notified him that he was marching
upon Camerino--which was at once true and untrue--and begged Guidobaldo
to assist him in this enterprise by sending him provisions to Gubbio,
which he should reach on the morrow--since he was marching by way of
Cagli and Sassoferrato. Further--and obviously with intent that the
Duke of Urbino should reduce the forces at his disposal--he desired
Guidobaldo to send Vitelli the support of a thousand men, which the
latter had earlier solicited, but which Guidobaldo had refused to
supply without orders from the Pope. Cesare concluded his letter with
protestations of brotherly love--the Judas’ kiss which makes him hateful
to us in this affair.

It all proved very reassuring to Guidobaldo who set his mind at ease
and never bethought him of looking to his defences, when, from Nocera,
Cesare made one of those sudden movements, terrible in their swiftness
as the spring of a tiger--enabling him to drive home his claws where
least expected. Leaving all baggage behind him, and with provisions
for only three days, he brought his troops by forced marches to Cagli,
within the Urbino State, and possessed himself of it almost before the
town had come to realize his presence.

Not until the citadel, taken entirely by surprise, was in Cesare’s hands
did a messenger speed to Guidobaldo with the unwelcome tidings that
the Duke of Valentinois was in arms, as an enemy, within the territory.
Together with that message came others into the garden of the Zoccolanti
monastery--that favourite resort of Guidobaldo’s--where he was indulging
his not unusual custom of supping in the cool of that summer evening.
They brought him word that, while Valentinois was advancing upon him
from the south, a force of 1,000 men were marching upon Urbino from
Isola di Fano in the east, and twice that number through the passes
of Sant’ Angelo and Verucchio in the north--all converging upon his
capital.

The attack had been shrewdly planned and timed, and if anything can
condone the treachery by which Guidobaldo was lulled into his false
security, it is the circumstance that this conduct of the matter avoided
bloodshed--a circumstance not wholly negligible, and one that was ever
a part of Cesare Borgia’s policy, save where punishment had to be
inflicted or reprisals taken.

Guidobaldo, seeing himself thus beset upon all sides at once, and
being all unprepared for resistance, perceived that nothing but flight
remained him; and that very night he left Urbino hurriedly, taking with
him the boy Francesco Maria, and intending at first to seek shelter in
his Castle of S. Leo--a fortress that was practically impregnable. But
already it was too late. The passes leading thither were by now in
the hands of the enemy, as Guidobaldo discovered at dawn. Thereupon,
changing his plans, he sent the boy and his few attendants to Bagno,
and, himself, disguised as a peasant, took to the hills, despite the
gout by which he was tormented. Thus he won to Ravenna, which was fast
becoming a home for dethroned princes.

Urbino, meanwhile, in no case to resist, sent its castellan to meet
Cesare and to make surrender to him--whereof Cesare, in the letter
already mentioned, gives news to the Pope, excusing himself for having
undertaken this thing without the Pope’s knowledge, but that “the
treachery employed against me by Guidobaldo was so enormous that I could
not suffer it.”

Within a few hours of poor Guidobaldo’s flight Cesare was housed in
Urbino’s splendid palace, whose stupendous library was the marvel of
all scholars of that day. Much of this, together with many of the
art-treasures collected by the Montefeltri, Cesare began shortly
afterwards to transfer to Cesena.

In addition to publishing an edict against pillage and violence in the
City of Urbino, Cesare made doubly sure that none should take place
by sending his soldiers to encamp at Fermignano, retaining near him in
Urbino no more than his gentlemen-at-arms. The capital being taken,
the remainder of the duchy made ready surrender, all the strongholds
announcing their submission to Cesare with the exception of that
almost inaccessible Castle of S. Leo, which capitulated only after a
considerable resistance.

From Urbino Cesare now entered into communication with the Florentines,
and asked that a representative should be sent to come to an agreement
with him. In response to this request, the Republic sent him Bishop
Soderini as her ambassador. The latter arrived in Urbino on June 25 and
was immediately and very cordially received by the duke. With him,
in the subordinate capacity of secretary, came a lean, small-headed,
tight-lipped man, with wide-set, intelligent eyes and prominent
cheek-bones--one Niccolò Macchiavelli, who, in needy circumstances at
present, and comparatively obscure, was destined to immortal fame. Thus
did Macchiavelli meet Cesare Borgia for the first time, and, for all
that we have no records of it, it is not to be doubted that his study of
that remarkable man began then in Urbino, to be continued presently,
as we shall see, when Macchiavelli returns to him in the quality of an
ambassador himself.

To Soderini the duke expounded his just grievance, founded upon the
Florentines’ unobservance of the treaty of Forno dei Campi; he demanded
that a fresh treaty should be drawn up to replace the broken one, and
that, for the purpose, Florence should change her government, as in
the ruling one, after what had passed, he could repose no faith. He
disclaimed all associations with the affair of Vitelli, but frankly
declared himself glad of it, as it had, no doubt, led Florence to
perceive what came of not keeping faith with him. He concluded by
assuring Soderini that, with himself for their friend, the Florentines
need fear no molestation from any one; but he begged that the Republic
should declare herself in the matter, since, if she did not care to have
him for her friend, she was, of course, at liberty to make of him her
enemy.

So impressed was Soderini by Cesare Borgia that on that same night he
wrote to the Signory:

“This lord is very magnificent and splendid, and so spirited in feats of
arms that there is nothing so great but that it must seem small to him.
In the pursuit of glory and in the acquisition of dominions he never
rests, and he knows neither danger nor fatigue. He moves so swiftly that
he arrives at a place before it is known that he has set out for it.
He knows how to make himself beloved of his soldiers, and he has in his
service the best men of Italy. These things render him victorious and
formidable, and to these is yet to be added his perpetual good fortune.
He argues,” the Florentine envoy proceeds, “with such sound reason that
to dispute with him would be a long affair, for his wit and eloquence
never fail him” (“dello ingegno e della lingua si vale quanto vuole”).

You are to remember that this homage is one of the few surviving
impressions of one who came into personal contact with Cesare, and of
one, moreover, representing a Government more or less inimical to him,
who would therefore have no reason to draw a favourable portrait of
him for that Government’s benefit. One single page of such testimony is
worth a dozen volumes of speculation and inference drawn afterwards by
men who never knew him--in many cases by men who never began to know his
epoch.

The envoy concludes by informing the Signory that he has the duke’s
assurances that the latter has no thought of attempting to deprive
Florence of any of her possessions, as “the object of his campaign has
not been to tyrannize, but to extirpate tyrants.”

Whilst Cesare awaited the Florentines’ reply to their ambassador’s
communication, he withdrew to the camp at Fermignano, where he was
sought on July 6 by a herald from Louis XII. This messenger came to
exhort Cesare to embark upon no enterprise against the Florentine
Republic, because to offend Florence would be to offend the Majesty of
France. Simultaneously, however, Florence received messages from the
Cardinal d’Amboise, suggesting that they should come to terms with
Valentinois by conceding him at least a part of what had been agreed in
the Treaty of Forno dei Campi.

As a consequence, Soderini was able to inform Cesare that the Republic
was ready to treat with him, but that first he must withdraw Vitelli
from Arezzo, and compel him to yield up the captured fortresses. The
duke, not trusting--as he had frankly avowed--a Government which once
already had broken faith with him, and perceiving that, if he whistled
his war-dogs to heel as requested, he would have lost the advantages of
his position, refused to take any such steps until the treaty should be
concluded. He consented, however, to enforce meanwhile an armistice.

But now it happened that news reached Florence of the advance of Louis
XII with an army of 20,000 men, bound for Naples to settle the dispute
with Spain. So the Republic--sly and treacherous as any other Italian
Government of the Cinquecento--instructed Soderini to temporize with
the duke; to spend the days in amiable, inconclusive interviews and
discussions of terms which the Signory did not mean to make. Thus they
counted upon gaining time, until the arrival of the French should put
an end to the trouble caused by Vitelli, and to the need for any
compromise.

But Cesare, though forced to submit, was not fooled by Soderini’s
smooth, evasive methods. He too--having private sources of information
in France--was advised of the French advance and of the imminence of
danger to himself in consequence of the affairs of Florence. And it
occasioned him no surprise to see Soderini come on July 19 to take his
leave of him, advised by the Signory that the French vanguard was at
hand, and that, consequently, the negotiations might now with safety be
abandoned.

To console him, he had news on the morrow of the conquest of Camerino.

The septuagenarian Giulio Cesare Varano had opposed to the Borgia forces
a stout resistance, what time he sent his two sons Pietro and Gianmaria
to Venice for help. It was in the hope of this solicited assistance that
he determined to defend his tyranny, and the war opened by a cavalry
skirmish in which Venanzio Varano routed the Borgia horse under the
command of the Duke of Gravina. Thereafter, however, the Varani had to
endure a siege; and the old story of the Romagna sieges was repeated.
Varano had given his subjects too much offence in the past, and it was
for his subjects now to call the reckoning.

A strong faction, led by a patrician youth of Camerino, demanded the
surrender of the State, and, upon being resisted, took arms and opened
the gates to the troops of Valentinois. The three Varani were taken
prisoners. Old Giulio Cesare was shut up in the Castle of Pergola, where
he shortly afterwards died--which was not wonderful or unnatural at his
time of life, and does not warrant Guicciardini for stating, without
authority, that he was strangled. Venanzio and Annibale were imprisoned
in the fortress of Cattolica.

In connection with this surrender of Camerino, Cesare wrote the
following affectionate letter to his sister Lucrezia--who was
dangerously ill at Ferrara in consequence of her delivery of a
still-born child:

“Most Illustrious and most Excellent Lady, our very dear
Sister,--Confident of the circumstance that there can be no more
efficacious and salutary medicine for the indisposition from which you
are at present suffering than the announcement of good and happy news,
we advise you that at this very moment we have received sure tidings of
the capture of Camerino. We beg that you will do honour to this message
by an immediate improvement, and inform us of it, because, tormented as
we are to know you so ill, nothing, not even this felicitous event,
can suffice to afford us pleasure. We beg you also kindly to convey
the present to the Illustrious Lord Don Alfonso, your husband and our
beloved Brother-in-law, to whom we are not writing to-day.”




CHAPTER XIV. THE REVOLT OF THE CONDOTTIERI


The coincidence of the arrival of the French army with the conquest of
Urbino and Camerino and the Tuscan troubles caused one more to be added
to that ceaseless stream of rumours that flowed through Italy concerning
the Borgias. This time the envy and malice that are ever provoked by
success and power gave voice in that rumour to the thing it hoped,
and there ensued as pretty a comedy as you shall find in the pages of
history.

The rumour had it that Louis XII, resentful and mistrustful of the
growth of Cesare’s might, which tended to weaken France in Italy and
became a menace to the French dominions, was come to make an end of him.
Instantly Louis’s Court in Milan was thronged by all whom Cesare had
offended--and they made up by now a goodly crowd, for a man may not rise
so swiftly to such eminence without raising a rich crop of enemies.

Meanwhile, however, Valentinois in the Montefeltre Palace at
Urbino remained extremely at ease. He was not the man to be without
intelligences. In the train of Louis was Francesco Troche, the Pope’s
confidential chamberlain and Cesare’s devoted servant, who, possessed
of information, was able to advise Valentinois precisely what were the
intentions of the King of France. Gathering from these advices that it
was Louis’s wish that the Florentines should not be molested further,
and naturally anxious not to run counter to the king’s intentions,
Cesare perceived that the time to take action had arrived, the time for
passivity in the affairs of Florence was at an end.

So he dispatched an envoy to Vitelli, ordering his instant evacuation
of Arezzo and his withdrawal with his troops from Tuscany, and he backed
the command by a threat to compel Vitelli by force of arms, and
to punish disobedience by depriving him of his state of Città di
Castello--“a matter,” Cesare informed him, “which would be easily
accomplished, as the best men of that State have already offered
themselves to me.”

It was a command which Vitelli had no choice but to obey, not being
in sufficient force to oppose the duke. So on July 29, with Gianpaolo
Baglioni, he relinquished the possession of Arezzo and departed out of
Tuscany, as he had been bidden. But so incensed was he against the duke
for this intervention between himself and his revenge, and so freely did
he express himself in the matter, that it was put about at once that he
intended to go against Cesare.

And that is the first hint of the revolt of the condottieri.

Having launched that interdict of his, Cesare, on July 25, in the garb
of a knight of St. John of Jerusalem, and with only four attendants,
departed secretly from Urbino to repair to Milan and King Louis. He
paused for fresh horses at Forli on the morrow, and on the 28th reached
Ferrara, where he remained for a couple of hours to visit Lucrezia, who
was now in convalescence. Ahead of him he dispatched, thence, a courier
to Milan to announce his coming, and, accompanied by Alfonso d’Este,
resumed his journey.

Meanwhile, the assembly of Cesare’s enemies had been increasing daily in
Milan, whither they repaired to support Louis and to vent their hatred
of Cesare and their grievances against him. There, amongst others,
might be seen the Duke of Urbino, Pietro Varano (one of the sons of
the deposed Lord of Camerino), Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro, and Francesco
Gonzaga of Mantua--which latter was ever ready to turn whichever way the
wind was blowing, and was now loudest in his denunciations of Cesare and
eagerly advocating the formation of a league against him.

Louis received the news of Cesare’s coming, and--endowed, it is clear,
with a nice sense of humour-­kept the matter secret until within a
few hours of the duke’s actual arrival. On the morning of August 5,
according to Bernardi,(1) he whispered the information in Trivulzio’s
ear-­and whispered it loudly enough to be overheard by those courtiers
who stood nearest.


  1 Cronache Forlivesi.


Whatever check their satisfaction at the supposed state of things may
have received then was as nothing to their feelings a few hours later
when they witnessed the greeting that passed between king and duke.
Under their uneasy eyes Louis rode forth to meet his visitor, and gave
him a glad and friendly welcome, addressing him as “cousin” and “dear
relative,” and so, no doubt, striking dismay into the hearts of those
courtiers, who may well have deemed that perhaps they had expressed
themselves too freely.

Louis, in person, accompanied Valentinois to the apartments prepared
for him in the Castle of Milan, and on the morrow gave a banquet and
commanded merry-makings in his visitor’s honour.

Conceive the feelings of those deposed tyrants and their friends, and
the sudden collapse of the hopes which they had imagined the king to be
encouraging. They did, of course, the only thing there was to do. They
took their leave precipitately and went their ways--all save Gonzaga,
whom the king retained that he might make his peace with Cesare, and
engage in friendship with him, a friendship consolidated there and then
by the betrothal of their infant children: little Francesco Gonzaga
and Louise de Valentinois, aged two, the daughter whom Cesare had never
beheld and was never to behold.

Two factors were at work in the interests of Valentinois--the coming war
in Naples with the Spaniard, which caused Louis to desire to stand well
with the Pope; and the ambition of Louis’s friend and counsellor, the
Cardinal d’Amboise, to wear the tiara, which caused this prelate to
desire to stand well with Cesare himself, since the latter’s will in
the matter of a Pope to succeed his father should be omnipotent with the
Sacred College.

Therefore, that they might serve their interests in the end, both king
and cardinal served Cesare’s in the meantime.

The Duke of Valentinois’s visit to Milan had served to increase the
choler of Vitelli, who accounted that by this action Cesare had put him
in disgrace with the King of France; and Vitelli cried out that thus was
he repaid for having sought to make Cesare King of Tuscany. In such high
dudgeon was the fierce Tyrant of Città di Castello that he would not go
to pay his court to Louis, and was still the more angry to hear of the
warm welcome accorded in Milan to the Cardinal Orsini. In this he
read approval of the Orsini for having stood neutral in the Florentine
business, and, by inference from that, disapproval of himself.

Before accusing Valentinois of treachery to his condottieri, before
saying that he shifted the blame of the Tuscan affair on to the
shoulders of his captains, it would be well to ascertain that there was
any blame to shift--that is to say, any blame that must originally have
fallen upon Cesare. Certainly he made no effort to restrain Vitelli
until the King of France had arrived and he had secret information which
caused him to deem it politic to intervene. But of what avail until that
moment, would any but an armed intervention have been with so vindictive
and one-idea’d a man, and what manner of fool would not Cesare have
been to have spent his strength in battle with his condottieri for the
purpose of befriending a people who had never shown themselves other
than his own enemies?

Like the perfect egotist he was, he sat on the fence, and took pleasure
in the spectacle of the harassing of his enemies by his friends,
prepared to reap any advantages there might be, but equally prepared to
avoid any disadvantages.

It was not heroic, it was not noble; but it was extremely human.

Cesare was with the King of France in Genoa at the end of August, and
remained in his train until September 2, when finally he took his leave
of him. When they heard of his departure from the Court of Louis, his
numerous enemies experienced almost as much chagrin as that which had
been occasioned them by his going thither. For they had been consoling
themselves of late with a fresh rumour; and again they were believing
what it pleased them to believe. Rumours, you perceive, were never
wanting where the Borgias were concerned, and it may be that you are
beginning to rate these voces populi at their proper value, and to
apprehend the worth of many of those that have been embalmed as truths
in the abiding records.

This last one had it that Louis was purposely keeping Cesare by him, and
intended ultimately to carry him off to France, and so put an end to the
disturbances the duke was creating in Italy. What a consolation would
not that have been to those Italian princelings to whose undoing he had
warred! And can you marvel that they believed and circulated so readily
the thing for which they hoped so fondly? By your appreciation of that
may you measure the fresh disappointment that was theirs.

So mistaken were they, indeed, as it now transpired, that Louis had
actually, at last, removed his protection from Bologna, under the
persuasion of Cesare and the Pope. Before the duke took his departure
from King Louis’s Court, the latter entered into a treaty with him in
that connection to supply him with three hundred lances: “De bailler au
Valentinois trois cents lances pour l’aider à conquérir Bologne au nome
de l’Eglise, et opprimer les Ursins, Baillons et Vitelozze.”

It was a double-dealing age, and Louis’s attitude in this affair
sorted well with it. Feeling that he owed Bologna some explanation, he
presently sent a singularly lame one by Claude de Seyssel. He put it
that the Bentivogli personally were none the less under his protection
than they had been hitherto, but that the terms of the protection
provided that it was granted exclusively of the rights and authority
of the Holy Roman See over Bologna, and that the king could not embroil
himself with the Pope. With such a shifty message went M. de Seyssel
to make it quite clear to Bentivogli what his position was. And on the
heels of it came, on September 2, a papal brief citing Bentivogli and
his two sons to appear before the Pontiff within fifteen days for the
purpose of considering with his Holiness the matter of the pacification
and better government of Bologna, which for so many years had been so
disorderly and turbulent. Thus the Pope’s summons, with a menace that
was all too thinly veiled.

But Bentivogli was not taken unawares. He was not even astonished. Ever
since Cesare’s departure from Rome in the previous spring he had been
disposing against such a possibility as this--fortifying Bologna,
throwing up outworks and erecting bastions beyond the city, and levying
and arming men, in all of which he depended largely upon the citizens
and particularly upon the art-guild, which was devoted to the House of
Bentivogli.

Stronger than the affection for their lord--which, when all is said,
was none too great in Bologna--was the deep-seated hatred of the clergy
entertained by the Bolognese. This it was that rallied to Bentivogli
such men as Fileno della Tuate, who actually hated him. But it was a
choice of evils with Fileno and many of his kidney. Detesting the ruling
house, and indignant at the injustices it practised, they detested the
priests still more--so much that they would have taken sides with Satan
himself against the Pontificals. In this spirit did they carry their
swords to Bentivogli.

Upon the nobles Bentivogli could not count--less than ever since the
cold-blooded murder of the Marescotti; but in the burghers’ adherence he
deemed himself secure, and indeed on September 17 he had some testimony
of it.

On that date--the fortnight’s grace expiring--the brief was again read
to the Reggimento; but it was impossible to adopt any resolution. The
people were in arms, and, with enormous uproar, protested that they
would not allow Giovanni Bentivogli or his sons to go to Rome, lest they
should be in danger once they had left their own State.

Italy was full of rumours at the time of Cesare’s proposed emprise
against Bologna, and it was added that he intended, further, to make
himself master of Città di Castello and Perugia, and thus, by depriving
them of their tyrannies, punish Vitelli and Baglioni for their
defection.

This was the natural result of the terms of Cesare’s treaty with France
having become known; but the part of it which regarded the Orsini,
Vitelli, and Baglioni was purely provisional. Considering that these
condottieri were now at odds with Cesare, they might see fit to consider
themselves bound to Bentivogli by the Treaty of Villafontana, signed by
Vitelli and Orsini on the duke’s behalf at the time of the capitulation
of Castel Bolognese. They might choose to disregard the fact that this
treaty had already been violated by Bentivogli himself, through the
non-fulfilment of the terms of it, and refuse to proceed against him
upon being so bidden by Valentinois.

It was for such a contingency as this that provision was made by the
clause concerning them in Cesare’s treaty with Louis.

The Orsini were still in the duke’s service, in command of troops levied
for him and paid by him, and considering that with them Cesare had no
quarrel, it is by no means clear why they should have gone over to the
alliance of the condottieri that was now forming against the duke. Join
it, however, they did. They, too, were in the Treaty of Villafontana;
but that they should consider themselves bound by it, would have
been--had they urged it--more in the nature of a pretext than a reason.
But they chose a pretext even more slender. They gave out that in Milan
Louis XII had told Cardinal Orsini that the Pope’s intention was to
destroy the Orsini.

To accept such a statement as true, we should have to believe in a
disloyalty and a double-dealing on the part of Louis XII altogether
incredible. To what end should he, on the one side, engage to assist
Cesare with 300 lances to “oppress” the Orsini--if necessary, and among
others--whilst, on the other, he goes to Orsini with the story which
they attribute to him? What a mean, treacherous, unkingly figure must
he not cut as a consequence! He may have been--we know, indeed, that he
was--no more averse to double­dealing than any other Cinquecentist; but
he was probably as averse to being found out in a meanness and made
to look contemptible as any double-dealer of our own times. It is a
consideration worth digesting.

When word of the story put about by the Orsini was carried to the
Pope he strenuously denied the imputation, and informed the Venetian
ambassador that he had written to complain of this to the King of
France, and that, far from such a thing being true, Cesare was so
devoted to the Orsini as to be “more Orsini than Borgian.”

It is further worth considering that the defection of the Orsini was
neither immediate nor spontaneous, as must surely have been the case had
the story been true. It was the Baglioni and Vitelli only who first met
to plot at Todi, to declare that they would not move against their ally
of Bologna, and to express the hope that they might bring the Orsini to
the same mind. They succeeded so well that the second meeting was held
at Magione--a place belonging to the powerful Cardinal Orsini, situated
near the Baglioni’s stronghold of Perugia. Vitellozzo was carried
thither on his bed, so stricken with the morbo gallico--which in Italy
was besetting most princes, temporal and ecclesiastical--that he was
unable to walk.

Gentile and Gianpaolo Baglioni, Cardinal Gianbattista Orsini, Francesco
Orsini, Duke of Gravina, Paolo Orsini, the bastard son of the Archbishop
of Trani, Pandolfo Petrucci--Lord of Siena--and Hermes Bentivogli were
all present. The last-named, prone to the direct methods of murder by
which he had rid Bologna of the Marescotti, is said to have declared
that he would kill Cesare Borgia if he but had the opportunity, whilst
Vitelli swore solemnly that within a year he would slay or capture the
duke, or else drive him out of Italy.

From this it will be seen that the Diet of Magione was no mere defensive
alliance, but actually an offensive one, with the annihilation of Cesare
Borgia for its objective.

They certainly had the power to carry out their resolutions, for
whilst Cesare disposed at that moment of not more than 2,500 foot, 300
men-at-arms, and the 100 lances of his Caesarean guard of patricians,
the confederates had in arms some 9,000 foot and 1,000 horse. Conscious
of their superior strength, they determined to strike at once, before
Cesare should be further supported by the French lances, and to make
sure of him by assailing him on every side at once. To this end it was
resolved that Bentivogli should instantly march upon Imola, where Cesare
lay, whilst the others should possess themselves of Urbino and Pesaro
simultaneously.

They even approached Florence and Venice in the matter, inviting the
Republics to come into the league against Valentinois.

The Florentines, however, could not trust such enemies of their own as
Vitelli and the Orsini, nor dared they join in an enterprise which had
for scope to make war upon an ally of France; and they sent word to
Cesare of their resolve to enter into no schemes against him.

The Venetians would gladly have moved to crush a man who had snatched
the Romagna from under their covetous eyes; but in view of the league
with France they dared not. What they dared, they did. They wrote to
Louis at length of the evils that were befalling Italy at the hands of
the Duke of Valentinois, and of the dishonour to the French crown which
lay for Louis in his alliance with Cesare Borgia. They even went so
far--and most treacherously, considering the league--as to allow their
famous captain, Bartolomeo d’Alviano, to reconduct Guidobaldo to Urbino,
as we shall presently see.

Had the confederates but kept faith with one another Cesare’s knell
had soon been tolled. But they were a weak-kneed pack of traitors,
irresolute in their enmity as in their friendships. The Orsini hung
back. They urged that they did not trust themselves to attack Cesare
with men actually in his pay; whilst Bentivogli--treacherous by nature
to the back-bone of him--actually went so far as to attempt to open
secret negotiations with Cesare through Ercole d’Este of Ferrara.




CHAPTER XV. MACCHIAVELLI’S LEGATION


On October 2 news of the revolt of the condottieri and the diet of
Magione had reached the Vatican and rendered the Pope uneasy. Cesare,
however, had been informed of it some time before at Imola, where he was
awaiting the French lances that should enable him to raid the Bolognese
and drive out the Bentivogli.

Where another might have been paralyzed by a defection which left him
almost without an army, and would have taken the course of sending
envoys to the rebels to attempt to make terms and by concessions to
patch up a treaty, Cesare, with characteristic courage, assurance, and
promptitude of action, flung out officers on every side to levy him
fresh troops.

His great reputation as a condottiero, the fame of his wealth and his
notorious liberality, stood him now in excellent stead. The response to
his call was instantaneous. Soldiers of fortune and mercenaries showed
the trust they had in him, and flocked to his standard from every
quarter. One of the first to arrive was Gasparo Sanseverino, known as
Fracassa, a condottiero of great renown, who had been in the Pontifical
service since the election of Pope Alexander. He was a valuable
acquisition to Cesare, who placed him in command of the horse. Another
was Lodovico Pico della Mirandola, who brought a small condotta of 60
lances and 60 light horse. Ranieri della Sassetta rode in at the head
of 100 mounted arbalisters, and Francesco de Luna with a body of 50
arquebusiers.(1)


  1  The arquebus, although it had existed in Italy for nearly a century,
was only just coming into general use.


Valentinois sent out Raffaele dei Pazzi and Galeotto Pallavicini, the
one into Lombardy to recruit 1,000 Gascons, the other to raise a body of
Swiss mercenaries. Yet, when all is said, these were but supplementary
forces; the main strength of Cesare’s new army lay in the troops raised
in the Romagna, which, faithful to him and confident of his power and
success, rallied to him now in the hour of his need. Than this there can
be no more eloquent testimony to the quality of his rule. In command of
these Romagnuoli troops he placed such Romagnuoli captains as Dionigio
di Naldo and Marcantonio da Fano, thereby again affording proof of his
wisdom, by giving these soldiers their own compatriots and men with whom
they were in sympathy for their leaders.

With such speed had he acted, and such was the influence of his name,
that already, by October 14, he had assembled an army of upwards of
6,000 men, which his officers were diligently drilling at Imola, whilst
daily now were the French lances expected, and the Swiss and Gascon
mercenaries he had sent to levy.

It may well be that this gave the confederates pause, and suggested
to them that they should reconsider their position and ask themselves
whether the opportunity for crushing Cesare had not slipped by whilst
they had stood undecided.

It was Pandolfo Petrucci who took the first step towards a
reconciliation, by sending word to Valentinois that it was not his
intention to take any measures that might displease his Excellency. His
Excellency will no doubt have smiled at that belated assurance from
the sparrow to the hawk. Then, a few days later, came news that Giulio
Orsini had entered into an agreement with the Pope. This appeared to
give the confederacy its death-blow, and Paolo Orsini was on the point
of setting out to seek Cesare at Imola for the purpose of treating
with him--which would definitely have given burial to the revolt--when
suddenly there befell an event which threw the scales the other way.

Cesare’s people were carrying out some work in the Castle of S. Leo,
in the interior of which a new wall was in course of erection. For the
purposes of this, great baulks of timber were being brought into the
castle from the surrounding country. Some peasants, headed by one
Brizio, who had been a squire of Guidobaldo’s, availed themselves of the
circumstance to capture the castle by a stratagem. Bringing forward some
great masses of timber and felled trees, they set them down along the
drawbridge in such a manner as to prevent its being hoisted. That done,
an attack in force was directed against the fortress. The place, whose
natural defences rendered it practically impregnable, was but slightly
manned; being thus surprised, and unable to raise the bridge, it was
powerless to offer any resistance, so that the Montefeltre peasants,
having killed every Borgia soldier of the garrison, took possession of
it and held it for Duke Guidobaldo.

This capture of S. Leo was as a spark that fired a train. Instantly the
hardy hillmen of Urbino were in arms to reconquer Guidobaldo’s duchy for
him. Stronghold after stronghold fell into their hands, until they
were in Urbino itself. They made short work of the capital’s scanty
defenders, flung Cesare’s governor into prison, and finally obtained
possession of the citadel.

It was the news of this that caused the confederates once more to pause.
Before declaring themselves, they waited to see what action Venice would
take, whilst in the meantime they sought shelter behind a declaration
that they were soldiers of the Church and would do nothing against the
will of the Pontiff. They were confidently assured that Venice would
befriend Guidobaldo, and help him back to his throne now that his own
people had done so much towards that end. It remained, however, to be
seen whether Venice would at the same time befriend Pesaro and Rimini.

Instantly Cesare Borgia--who was assailed by grave doubts concerning the
Venetians--took his measures. He ordered Bartolomeo da Capranica, who
was chief in command of his troops in Urbino, to fall back upon Rimini
with all his companies, whilst to Pesaro the duke dispatched Michele da
Corella and Ramiro de Lorqua.

It was a busy time of action with the duke at Imola, and yet, amid all
the occupation which this equipment of a new army must have given him,
he still found time for diplomatic measures, and, taking advantage of
the expressed friendliness of Florence, he had replied by desiring
the Signory to send an envoy to confer with him. Florence responded by
sending, as her representative, that same Niccolò Macchiavelli who had
earlier accompanied Soderini on a similar mission to Valentinois, and
who had meanwhile been advanced to the dignity of Secretary of State.

Macchiavelli has left us, in his dispatches to his Government, the
most precious and valuable information concerning that period of Cesare
Borgia’s history during which he was with the duke on the business of
his legation. Not only is it the rare evidence of an eye-witness that
Macchiavelli affords us, but the evidence, as we have said, of one
endowed with singular acumen and an extraordinary gift of psychological
analysis. The one clear and certain inference to be drawn, not only from
those dispatches, but from the Florentine secretary’s later writings,
is that, at close quarters with Cesare Borgia, a critical witness of his
methods, he conceived for him a transcending admiration which was later
to find its fullest expression in his immortal book The Prince--a
book, remember, compiled to serve as a guide in government to Giuliano
de’Medici, the feeble brother of Pope Leo X, a book inspired by Cesare
Borgia, who is the model prince held up by Macchiavelli for emulation.

Does it serve any purpose, in the face of this work from the pen of the
acknowledged inventor of state-craft, to describe Cesare’s conquest
of the Romagna by opprobrious epithets and sweeping statements of
condemnation and censure--statements kept carefully general, and never
permitted to enter into detail which must destroy their own ends and
expose their falsehood?

Gregorovius, in this connection, is as full of contradictions as any
man must be who does not sift out the truth and rigidly follow it in his
writings. Consider the following scrupulously translated extracts from
his Geschichte der Stadt Rom:

  (a) “Cesare departed from Rome to resume his bloody work in the
Romagna.”

  (b) “...the frightful deeds performed by Cesare on both sides of the
Apennines. He assumes the semblance of an exterminating angel, and
performs such hellish iniquities that we can only shudder at the
contemplation of the evil of which human nature is capable.”

And now, pray, consider and compare with those the following excerpt
from the very next page of that same monumental work:

“Before him [Cesare] cities trembled; the magistrates prostrated
themselves in the dust; sycophantic courtiers praised him to the stars.
Yet it is undeniable that his government was energetic and good; for
the first time Romagna enjoyed peace and was rid of her vampires. In the
name of Cesare justice was administered by Antonio di Monte Sansovino,
President of the Ruota of Cesena, a man universally beloved.”

It is almost as if the truth had slipped out unawares, for the first
period hardly seems a logical prelude to the second, by which it is
largely contradicted. If Cesare’s government was so good that Romagna
knew peace at last and was rid of her vampires, why did cities tremble
before him? There is, by the way, no evidence of such trepidations in
any of the chronicles of the conquered States, one and all of which hail
Cesare as their deliverer. Why, if he was held in such terror, did city
after city--as we have seen--spontaneously offer itself to Cesare’s
dominion?

But to rebut those statements of Gregorovius’s there is scarce the need
to pose these questions; sufficiently does Gregorovius himself
rebut them. The men who praised Cesare, the historian tells us, were
sycophantic courtiers. But where is the wonder of his being praised if
his government was as good as Gregorovius admits it to have been? What
was unnatural in that praise? What so untruthful as to deserve to be
branded sycophantic? And by what right is an historian to reject as
sycophants the writers who praise a man, whilst accepting every word
of his detractors as the words of inspired evangelists, even when
their falsehoods are so transparent as to provoke the derision of the
thoughtful and analytic?

As l’Espinois points out in his masterly essay in the Revue des
Questions Historiques, Gregorovius refuses to recognize in Cesare Borgia
the Messiah of a united Central Italy, but considers him merely as
a high-flying adventurer; whilst Villari, in his Life and Times of
Macchiavelli, tells you bluntly that Cesare Borgia was neither a
statesman nor a soldier but a brigand-chief.

These are mere words; and to utter words is easier than to make them
good.

“High-flying adventurer,” or “brigand-chief,” by all means, if it
please you. What but a high-flying adventurer was the wood-cutter, Muzio
Attendolo, founder of the ducal House of Sforza? What but a high-flying
adventurer was that Count Henry of Burgundy who founded the kingdom
of Portugal? What else was the Norman bastard William, who conquered
England? What else the artillery officer, Napoleon Bonaparte, who became
Emperor of the French? What else was the founder of any dynasty but a
high-flying adventurer--or a brigand-chief, if the melodramatic term is
more captivating to your fancy?

These terms are used to belittle Cesare. They achieve no more, however,
than to belittle those who penned them; for, even as they are true,
the marvel is that the admirable matter in these truths appears to have
escaped those authors.

What else Gregorovius opines--that Cesare was no Messiah of United
Italy--is true enough. Cesare was the Messiah of Cesare. The well-being
of Italy for its own sake exercised his mind not so much as
the well-being of the horse he rode. He wrought for his own
aggrandisement--but he wrought wisely; and, whilst the end in view is no
more to be censured than the ambition of any man, the means employed
are in the highest degree to be commended, since the well-being of
the Romagna, which was not an aim, was, nevertheless, an essential and
praiseworthy incident.

When it can be shown that every other of those conquerors who cut heroic
figures in history were purest altruists, it will be time to damn Cesare
Borgia for his egotism.

What Villari says, for the purpose of adding rhetorical force to
his “brigand-chief”--that Cesare was no statesman and no soldier--is
entirely of a piece with the rest of the chapter in which it
occurs(1)--a chapter rich in sweeping inaccuracies concerning Cesare.
But it is staggering to find the statement in such a place, amid
Macchiavelli’s letters on Cesare, breathing an obvious and profound
admiration of the duke’s talents as a politician and a soldier--an
admiration which later is to go perilously near to worship. To
Macchiavelli, Cesare is the incarnation of a hazy ideal, as is
abundantly shown in The Prince. For Villari to reconcile all this with
his own views must seem impossible. And impossible it is; yet Villari
achieves it, with an audacity that leaves you breathless.


  1  In his Niccolò Machiavelli.


No--he practically tells you--this Macchiavelli, who daily saw and spoke
with Cesare for two months (and during a critical time, which is when
men best reveal their natures), this acute Florentine--the acutest
man of his age, perhaps--who studied and analysed Cesare, and sent his
Government the results of his analyses, and was inspired by them later
to write The Prince--this man did not know Cesare Borgia. He wrote, not
about Cesare himself, but about a creation of his own intellect.

That is what Villari pretends. Macchiavelli, the representative of a
power unfriendly at heart under the mask of the expedient friendliness,
his mind already poisoned by all the rumours current throughout Italy,
comes on this mission to Valentinois. Florence, fearing and hating
Valentinois as she does, would doubtless take pleasure in detractory
advices. Other ambassadors--particularly those of Venice--pander to
their Governments’ wishes in this respect, conscious that there is a
sycophancy in slander contrasted with which the ordinary sycophancy of
flattery is as water to wine; they diligently send home every scrap
of indecent or scandalous rumour they can pick up in the Roman
ante-chambers, however unlikely, uncorroborated, or unconcerning the
business of an ambassador.

But Macchiavelli, in Cesare Borgia’s presence, is overawed by his
greatness, his force and his intellect, and these attributes engage him
in his dispatches. These same dispatches are a stumbling-block to all
who prefer to tread the beaten, sensational track, and to see in
Cesare Borgia a villain of melodrama, a monster of crime, brutal, and,
consequently, of no intellectual force. But Villari contrives to step
more or less neatly, if fatuously, over that formidable obstacle, by
telling you that Macchiavelli presents to you not really Cesare Borgia,
but a creation of his own intellect, which he had come to admire. It
is a simple, elementary expedient by means of which every piece of
historical evidence ever penned may be destroyed--including all that
which defames the House of Borgia.

Macchiavelli arrived at Imola on the evening of October 7, 1502, and,
all travel-stained as he was, repaired straight to the duke, as if
the message with which he was charged was one that would not brook a
moment’s delay in its deliverance. Actually, however, he had nothing to
offer Cesare but the empty expressions of Florence’s friendship and
the hopes she founded upon Cesare’s reciprocation. The crafty young
Florentine--he was thirty-three at the time--was sent to temporize and
to avoid committing himself or his Government.

Valentinois listened to the specious compliments, and replied by similar
protestations and by reminding Florence how he had curbed the hand
of those very condottieri who had now rebelled against him as a
consequence. He showed himself calm and tranquil at the loss of Urbino,
telling Macchiavelli that he “had not forgotten the way to reconquer
it,” when it should suit him. Of the revolted condottieri he
contemptuously said that he accounted them fools for not having known
how to choose a more favourable moment in which to harm him, and that
they would presently find such a fire burning under their feet as would
call for more water to quench it than such men as these disposed of.

Meanwhile, the success of those rustics of Urbino who had risen, and
the ease of their victories, had fired others of the territory to follow
their example. Fossombrone and Pergola were the next to rebel and to put
the Borgia garrisons to the sword; but, in their reckless audacity,
they chose their moment ill, for Michele da Corella was at hand with his
lances, and, although his orders had been to repair straight to Pesaro,
he ventured to depart from them to the extent of turning aside to punish
the insurgence of those towns by launching his men-at-arms upon them and
subjecting them to an appalling and pitiless sack.

When Cesare heard the news of it and the details of the horrors that had
been perpetrated, he turned, smiling cruelly, to Macchiavelli, who
was with him, and, “The constellations this year seem unfavourable to
rebels,” he observed.

A battle of wits was toward between the Florentines’ Secretary of State
and the Duke of Valentinois, each mistrustful of the other. In the end
Cesare, a little out of patience at so much inconclusiveness, though
outwardly preserving his immutable serenity, sought to come to grips by
demanding that Florence should declare whether he was to account her his
friend or not. But this was precisely what Macchiavelli’s instructions
forbade him from declaring. He answered that he must first write to the
Signory, and begged the duke to tell him what terms he proposed should
form the treaty. But there it was the duke’s turn to fence and to avoid
a direct answer, desiring that Florence should open the negotiations and
that from her should come the first proposal.

He reminded Macchiavelli that Florence would do well to come to a
decision before the Orsini sought to patch up a peace with him, since,
once that was done, there would be fresh difficulties, owing, of course,
to Orsini’s enmity to the existing Florentine Government. And of such a
peace there was now every indication, Paolo Orsini having at last
sent Cesare proposals for rejoining him, subject to his abandoning the
Bologna enterprise (in which, the Orsini argued, they could not bear
a hand without breaking faith with Bentivogli) and turning against
Florence. Vitelli, at the same time, announced himself ready to return
to Cesare’s service, but first he required some “honest security.”

Well might it have pleased Cesare to oblige the Orsini to the letter,
and to give a lesson in straight-dealing to these shuffling Florentine
pedlars who sent a nimble-witted Secretary of State to hold him in play
with sweet words of barren meaning. But there was France and her wishes
to be considered, and he could not commit himself. So his answer was
peremptory and condescending. He told them that, if they desired to show
themselves his friends, they could set about reconquering and holding
Urbino for him.

It looked as if the condottieri agreed to this, for on October 11
Vitelli seized Castel Durante, and on the next day Baglioni was in
possession of Cagli.

In view of this, Cesare bade the troops which he had withdrawn to
advance again upon the city of Urbino and take possession of it. But
suddenly, on the 12th, a messenger from Guidobaldo rode into Urbino to
announce their duke’s return within a few days to defend the subjects
who had shown themselves so loyal to him. This, the shifty confederates
accounted, must be done with the support of Venice, whence they
concluded that Venice must have declared against Valentinois, and again
they treacherously changed sides.

The Orsini proceeded to prompt action. Assured of their return to
himself, and counting upon their support in Urbino, Cesare had contented
himself with sending thither a small force of 100 lances and 200
light horse. Upon these fell the Orsini, and put them to utter rout at
Calmazzo, near Fossombrone, capturing Ugo di Moncada, who commanded
one of the companies, but missing Michele da Corella, who contrived to
escape to Fossombrone.

The conquerors entered Urbino that evening, and, as if to put it on
record that they burnt their boats with Valentinois, Paolo Orsini wrote
that same night to the Venetian Senate advices of the victory won.
Three days later--on October 18--Guidobaldo, accompanied by his nephews
Ottaviano Fregioso and Gianmaria Varano, re-entered his capital amid the
cheers and enthusiasm of his loyal and loving people.

Vitelli made haste to place his artillery at Guidobaldo’s disposal for
the reduction of Cagli, Pergola, and Fossombrone, which were still held
for Valentinois, whilst Oliverotto da Fermo went with Gianmaria Varano
to attempt the reconquest of Camerino, and Gianpaolo Baglioni to Fano,
which, however, he did not attempt to enter as an enemy--an idle course,
seeing how loyally the town held for Cesare--but as a ducal condottiero.

Fired by Orsini’s example, Bentivogli also took the offensive, and began
by ordering the canonists of Bologna University to go to the churches
and encourage the people to disregard the excommunications launched
against the city. He wrote to the King of France to complain that Cesare
had broken the Treaty of Villafontana by which he had undertaken never
again to molest Bologna--naïvely ignoring the circumstance that he
himself had been the first to violate the terms of that same treaty, and
that it was precisely upon such grounds that Cesare was threatening him.

Thus matters stood, the confederates turning anxious eyes towards
Venice, and, haply, beginning to wonder whether the Republic was indeed
going to move to their support as they had so confidently expected, and
realizing perhaps by now their rashness, and the ruin that awaited them
should Venice fail them. And fail them Venice did. The Venetians had
received a reply from Louis XII to that letter in which they had heaped
odium upon the Borgia and shown the king what dishonour to himself dwelt
in his alliance with Valentinois. Their criticisms and accusations were
ignored in that reply, which resolved itself into nothing more than a
threat that “if they opposed themselves to the enterprise of the Church
they would be treated by him as enemies,” and of this letter he sent
Cesare a copy, as Cesare himself told Macchiavelli.

So, whilst Valentinois in Imola was able to breathe more freely, the
condottieri in Urbino may well have been overcome with horror at their
position and at having been thus left in the lurch by Venice. None was
better aware than Pandolfo Petrucci of the folly of their action and of
the danger that now impended, and he sent his secretary to Valentinois
to say that if the duke would but reassure them on the score of his
intentions they would return to him and aid him in recovering what had
been lost.

Following upon this message came Paolo Orsini himself to Imola on the
25th, disguised as a courier, and having first taken the precaution of
obtaining a safe-conduct. He left again on the 29th, bearing with him
a treaty the terms of which had been agreed between himself and Cesare
during that visit. These were that Cesare should engage to protect the
States of all his allied condottieri, and they to serve him and the
Church in return. A special convention was to follow, to decide the
matter of the Bentivogli, which should be resolved by Cesare, Cardinal
Orsini, and Pandolfo Petrucci in consultation, their judgment to be
binding upon all.

Cesare’s contempt for the Orsini and the rest of the shifty men who
formed that confederacy--that “diet of bankrupts,” as he had termed
it--was expressed plainly enough to Macchiavelli.

“To-day,” said he, “Messer Paolo is to visit me, and to-morrow there
will be the cardinal; and thus they think to befool me, at their
pleasure. But I, on my side, am only dallying with them. I listen to all
they have to say and bide my own time.”

Later, Macchiavelli was to remember those words, which meanwhile
afforded him matter for reflection.

As Paolo Orsini rode away from Imola, the duke’s secretary, Gherardi,
followed and overtook him to say that Cesare desired to add to the
treaty another clause--one relating to the King of France. To this Paolo
Orsini refused to consent, but, upon being pressed in the matter by
Gherardi, went so far as to promise to submit the clause to the others.

On October 30 Cesare published a notice in the Romagna, intimating the
return to obedience on the part of his captains.

Macchiavelli was mystified by this, and apprehensive--as men will be
of the things they cannot fathom--of what might be reserved in it for
Florence. It was Gherardi who reassured him, laughing in the face of the
crafty Florentine, as he informed him that even children should come to
smile at such a treaty as this. He added that he had gone after Paolo
Orsini to beg the addition of another clause, intentionally omitted by
the duke.

“If they accept that clause,” concluded Messer Agabito, “it will open a
window; if they refuse it, a door, by which the duke can issue from the
treaty.”

Macchiavelli’s wonder increased. But the subject of it now was that the
condottieri should be hoodwinked by a document in such terms, and well
may he have bethought him then of those words which Cesare had used to
him a few days earlier.




CHAPTER XVI. RAMIRO DE LORQUA


It really seemed as if the condottieri were determined to make their
score as heavy as possible. For even whilst Paolo Orsini had been on his
mission of peace to Cesare, and whilst they awaited his return, they had
continued in arms against the duke. The Vitelli had aided Guidobaldo
to reconquer his territory, and had killed, in the course of doing so,
Bartolomeo da Capranica, Cesare’s most valued captain and Vitelli’s
brother­in-arms of yesterday. The Baglioni were pressing Michele da
Corella in Pesaro, but to little purpose; whilst the butcher Oliverotto
da Fermo in Camerino--of which he had taken possession with Gianmaria
Varano--was slaughtering every Spaniard he could find.

On the other side, Corella in Pesaro hanged five men whom he caught
practising against the duke’s government, and, having taken young Pietro
Varano--who was on his way to join his brother in Camerino in view of
the revolt there--he had him strangled in the market-place. There is a
story that, with life not yet extinct, the poor youth was carried into
church by the pitiful crowd. But here a friar, discovering that he still
lived, called in the soldiers and bade them finish him. This friar,
going later through Cagli, was recognized, set upon by a mob, and torn
to pieces--in which, if the rest of the tale be true, he was richly
served.

Into the theatre of bloodshed came Paolo Orsini from his mission
to Valentinois, bringing with him the treaty for signature by the
condottieri. Accustomed as they were to playing fast and loose,
they opined that, so far as Urbino was concerned, enough changes of
government had they contrived there already. Vitelli pointed out the
unseemliness of once again deposing Guidobaldo, whom they had just
reseated upon his throne. Besides, he perceived in the treaty the end
of his hopes of a descent upon Florence, which was the cause of all his
labours. So he rejected it.

But Valentinois had already got the Orsini and Pandolfo Petrucci on
his side, and so the confederacy was divided. Another factor came to
befriend the duke. On November 2 he was visited by Antonio Galeazzo
Bentivogli, sent by his father Giovanni to propose a treaty with
him--this state of affairs having been brought about by the mediation of
Ercole d’Este. From the negotiations that followed it resulted that, on
the 13th, the Orsini had word from Cesare that he had entered into
an alliance with the Bentivogli--which definitely removed their main
objection to bearing arms with him.

It was resigning much on Cesare’s part, but the treaty, after all, was
only for two years, and might, of course, be broken before then, as they
understood these matters. This treaty was signed at the Vatican on the
23rd, between Borgia and Bentivogli, to guarantee the States of both.
The King of France, the Signory of Florence, and the Duke of Ferrara
guaranteed the alliance.

Inter alia, it was agreed between them that Bologna should supply Cesare
with 100 lances and 200 light horse for one or two enterprises within
the year, and that the condotta of 100 lances which Cesare held from
Bologna by the last treaty should be renewed. The terms of the treaty
were to be kept utterly secret for the next three months, so that
the affairs of Urbino and Camerino should not be prejudiced by their
publication.

The result was instantaneous. On November 27 Paolo Orsini was back at
Imola with the other treaty, which bore now the signatures of all the
confederates. Vitelli, finding himself isolated, had swallowed his
chagrin in the matter of Florence, and his scruples in the matter of
Urbino, abandoning the unfortunate Guidobaldo to his fate. This came
swiftly. From Imola, Paolo Orsini rode to Fano on the 29th, and ordered
his men to advance upon Urbino and seize the city in the Duke of
Valentinois’s name, proclaiming a pardon for all rebels who would be
submissive.

Guidobaldo and the ill-starred Lord of Faenza were the two exceptions in
Romagna--the only two who had known how to win the affections of their
subjects. For Guidobaldo there was nothing that the men of Urbino would
not have done. They rallied to him now, and the women of Valbone--like
the ladies of England to save Coeur-de-Lion--came with their jewels and
trinkets, offering them that he might have the means to levy troops and
resist. But this gentle, kindly Guidobaldo could not subject his country
to further ravages of war; and so he determined, in his subjects’
interests as much as in his own, to depart for the second time.

Early in December the Orsini troops are in his territory, and Paolo,
halting them a few miles out of Urbino, sends to beg Guidobaldo’s
attendance in his camp. Guidobaldo, crippled by gout and unable at the
time to walk a step, sends Paolo his excuses and begs that he will come
to Urbino, where he awaits him. There Guidobaldo makes formal surrender
to him, takes leave of his faithful friends, enjoins fidelity to
Valentinois and trust in God, and so on December 19 he departs into
exile, the one pathetic noble figure amid so many ignoble ones. Paolo,
taking possession of the duchy, assumes the title of governor.

The Florentines had had their chance of an alliance with Cesare, and had
deliberately neglected it. Early in November they had received letters
from the King of France urging them to come to an accord with Cesare,
and they had made known to the duke that they desired to reoccupy Pisa
and to assure themselves of Vitelli; but, when he pressed that Florence
should give him a condotta, Macchiavelli--following his instructions
not to commit the Republic in any way--had answered “that his Excellency
must not be considered as other lords, but as a new potentate in Italy,
with whom it is more seemly to make an alliance or a friendship than to
grant him a condotta; and, as alliances are maintained by arms, and
that is the only power to compel their observance, the Signory could
not perceive what security they would have when three-quarters or
three-fifths of their arms would be in the duke’s hands.” Macchiavelli
added diplomatically that “he did not say this to impugn the duke’s
good faith, but to show him that princes should be circumspect and never
enter into anything that leaves a possibility of their being put at a
disadvantage.”(1)


  1  See the twenty-first letter from Macchiavelli on this legation.


Cesare answered him calmly (“senza segno d’alterazione alcuna”) that
without a condotta, he didn’t know what to make of a private friendship
whose first principles were denied him. And there the matter hung,
for Macchiavelli’s legation had for only aim to ensure the immunity
of Tuscany and to safeguard Florentine interests without conceding any
advantages to Cesare--as the latter had perceived from the first.

On December 10 Cesare moved from Imola with his entire army, intent now
upon the conquest of Sinigaglia, which State Giuliano della Rovere had
been unable to save for his nephew, as king and Pope had alike turned
a deaf ear upon the excuses he had sought to make for the Prefetessa,
Giovanna da Montefeltre--the mother of the young prefect--who had aided
her brother Guidobaldo in the late war in Urbino.

On the morrow Valentinois arrived in Cesena and encamped his army there
for Christmas, as in the previous year. The country was beginning
to feel the effects of this prolonged vast military occupation, and
although the duke, with intent to relieve the people, had done all that
was possible to provision the troops, and had purchased from Venice
30,000 bushels of wheat for the purpose, yet all had been consumed. “The
very stones have been eaten,” says Macchiavelli.

To account for this state of things--and possibly for certain other
matters--Messer Ramiro de Lorqua, the Governor-General, was summoned
from Pesaro; whilst to avert the threatened famine Cesare ordered that
the cereals in the private granaries of Cesena should be sold at reduced
prices, and he further proceeded, at heavy expense, to procure grain
from without. Another, less far-seeing than Valentinois, might have
made capital out of Urbino’s late rebellion, and pillaged the country to
provide for pressing needs. But that would have been opposed to Cesare’s
policy, of fostering the goodwill of the people he subjected.

On December 20 three of the companies of French lances that had been
with Cesare took their leave of him and returned to Lombardy, so
that Cesare was left with only one company. There appears to be some
confusion as to the reasons for this, and it is stated by some
that those companies were recalled to Milan by the French governor.
Macchiavelli, ever inquisitive and inquiring, questioned one of the
French officers in the matter, to be told that the lances were returning
because the duke no longer needed them, the inference being that this
was in consequence of the return of the condottieri to their allegiance.
But the astute secretary did not at the time account this convincing,
arguing that the duke could not yet be said to be secure, nor could
he know for certain how far he might trust Vitelli and the Orsini.
Presumably, however, he afterwards obtained more certain information,
for he says later that Valentinois himself dismissed the French, and
that the dismissal was part of the stratagem he was preparing, and had
for object to reassure Vitelli and the other confederates, and to throw
them off their guard, by causing them to suppose him indifferently
supported.

But the departure of the French did not take place without much
discussion being provoked, and rumour making extremely busy, whilst
it was generally assumed that it would retard the Sinigaglia conquest.
Nevertheless, the duke calmly pursued his preparations, and proceeded
now to send forward his artillery. There was no real ground upon which
to assume that he would adopt any other course. Cesare was now in
considerable strength, apart from French lances, and even as these
left him he was joined by a thousand Swiss, and another six hundred
Romagnuoli from the Val di Lamone. Moreover, as far as the reduction of
Sinigaglia was concerned, no resistance was to be expected, for Cardinal
Giuliano della Rovere had written enjoining the people to surrender
peacefully to the duke.

What matters Cesare may have found in Cesena to justify the arrest of
his Governor-General we do not know to the full with absolute certainty.
On December 22 Ramiro de Lorqua, coming from Pesaro in response to his
master’s summons, was arrested on his arrival and flung into prison. His
examination was to follow.

Macchiavelli, reporting the arrest, says: “It is thought he [Cesare] may
sacrifice him to the people, who have a very great desire of it.”

Ramiro had made himself detested in Romagna by the ruthlessness of his
rule, and a ruthless servant reflects upon his master, a matter which
could nowise suit Borgia. To all who have read The Prince it will be
clear that upon that ground alone--of having brought Valentinois’s
justice into disrepute by the harshness which in Valentinois’s name he
practised--Macchiavelli would have approved the execution of Ramiro.
He would have accounted it perfectly justifiable that Ramiro should
be sacrificed to the people for no better reason than because he had
provoked their hatred, since this sacrifice made for the duke’s welfare.
He does, as a matter of fact, justify this execution, but upon much
fuller grounds than these. Still, had the reasons been no better than
are mentioned, he would still have justified it upon those. So much
is clear; and, when so much is clear, much more will be clear to you
touching this strange epoch.

There was, however, more than a matter of sacrificing the
Governor-General to the hatred of the people. There was, for one thing,
the matter of that wheat which had disappeared. Ramiro was charged with
having fraudulently sold it to his own dishonest profit, putting
the duke to the heavy expense of importing fresh supplies for the
nourishment of the people. The seriousness of the charge will be
appreciated when it is considered that, had a famine resulted from
this peculation, grave disorder might have ensued and perhaps even a
rebellion against a government which could provide no better.

The duke published the news of the governor’s arrest throughout Romagna.
He announced his displeasure and regret at the harshnesses and corrupt
practices of Ramiro de Lorqua, in spite of the most urgent admonishings
that he should refrain from all undue exactions and the threat of grave
punishment should he disobey. These frauds, corruption, extortion, and
rapine practised by the governor were so grave, continuous and general,
stated the duke in his manifesto, that “there is no city, country-side,
or castle, nor any place in all Romagna, nor officer or minister of
the duke’s, who does not know of these abuses; and, amongst others,
the famine of wheat occasioned by the traffic which he held against our
express prohibition, sending out such quantities as would abundantly
have sufficed for the people and the army.”

He concludes with assurances of his intention that, in the future, they
shall be ruled with justice and integrity, and he urges all who may
have charges to prefer against the said governor to bring them forward
immediately.

It was freely rumoured that the charges against Ramiro by no means ended
there, and in Bologna--and from Bologna the truth of such a matter might
well transpire, all things considered--it was openly said that Ramiro
had been in secret treaty with the Bentivogli, Orsini, and Vitelli,
against the Duke of Valentinois: “Aveva provixione da Messer Zoane
Bentivogli e da Orsini e Vitelozo contro el duca,” writes Fileno della
Tuate, who, it will be borne in mind, was no friend of the Borgia, and
would be at no pains to find justification for the duke’s deeds.

But of that secret treaty there was, for the moment, no official
mention. Later the rumour of it was to receive the fullest confirmation,
and, together with that, we shall give, in the next chapter, the duke’s
obvious reasons for having kept the matter secret at first. Matter
enough and to spare was there already upon which to dispose of Messer
Ramiro de Lorqua and disposed of he was, with the most summary justice.

On the morning of December 26 the first folk to be astir in Cesena
beheld, in the grey light of that wintry dawn, the body of Ramiro lying
headless in the square. It was richly dressed, with all his ornaments
upon it, a scarlet cloak about it, and the hands were gloved. On a
pike beside the body the black-bearded head was set up to view, and
so remained throughout that day, a terrible display of the swift and
pitiless justice of the duke.

Macchiavelli wrote: “The reason of his death is not properly known”
 (“non si sa bene la cagione della sua morte”) “beyond the fact that such
was the pleasure of the prince, who shows us that he can make and unmake
men according to their deserts.”

The Cronica Civitas Faventiae, the Diariurn Caesenate, and the Cronache
Forlivese, all express the people’s extreme satisfaction at the deed,
and endorse the charges of brutality against the man which are contained
in Cesare’s letter.




CHAPTER XVII. “THE BEAUTIFUL STRATAGEM”


Cesare left Cesena very early on the morning of December 26--the morning
of Ramiro’s execution--and by the 29th he was at Fano, where he received
the envoys who came from Ancona with protestations of loyalty, as well
as a messenger from Vitellozzo Vitelli, who brought him news of the
surrender of Sinigaglia. The citadel itself was still being held by
Andrea Doria--the same who was afterwards to become so famous in Genoa;
this, it was stated, was solely because Doria desired to make surrender
to the duke himself. The Prefectress, Giovanna da Montefeltre, had
already departed from the city, which she ruled as regent for her
eleven-year old boy, and had gone by sea to Venice.

The duke returned answer to Vitelli that he would be in Sinigaglia
himself upon the morrow, and he invited the condottieri to receive him
there, since he was decided to possess himself of the citadel at once,
whether Doria chose to surrender it peacefully or not; and that, to
provide for emergencies, he would bring his artillery with him. Lastly,
Vitelli was bidden to prepare quarters within the new town for the
troops that would accompany Cesare. To do this it was necessary to
dispose the soldiers of Oliverotto da Fermo in the borgo. These were the
only troops with the condottieri in Sinigaglia; the remainder of their
forces were quartered in the strongholds of the territory at distances
of from five to seven miles of the town.

On the last day of that year 1502 Cesare Borgia appeared before
Sinigaglia to receive the homage of those men who had used him so
treacherously, and whom--with the exception of Paolo Orsini--he now
met face to face for the first time since their rebellion. Here were
Francesco Orsini, Duke of Gravina, with Paolo and the latter’s son
Fabio; here was Oliverotto, the ruffianly Lord of Fermo, who had won his
lordship by the cold-blooded murder of his kinsman, and concerning whom
a rumour ran in Rome that Cesare had sworn to choke him with his own
hands; and here was Vitellozzo Vitelli, the arch-traitor of them all.

Gianpaolo Baglioni was absent through illness--a matter less fatal to
him than was their health to those who were present--and the Cardinal
and Giulio Orsini were in Rome.

Were these captains mad to suppose that such a man as Cesare Borgia
could so forget the wrong they had done him, and forgive them in this
easy fashion, exacting no amends? Were they mad to suppose that, after
such proofs as they had given him of what manner of faith they kept,
he would trust them hereafter with their lives to work further mischief
against him? (Well might Macchiavelli have marvelled when he beheld
the terms of the treaty the duke had made with them.) Were they mad to
imagine that one so crafty as Valentinois would so place himself into
their hands--the hands of men who had sworn his ruin and death? Truly,
mad they must have been--rendered so by the gods who would destroy them.

The tale of that happening is graphically told by the pen of the
admiring Macchiavelli, who names the affair “Il Bellissimo Inganno.”
 That he so named it should suffice us and restrain us from criticisms of
our own, accepting that criticism of his. To us, judged from our modern
standpoint, the affair of Sinigaglia is the last word in treachery
and iscariotism. But you are here concerned with the standpoint of
the Cinquecento, and that standpoint Macchiavelli gives you when he
describes this business as “the beautiful stratagem.” To offer judgment
in despite of that is to commit a fatuity, which too often already has
been committed.

Here, then, is Macchiavelli’s story of the event:

On the morning of December 31 Cesare’s army, composed of 10,000 foot
and 3,000 horse,(1) was drawn up on the banks of the River Metauro--some
five miles from Sinigaglia--in accordance with his orders, awaiting his
arrival. He came at daybreak, and immediately ordered forward 200 lances
under the command of Don Michele da Corella; he bade the foot to march
after these, and himself brought up the rear with the main body of the
horse.


  1 This is Macchiavelli’s report of the forces; but, it appears to be an
exaggeration, for, upon leaving Cesena, Cesare does not appear to have
commanded more than 10,000 men in all.


In Sinigaglia, as we have seen, the condottieri had only the troops of
Oliverotto--1,000 foot and 150 horse--which had been quartered in the
borgo, and were now drawn up in the market-place, Oliverotto at their
head, to do honour to the duke.

As the horse under Don Michele gained the little river Misa and the
bridge that spanned it, almost directly opposite to the gates of
Sinigaglia, their captain halted them and drew them up into two files,
between which a lane was opened. Through this the foot went forward
and straight into the town, and after came Cesare himself, a graceful,
youthful figure, resplendent in full armour at the head of his lances.
To meet him advanced now the three Orsini and Vitellozzo Vitelli.
Macchiavelli tells us of the latter’s uneasiness, of his premonitions of
evil, and the farewells (all of which Macchiavelli had afterwards heard
reported) which he had taken of his family before coming to Sinigaglia.
Probably these are no more than the stories that grow up about such men
after such an event as that which was about to happen.

The condottieri came unarmed, Vitelli mounted on a mule, wearing a cloak
with a green lining. In that group he is the only man deserving of any
respect or pity--a victim of his sense of duty to his family, driven to
his rebellion and faithlessness to Valentinois by his consuming desire
to avenge his brother’s death upon the Florentines. The others were
poor creatures, incapable even of keeping faith with one another. Paolo
Orsini was actually said to be in secret concert with Valentinois since
his mission to him at Imola, and to have accepted heavy bribes from him.
Oliverotto you have seen at work, making a holocaust of his family and
friends under the base spur of his cupidity; whilst of the absent ones,
Pandolfo Petrucci alone was a man of any steadfastness and honesty.

The duke’s reception of them was invested with that gracious
friendliness of which none knew the art better than did he, intent
upon showing them that the past was forgiven and their offences against
himself forgotten. As they turned and rode with him through the gates
of Sinigaglia some of the duke’s gentlemen hemmed them about in the
preconcerted manner, lest even now they should be taken with alarm. But
it was all done unostentatiously and with every show of friendliness,
that no suspicions should be aroused.

From the group Cesare had missed Oliverotto, and as they now approached
the market-square, where the Tyrant of Fermo sat on his horse at the
head of his troops, Cesare made a sign with his eyes to Don Michele, the
purport of which was plain to the captain. He rode ahead to suggest to
Ohiverotto that this was no time to have his men under arms and out of
their lodgings, and to point out to him that, if they were not dismissed
they would be in danger of having their quarters snatched from them by
the duke’s men, from which trouble might arise. To this he added that
the duke was expecting his lordship.

Oliverotto, persuaded, gave the order for the dismissal of his troops,
and the duke, coming up at that moment, called to him. In response
he went to greet him, and fell in thereafter with the others who were
riding with Valentinois.

In amiable conversation with them all, and riding between Vitelli and
Francesco Orsini, the duke passed from the borgo into the town itself,
and so to the palace, where the condottieri disposed to take their leave
of him. But Cesare was not for parting with them yet; he bade them in
with him, and they perforce must accept his invitation. Besides, his
mood was so agreeable that surely there could be nought to fear.

But scarce were they inside when his manner changed of a sudden, and at
a sign from him they were instantly overpowered and arrested by those
gentlemen of his own who were of the party and who came to it well
schooled in what they were to do.

Buonaccorsi compiled his diary carefully from the letters of
Macchiavelli to the Ten, in so far as this and other affairs are
concerned; and to Buonaccorsi we must now turn for what immediately
follows, which is no doubt from Macchiavelli’s second letter of December
31, in which the full details of the affair are given. His first letter
no more than briefly states the happening; the second unfortunately
is missing; so that the above particulars--and some yet to follow--are
culled from the relations which he afterwards penned (“Del modo tenuto,”
 etc.), edited, however, by the help of his dispatches at the time in
regard to the causes which led to the affair. Between these and the
actual relation there are some minor discrepancies. Unquestionably the
dispatches are the more reliable, so that, where such discrepancies
occur, the version in the dispatches has been preferred.

To turn for a moment to Buonaccorsi, he tells us that, as the Florentine
envoy (who was, of course, Macchiavelli) following the Duke of
Valentinois entered the town later, after the arrest of the condottieri,
and found all uproar and confusion, he repaired straight to the palace
to ascertain the truth. As he approached he met the duke, riding out in
full armour to quell the rioting and restrain his men, who were by
now all out of hand and pillaging the city. Cesare, perceiving the
secretary, reined in and called him.

“This,” he said, “is what I wanted to tell Monsignor di Volterra
[Soderini] when he came to Urbino, but I could not entrust him with the
secret. Now that my opportunity has come, I have known very well how to
make use of it, and I have done a great service to your masters.”

And with that Cesare left him, and, calling his captains about him,
rode down into the town to put an end to the horrors that were being
perpetrated there.

Immediately upon the arrest of the condottieri Cesare had issued orders
to attack the soldiers of Vitelli and Orsini, and to dislodge them from
the castles of the territory where they were quartered, and similarly
to dislodge Oliverotto’s men and drive them out of Sinigaglia. This had
been swiftly accomplished. But the duke’s men were not disposed to leave
matters at that. Excited by the taste of battle that had been theirs,
they returned to wreak their fury upon the town, and were proceeding to
put it to sack, directing particular attention to the wealthy quarter
occupied by the Venetian merchants, which is said to have been plundered
by them to the extent of some 20,000 ducats. They would have made an
end of Sinigaglia but for the sudden appearance amongst them of the duke
himself. He rode through the streets, angrily ordering the pillage to
cease; and, to show how much he was in earnest, with his own hands he
cut down some who were insolent or slow to obey him; thus, before dusk,
he had restored order and quiet.

As for the condottieri, Vitelli and Oliverotto were dealt with that very
night. There is a story that Oliverotto, seeing that all was lost, drew
a dagger and would have put it through his heart to save himself from
dying at the hands of the hangman. If it is true, then that was his last
show of spirit. He turned craven at the end, and protested tearfully to
his judges--for a trial was given them--that the fault of all the wrong
wrought against the duke lay with his brother-in-law, Vitellozzo. More
wonderful was it that the grim Vitelli’s courage also should break down
at the end, and that he should beg that the Pope be implored to grant
him a plenary indulgence and that his answer be awaited.

But at dawn--the night having been consumed in their trial--they were
placed back to back, and so strangled, and their bodies were taken to
the church of the Misericordia Hospital.

The Orsini were not dealt with just yet. They were kept prisoners, and
Valentinois would go no further until he should have heard from Rome
that Giulio Orsini and the powerful cardinal were also under arrest. To
put to death at present the men in his power might be to alarm and so
lose the others. They are right who say that his craft was devilish; but
what else was to be expected of the times?

On the morrow--January 1, 1503--the duke issued dispatches to the Powers
of Italy giving his account of the deed. It set forth that the Orsini
and their confederates, notwithstanding the pardon accorded them for
their first betrayal and revolt, upon learning of the departure of the
French lances--and concluding that the duke was thereby weakened, and
left with only a few followers of no account--had plotted a fresh and
still greater treachery. Under pretence of assisting him in the
taking of Sinigaglia, whither it was known that he was going, they had
assembled there in their full strength, but displaying only one-third
of it, and concealing the remainder in the castles of the surrounding
country. They had then agreed with the castellan of Sinigaglia, that on
that night they should attack him on every side of the new town, which,
being small, could contain, as they knew, but few of his people. This
treachery coming to his knowledge, he had been able to forestall it,
and, entering Sinigaglia with all his troops, he had seized the
traitors and taken the forces of Oliverotto by surprise. He concluded by
exhorting all to render thanks unto God that an end was set to the many
calamities suffered in Italy in consequence of those malignant ones.(1)


  1  See this letter in the documents appended to Alvisi’s Cesare Borgia,
document 76.


For once Cesare Borgia is heard giving his own side of an affair. But
are the particulars of his version true? Who shall say positively? His
statement is not by any means contrary to the known facts, although it
sets upon them an explanation rather different to that afforded us by
Macchiavelli. But it is to be remembered that, after all, Macchiavelli
had to fall back upon the inferences which he drew from what he beheld,
and that there is no scrap of evidence directly to refute any one of
Cesare’s statements. There is even confirmation of the statement that
the condottieri conceived that he was weakened by the departure of the
French lances and left with only a few followers of no account. For
Macchiavelli himself dwells upon the artifice with which Cesare broke up
his forces and disposed of them in comparatively small numbers here and
there to the end that his full strength should remain concealed; and he
admires the strategy of that proceeding.

Certainly the duke’s narrative tends to increase his justification for
acting as he did. But at best it can only increase it, for the actual
justification was always there, and by the light of his epoch it is
difficult to see how he should be blamed. These men had openly sworn
to have his life, and from what has been seen of them there is little
reason to suppose they would not have kept their word had they but been
given the opportunity.

In connection with Cesare’s version, it is well to go back for a moment
to the execution of Ramiro de Lorqua, and to recall the alleged secret
motives that led to it. Macchiavelli himself was not satisfied that all
was disclosed, and that the governor’s harshness and dishonesty had been
the sole causes of the justice done upon him. “The reason of his death
is not properly known,” wrote the Florentine secretary. Another envoy
of that day would have filled his dispatches with the rumours that were
current, with the matters that were being whispered at street corners.
But Macchiavelli’s habit was to disregard rumours as a rule, knowing
their danger--a circumstance which renders his evidence the most
valuable which we possess.

It is perhaps permissible to ask: What dark secrets had the torture of
the cord drawn from Messer Ramiro? Had these informed the duke of the
true state of affairs at Sinigaglia, and had the knowledge brought him
straight from Cesena to deal with the matter?

There is justification for these questions, inasmuch as on January 4 the
Pope related to Giustiniani--for which see his dispatches--that Ramiro
de Lorqua, being sentenced to death, stated that he desired to inform
the duke of certain matters, and informed him that he had concerted with
the Orsini to give the latter the territory of Cesena; but that, as
this could not now be done, in consequence of Cesare’s treaty with the
condottieri, Vitelli had arranged to kill the duke, in which design he
had the concurrence of Oliverotto. They had planned that a crossbow-man
should shoot the duke as he rode into Sinigaglia, in consequence of
which the duke took great care of himself and never put off his armour
until the affair was over. Vitellozzo, the Pope said, had confessed
before he died that all that Ramiro had told the duke was true, and
at the Consistory of January 6, when the Sacred College begged for
the release of the old Cardinal Orsini--who had been taken with the
Archbishop of Florence, Giacomo di Santacroce, and Gianbattista da
Virginio--the Pope answered by informing the cardinals of this plot
against the duke’s life.

These statements by Cesare and his father are perfectly consistent
with each other and with the events. Yet, for want of independent
confirmation, they are not to be insisted upon as affording the true
version--as, of course, the Pope may have urged what he did as a pretext
to justify what was yet to follow.

It is readily conceivable that Ramiro, under torture, or in the hope
perhaps of saving his life, may have betrayed the alleged plot to murder
Cesare. And it is perfectly consistent with Cesare’s character and with
his age that he should have entered into a bargain to learn what Ramiro
might have to disclose, and then have repudiated it and given him to the
executioner. If Cesare, under such circumstances as these, had learnt
what was contemplated, he would very naturally have kept silent on the
score of it until he had dealt with the condottieri. To do otherwise
might be to forewarn them. He was, as Macchiavelli says, a secret man,
and the more dangerous for his closeness, since he never let it be known
what he intended until he had executed his designs.

Guicciardini, of course, has called the Sinigaglia affair a villainy
(“scelleragine”) whilst Fabio Orsini and a nephew of Vitelli’s who
escaped from Sinigaglia and arrived two days later at Perugia, sought to
engage sympathy by means of an extraordinary tale, so alien to all the
facts--apart from their obvious reasons to lie and provoke resentment
against Cesare--as not to be worth citing.




CHAPTER XVIII. THE ZENITH


Andrea Doria did not remain to make formal surrender of the citadel
of Sinigaglia to the duke--for which purpose, be it borne in mind, had
Cesare been invited, indirectly, to come to Sinigaglia. He fled during
the night that saw Vitelli and Oliverotto writhing their last in the
strangler’s hands. And his flight adds colour to the versions of the
affair that were afforded the world by Cesare and his father. Andrea
Doria, waiting to surrender his trust, had nothing to fear from the
duke, no reason to do anything but remain. Andrea Doria, intriguing
against the duke’s life with the condottieri, finding them seized by the
duke, and inferring that all was discovered, had every reason to fly.

The citadel made surrender on that New Year’s morning, when Cesare
summoned it to do so, whilst the troops of the Orsini and Vitelli lodged
in the castles of the territory, being taken unawares, were speedily
disposed of. So, there being nothing more left to do in Sinigaglia,
Cesare once more marshalled his men and set out for Città di
Castello--the tyranny of the Vitelli, which he found undefended and of
which he took possession in the name of the Church. Thence he rushed
on towards Perugia, for he had word that Guidobaldo of Urbino, Fabio
Orsini, Annibale and Venanzio Varano, and Vitelli’s nephew were
assembled there under the wing of Gianpaolo Baglioni, who, with a
considerable condotta at his back, was making big talk of resisting
the Duke of Romagna and Valentinois. In this, Gianpaolo persevered most
bravely until he had news that the duke was as near as Gualdo, when
precipitately he fled--leaving his guests to shift for themselves. He
had remembered, perhaps, at the last moment how narrow an escape he
had had of it at Sinigaglia, and he repaired to Siena to join Pandolfo
Petrucci, who had been equally fortunate in that connection.

To meet the advancing and irresistible duke came ambassadors from
Perugia with smooth words of welcome, the offer of the city, and their
thanks for his having delivered them of the tyrants that oppressed
them; and there is not the slightest cause to suppose that this was mere
sycophancy, for a more bloody, murderous crew than these Baglioni--whose
feuds not only with the rival family of the Oddi, but among their
very selves, had more than once embrued the walls of that city in the
hills--it would be difficult to find in Italy, or anywhere in Europe.
The history of the Baglioni is one record of slaughter. Under their
rule in Perugia human blood seems commonly to have flowed anywhere more
freely than in human veins. It is no matter for wonder that the people
sent their ambassador to thank Cesare for having delivered them from the
yoke that had oppressed them.

Perugia having rendered him her oath of fealty, the duke left her
his secretary, Agabito Gherardi, as his commissioner, whilst sending
Vincenzo Calmeta to Fermo--Oliverotto’s tyranny--another State which was
very fervent in the thanks it expressed for this deliverance.

Scarcely was Cesare gone from Perugia when into the hands of his people
fell the person of the Lady Panthasilea Baglioni d’Alviano--the wife of
the famous Venetian condottiero Bartolomeo d’Alviano--and they, aware of
the feelings prevailing between their lord and the Government of Venice,
bethought them that here was a valuable hostage. So they shut her up
in the Castle of Todi, together with her children and the women who had
been with her when she was taken.

As in the case of Dorotea Caracciolo, the rumour is instantly put about
that it was Cesare who had seized her, that he had taken her to his
camp, and that this poor woman had fallen a prey to that lustful
monster. So--and in some such words--ran the story, and such a hold did
it take upon folks’ credulity that we see Piero di Bibieno before the
Council of Ten, laying a more or less formal charge against the duke in
rather broader terms than are here set down. So much, few of those
who have repeated his story omit to tell you. But for some reason, not
obviously apparent, they do not think it worth while to add that the
Doge himself--better informed, it is clear, for he speaks with finality
in the matter--reproved him by denying the rumour and definitely stating
that it was not true, as you may read in the Diary of Marino Sanuto.
That same diary shows you the husband--a person of great consequence in
Venice--before the Council, clamouring for the enlargement of his lady;
yet never once does he mention the name of Valentinois. The Council of
Ten sends an envoy to wait upon the Pope; and the Pope expresses his
profound regret and his esteem for Alviano, and informs the envoy that
he is writing to Valentinois to demand her instant release--in fact,
shows the envoy the letter.

To that same letter the duke replied on January 29 that he had known
nothing of the matter until this communication reached him; that he has
since ascertained that the lady was indeed captured and that she has
since been detained in the Castle of Todi with all the consideration
due to her rank; and that, immediately upon ascertaining this he had
commanded that she should be set at liberty, which was done.

And so the Lady Panthasilea returned unharmed to her husband.

In Assisi Cesare received the Florentine ambassador Salviati, who came
to congratulate the duke upon the affair of Sinigaglia and to replace
Macchiavelli--the latter having been ordered home again. Congratulations
indeed were addressed to him by all those Powers that had received his
official intimation of the event. Amongst these were the felicitations
of the beautiful and accomplished Isabella d’Este, Marchioness of
Gonzaga--whose relations with him were ever of the friendliest, even
when Faenza by its bravery evoked her pity--and with these she sent him,
for the coming carnival, a present of a hundred masks of rare variety
and singular beauty, because she opined that “after the fatigues he had
suffered in these glorious enterprises, he would desire to contrive for
some recreation.”

Here in Assisi, too, he received the Siennese envoys who came to wait
upon him, and he demanded that, out of respect for the King of France,
they should drive out Pandolfo Petrucci from Siena. For, to use his
own words, “having deprived his enemies of their weapons, he would now
deprive them of their brain,” by which he paid Petrucci the compliment
of accounting him the “brain” of all that had been attempted against
him. To show the Siennese how much he was in earnest, he leaves all
baggage and stores at Assisi, and, unhampered, makes one of his sudden
swoops towards Siena, pausing on January 13 at Castel della Pieve to
publish, at last, his treaty with Bentivogli. The latter being
now sincere, no doubt out of fear of the consequences of further
insincerity, at once sends Cesare 30 lances and 100 arbalisters under
the command of Antonio della Volta.

It was there in Assisi, on the morning of striking his camp again, that
Cesare completed the work that had been begun at Sinigaglia by having
Paolo Orsini and the Duke of Gravina strangled. There was no cause
to delay the matter longer. He had word from Rome of the capture of
Cardinal Orsini, of Gianbattista da Virginio, of Giacomo di Santacroce,
and Rinaldo Orsini, Archbishop of Florence.

On January 27, Pandolfo Petrucci being still in Siena, and Cesare’s
patience exhausted, he issued an ultimatum from his camp at Sartiano in
which he declared that if, within twenty-four hours, Petrucci had not
been expelled from the city, he would loose his soldiers upon Siena to
devastate the territory, and would treat every inhabitant “as a Pandolfo
and an enemy.”

Siena judged it well to bow before that threatening command, and Cesare,
seeing himself obeyed, was free to depart to Rome, whither the Pope had
recalled him and where work awaited him. He was required to make an end
of the resistance of the barons, a task which had been entrusted to his
brother Giuffredo, but which the latter had been unable to carry out.

In this matter Cesare and his father are said to have violently
disagreed, and it is reported that high words flew between them; for
Cesare--who looked ahead and had his own future to consider, which
should extend beyond the lifetime of Alexander VI--would not move
against Silvio Savelli in Palombara, nor Gian Giordano in Bracciano,
alleging, as his reason for the latter forbearance, that Gian Giordano,
being a knight of St. Michael like himself, he was inhibited by the
terms of that knighthood from levying war upon him. To that he adhered,
whilst disposing, however, to lay siege to Ceri, where Giulio and
Giovanni Orsini had taken refuge.

In the meantime, the Cardinal Gianbattista Orsini had breathed his last
in the Castle of Sant’ Angelo.

Soderini had written ironically to Florence on February 15: “Cardinal
Orsini, in prison, shows signs of frenzy. I leave your Sublimities
to conclude, in your wisdom, the judgment that is formed of such an
illness.”

It was not, however, until a week later--on February 22--that he
succumbed, when the cry of “Poison!” grew so loud and general that the
Pope ordered the cardinal’s body to be carried on a bier with the face
exposed, that all the world might see its calm and the absence of such
stains as were believed usually to accompany venenation.

Nevertheless, the opinion spread that he had been poisoned--and the
poisoning of Cardinal Orsini has been included in the long list of the
Crimes of the Borgias with which we have been entertained. That the
rumour should have spread is not in the least wonderful, considering
in what bad odour were the Orsini at the Vatican just then, and--be it
remembered--what provocation they had given. Although Valentinois dubbed
Pandolfo Petrucci the “brain” of the conspiracy against him, the real
guiding spirit, there can be little doubt, was this Cardinal Orsini,
in whose stronghold at Magione the diet had met to plot Valentinois’s
ruin--the ruin of the Gonfalonier of the Church, and the fresh
alienation from the Holy See of the tyrannies which it claimed for its
own, and which at great cost had been recovered to it.

Against the Pope, considered as a temporal ruler, that was treason
in the highest degree, and punishable by death; and, assuming that
Alexander did cause the death of Cardinal Orsini, the only just censure
that could fall upon him for the deed concerns the means employed. Yet
even against that it might be urged that thus was the dignity of the
purple saved the dishonouring touch of the hangman’s hands.

Some six weeks later--on April 10--died Giovanni Michieli, Cardinal of
Sant’ Angelo, and Giustiniani, the Venetian ambassador, wrote to his
Government that the cardinal had been ill for only two days, and
that his illness had been attended by violent sickness. This--and the
reticence of it--was no doubt intended to arouse the suspicion that the
cardinal had been poisoned. Giustiniani adds that Michieli’s house was
stripped that very night by the Pope, who profited thereby to the extent
of some 150,000 ducats, besides plate and other valuables; and this was
intended to show an indecent eagerness on the Pope’s part to possess
himself of that which by the cardinal’s death he inherited, whereas, in
truth, the measure would be one of wise precaution against the customary
danger of pillage by the mob.

But in March of the year 1504, under the pontificate of Julius
II (Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere) a subdeacon, named Asquino de
Colloredo, was arrested for defaming the dead cardinal (“interfector
bone memorie Cardinalis S. Angeli”).(1) What other suspicions were
entertained against him, what other revelations it was hoped to extract
from him, cannot be said; but Asquino was put to the question, to
the usual accompaniment of the torture of the cord, and under this he
confessed that he had poisoned Cardinal Michieli, constrained to it
by Pope Alexander VI and the Duke of Valentinois, against his will and
without reward (“verumtamen non voluisse et pecunias non habuisse”).


  1  Burchard’s Diarium, March 6, 1504.


Now if Asquino defamed the memory of Cardinal Michieli it seems to
follow naturally that he had hated the cardinal; and, if we know that he
hated him, we need not marvel that, out of that hatred, he poisoned him.
But something must have been suspected as a motive for his arrest
in addition to the slanders he was uttering, otherwise how came
the questions put to him to be directed so as to wring from him the
confession that he had poisoned the cardinal? If you choose to believe
his further statement that he was constrained to it by Pope Alexander
and the Duke of Valentinois, you are, of course, at liberty to do so.
But you will do well first to determine precisely what degree of credit
such a man might be worth when seeking to extenuate a fault admitted
under pressure of the torture--and offering the extenuation likeliest to
gain him the favour of the della Rovere Pope, whose life’s task--as we
shall see--was the defamation of the hated Borgias. You will also do
well closely to examine the last part of his confession--that he was
constrained to it “against his will and without reward.” Would the deed
have been so very much against the will of one who went about publishing
his hatred of the dead cardinal by the slanders he emitted?

Upon such evidence as that the accusation of the Pope’s murder of
Cardinal Michieli has been definitely established--and it must be
admitted that it is, if anything, rather more evidence than is usually
forthcoming of the vampirism and atrocities alleged against him.

Giustiniani, writing to his Government in the spring of 1503, informs
the Council of Ten that it is the Pope’s way to fatten his cardinals
before disposing of them--that is to say, enriching them before
poisoning them, that he may inherit their possessions. It was a wild and
sweeping statement, dictated by political animus, and it has since grown
to proportions more monstrous than the original. You may read usque
ad nauseam of the Pope and Cesare’s constant practice of poisoning
cardinals who had grown rich, for the purpose of seizing their
possessions, and you are very naturally filled with horror at so much
and such abominable turpitude. In this matter, assertion--coupled with
whorling periods of vituperation--have ever been considered by the
accusers all that was necessary to establish the accusations. It has
never, for instance, been considered necessary to cite the names of the
cardinals composing that regiment of victims. That, of course, would be
to challenge easy refutation of the wholesale charge; and refutation is
not desired by those who prefer the sensational manner.

The omission may, in part at least, be repaired by giving a list of
the cardinals who died during the eleven years of the pontificate
of Alexander VI. Those deaths, in eleven years, number
twenty-one--representing, incidentally, a percentage that compares
favourably with any other eleven years of any other pontificate or
pontificates. They are:

     Ardicino della Porta   .   .     In 1493, at Rome
     Giovanni de’Conti.   .   .       In 1493, at Rome
     Domenico della Rovere  .   .     In 1494, at Rome
     Gonzalo de Mendoza.   .   .      In 1495, in Spain
     Louis André d’Epinay   .   .     In 1495, in France
     Gian Giacomo Sclafetano.   .     In 1496, at Rome
     Bernardino di Lunati   .   .     In 1497, at Rome
     Paolo Fregosi.   .   .   .       In 1498, at Rome
     Gianbattista Savelli   .   .     In 1498, at Rome
     Giovanni della Grolaye .   .     In 1499, at Rome
     Giovanni Borgia  .   .   .       In 1500, at Fossombrone
     Bartolomeo Martini.   .   .      In 1500, at Rome
     John Morton.   .   .   .         In 1500, in England
     Battista Zeno.   .   .   .       In 1501, at Rome
     Juan Lopez .   .   .   .         In 1501, at Rome
     Gianbattista Ferrari   .   .     In 1502, at Rome
     Hurtado de Mendoza.   .   .      In 1502, in Spain
     Gianbattista Orsini.   .   .     In 1503, at Rome
     Giovanni Michieli.   .   .       In 1503, at Rome
     Giovanni Borgia (Seniore).   .   In 1503, at Rome
     Federico Casimir .   .   .       In 1503, in Poland

Now, search as you will, not only such contemporary records as diaries,
chronicles, and dispatches from ambassadors in Rome during that period
of eleven years but also subsequent writings compiled from them, and you
shall find no breath of scandal attaching to the death of seventeen of
those cardinals, no suggestion that they died other than natural deaths.

Four remain: Cardinals Giovanni Borgia (Giuniore), Gianbattista Ferrari
(Cardinal of Modena), Gianbattista Orsini, and Giovanni Michieli, all of
whom the Pope and Cesare have, more or less persistently, been accused
of poisoning.

Giovanni Borgia’s death at Fossombrone has been dealt with at length
in its proper place, and it has been shown how utterly malicious and
groundless was the accusation.

Giovanni Michieli’s is the case that has just been reviewed, and
touching which you may form your own conclusions.

Gianbattista Orsini’s also has been examined. It rests upon rumour; but
even if that rumour be true, it is unfair to consider the deed in any
but the light of a political execution.

There remains the case of the Cardinal of Modena, a man who had amassed
enormous wealth in the most questionable manner, and who was universally
execrated. The epigrams upon his death, in the form of epitaphs, dealt
most terribly with “his ignominious memory”--as Burchard has it. Of
these the Master of Ceremonies collected upwards of a score, which he
gives in his Diarium. Let one suffice here as a fair example of the
rest, the one that has it that the earth has the cardinal’s body, the
bull (i.e. the Borgia) his wealth, and hell his soul.

     “Hac Janus Baptista jacet Ferrarius urna,
     Terra habuit corpus, Bos bona, Styx animam.”

The only absolutely contemporary suggestion of his having been poisoned
emanated from the pen of that same Giustiniani. He wrote to the Venetian
Senate to announce the cardinal’s death on July 20. In his letter he
relates how his benefices were immediately distributed, and how the
lion’s share fell to the cardinal’s secretary, Sebastiano Pinzone, and
that it was said (“é fama”) that this man had received them as the price
of blood (“in premium sanguinis”), “since it is held, from many evident
signs, that the cardinal died from poison” (“ex veneno”).

Already on the 11th he had written: “The Cardinal of Modena lies ill,
with little hope of recovery. Poison is suspected” (“si dubita di
veleno”).

That was penned on the eighth day of the cardinal’s sickness, for he was
taken ill on the 3rd--as Burchard shows. Burchard, further, lays before
us the whole course of the illness; tells us how, from the beginning,
the cardinal refused to be bled or to take medicine of any kind, tells
us explicitly and positively that the cardinal was suffering from a
certain fever--so prevalent and deadly in Rome during the months of
July and August; he informs us that, on the 11th (the day on which
Giustiniani wrote the above-cited dispatch), the fever abated, to
return on the 16th. He was attended (Burchard continues) by many able
physicians, who strove to induce him to take their medicines; but he
refused persistently until the following day, when he accepted a small
proportion of the doses proposed. On July 20--after an illness of
seventeen days--he finally expired.

Those entries in the diary of the Master of Ceremonies constitute an
incontrovertible document, an irrefutable testimony against the charges
of poisoning when taken in conjunction with the evidence of fact
afforded by the length of the illness.

It is true that, under date of November 20, 1504 (under the pontificate
of Julius II), there is the following entry:

“Sentence was pronounced in the ‘Ruota’ against Sebastiano Pinzone,
apostolic scribe, contumaciously absent, and he was deprived of all
benefices and offices in that he had caused the death of the Cardinal of
Modena, his patron, who had raised him from the dust.”

But not even that can shake the conviction that must leap to every
honest mind from following the entries in the diary contemporary with
the cardinal’s decease. They are too circumstantial and conclusive to
be overthrown by this recorded sentence of the Ruota two years later
against a man who was not even present to defend himself. Besides, it is
necessary to discriminate. Burchard is not stating opinions of his own
when he writes “in that he caused the death of the Cardinal of Modena,”
 etc.; he is simply--and obviously--recording the finding of the Tribunal
of the Ruota, without comment of his own. Lastly, it is as well to
observe that in that verdict against Pinzone--of doubtful justice as it
is--there is no mention made of the Borgias.

The proceedings instituted against Sebastiano Pinzone were of a piece
with those instituted against Asquino de Colloredo and others yet to
be considered; they were set on foot by Giuliano della Rovere--that
implacable enemy of the House of Borgia--when he became Pope, for the
purpose of heaping ignominy upon the family of his predecessor. But that
shall be further dealt with presently.

Another instance of the unceasing growth of Borgia history is afforded
in connection with this Sebastiano Pinzone by Dr. Jacob Burckhardt (in
Der Cultur der Renaissance in Italien) who, in the course of the usual
sweeping diatribe against Cesare, mentions “Michele da Corella, his
strangler, and Sebastiano Pinzone, his poisoner.” It is an amazing
statement; for, whilst obviously leaning upon Giustiniani’s dispatch
for the presumption that Pinzone was a poisoner at all, he ignores the
statement contained in it that Pinzone was the secretary and favourite
of Cardinal Ferrari, nor troubles to ascertain that the man was never in
Cesare Borgia’s service at all, nor is ever once mentioned anywhere as
connected in any capacity whatever with the duke. Dr. Burckhardt felt,
no doubt, the necessity of linking Pinzone to the Borgias, that the
alleged guilt of the former may recoil upon the latter, and so he
accomplished it in this facile and irresponsible manner.

Now, notwithstanding the full and circumstantial evidence afforded by
Burchard’s Diarium of the Cardinal of Modena’s death of a tertian
fever, the German scholar Gregorovius does not hesitate to write of this
cardinal’s death: “It is certain that it was due to their [the Borgias']
infallible white powders.”

Oh the art of writing history in sweeping statements to support a
preconceived point of view! Oh that white powder of the Borgias!

Giovio tells us all about it. Cantarella, he calls it--Cantharides. Why
Cantarella? Possibly because it is a pleasing, mellifluous word that
will help a sentence hang together smoothly; possibly because the
notorious aphrodisiac properties of that drug suggested it to Giovio as
just the poison to be kept handy by folk addicted to the pursuits which
he and others attribute to the Borgias. Can you surmise any better
reason? For observe that Giovio describes the Cantarella for you--a
blunder of his which gives the lie to his statement. “A white powder of
a faint and not unpleasing savour,” says he; and that, as you know, is
nothing like cantharides, which is green, intensely acrid, and burning.
Yet who cares for such discrepancies? Who will ever question anything
that is uttered against a Borgia? “Cantarella--a white powder of a faint
and not unpleasing savour,” answers excellently the steady purpose of
supporting a defamation and pandering to the tastes of those who like
sensations in their reading--and so, from pen to pen, from book to book
it leaps, as unchallenged as it is impossible.

Whilst Cesare’s troops were engaged in laying siege to Ceri, and, by
engines contrived by Leonardo da Vinci, pressing the defenders so
sorely that at the end of a month’s resistance they surrendered with
safe-conduct, the inimical and ever-jealous Venetians in the north were
stirring up what trouble they could. Chafing under the restraint of
France, they but sought a pretext that should justify them in the eyes
of Louis for making war upon Cesare, and when presently envoys came
to lay before the Pope the grievance of the Republic at the pillage by
Borgian soldiery of the Venetian traders in Sinigaglia, Cesare had no
delusions concerning their disposition towards himself.

Growing uneasy lest they should make this a reason for assailing his
frontiers, he sent orders north recommending vigilance and instructing
his officers to deal severely with all enemies of his State, whilst he
proceeded to complete the provisions for the government of the Romagna.
To replace the Governor-General he appointed four seneschals: Cristoforo
della Torre for Forli, Faenza and Imola; Hieronimo Bonadies for Cesena,
Rimini, and Pesaro; Andrea Cossa for Fano, Sinigaglia, Fossombrone, and
Pergola; and Pedro Ramires for the duchy of Urbino. This last was to
find a deal of work for his hands; for Urbino was not yet submissive,
Majolo and S. Leo still holding for Guidobaldo.

Ramires began by reducing Majolo, and then proceeded to lay siege to
S. Leo. But the Castellan--one Lattanzio--encouraged by the assurances
given him that the Venetians would render Guidobaldo assistance to
reconquer his dominions, resisted stubbornly, and was not brought to
surrender until the end of June, after having held the castle for six
months.

If Venice was jealous and hostile in the north, Florence was scarcely
less so in mid-Italy--though perhaps with rather more justification, for
Cesare’s growing power and boundless ambition kept the latter Republic
in perpetual fear of being absorbed into his dominions--into that
kingdom which it was his ultimate aim to found. There can be little
doubt that Francesco da Narni, who appeared in Tuscany early in the
March of that year, coming from the French Court for the purpose of
arranging a league of Florence, Bologna, Siena, and Lucca--the four
States more or less under French protection--had been besought by
Florence, to the obvious end that these four States, united, might
inter-defend themselves against Valentinois. And Florence even went
so far as to avail herself of this to the extent of restoring Pandolfo
Petrucci to the lordship of Siena--preferring even this avowed enemy to
the fearful Valentinois. Thus came about Petrucci’s restoration towards
the end of March, despite the fact that the Siennese were divided on the
subject of his return.

With the single exception of Camerino, where disturbances still
continued, all was quiet in the States of the Church by that summer of
1503.

This desirable state of things had been achieved by Cesare’s wise and
liberal government, which also sufficed to ensure its continuance.

He had successfully combated the threatened famine by importing grain
from Sicily. To Sinigaglia--his latest conquest--he had accorded, as to
the other subjected States, the privilege of appointing her own native
officials, with, of course, the exception of the Podestà (who never
could be a native of any place where he dispensed justice) and the
Castellan. In Cesena a liberal justice was measured out by the Tribunal
of the Ruota, which Cesare had instituted there, equipping it with the
best jurisconsults of the Romagna.

In Rome he proceeded to a military organization on a new basis, and
with a thoroughness never before seen in Italy--or elsewhere, for that
matter--but which was thereafter the example all sought to copy. We have
seen him issuing an edict that every house in the Romagna should furnish
him one man-at-arms to serve him when necessary. The men so levied were
under obligation to repair to the market-place of their native town when
summoned thither by the ringing of the bells, and it was estimated that
this method of conscription would yield him six or seven thousand men,
who could be mobilized in a couple of days. He increased the number
of arquebusiers, appreciating the power and value of a weapon
which--although invented nearly a century earlier--was still regarded
with suspicion. He was also the inventor of the military uniform,
putting his soldiers into a livery of his own, and causing his
men-at-arms to wear over their armour a smock, quartered red and
yellow with the name CESARE lettered on the breast and back, whilst the
gentlemen of his guard wore surcoats of his colours in gold brocade and
crimson velvet.

He continued to levy troops and to arm them, and it is scarcely
over-stating the case to say that hardly a tyrant of the Romagna would
have dared to do so much for fear of the weapons being turned against
himself. Cesare knew no such fear. He enjoyed a loyalty from the people
he had subjected which was almost unprecedented in Italy. The very
officers he placed in command of the troops of his levying were, for the
most part, natives of the Romagna. Is there no inference concerning him
to be drawn from that!

For every man in his service Cesare ordered a back-and-breast and
headpiece of steel, and the armourers’ shops of Brescia rang busily that
summer with the clang of metal upon metal, as that defensive armour for
Cesare’s troops was being forged. At the same time the foundries were
turning out fresh cannon in that season which saw Cesare at the very
height and zenith of his power, although he himself may not have
accounted that, as yet, he was further than at the beginning.

But the catastrophe that was to hurl him irretrievably from the eminence
to which in three short years he had climbed was approaching with
stealthy, relentless foot, and was even now upon him.




BOOK IV. THE BULL CADENT

“Cesar Borgia che era della gente Per armi e per virtú tenuto un sole,
Mancar dovendo andó dove andar sole Phebo, verso la sera, al Occidente.

“Girolamo Casio--Epitaffi.”




CHAPTER I. THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER VI


Unfortunate Naples was a battle-field once more. France and Spain were
engaged there in a war whose details belong elsewhere.

To the aid of France, which was hard beset and with whose arms things
were going none too well, Cesare was summoned to fulfil the obligations
under which he was placed by virtue of his treaty with King Louis.

Rumours were rife that he was negotiating secretly with Gonzalo de
Cordoba, the Great Captain, and the truth of whether or not he was
guilty of so base a treachery has never been discovered. These rumours
had been abroad since May, and, if not arising out of, they were
certainly stimulated by, an edict published by Valentinois concerning
the papal chamberlain, Francesco Troche. In this edict Cesare enjoined
all subjects of the Holy See to arrest, wherever found, this man who had
fled from Rome, and whose flight “was concerned with something against
the honour of the King of France.”

Francesco Troche had been Alexander’s confidential chamberlain and
secretary; he had been a diligent servant of the House of Borgia, and
when in France had acted as a spy for Valentinois, keeping the duke
supplied with valuable information at a critical time, as we have seen.

Villari says of him that he was “one of the Borgias’ most trusted
assassins.” That he has never been so much as alleged to have murdered
anyone does not signify. He was a servant--a trusted servant--of
the Borgias; therefore the title of “assassin” is, ipso facto, to be
bestowed upon him.

The flight of a man holding such an intimate position as Troche’s was
naturally a subject of much speculation and gossip, but a matter upon
which there was no knowledge. Valentinois was ever secret. In common
with his father--though hardly in so marked a degree, and if we except
the case of the scurrilous Letter to Silvio Savelli--he showed a
contemptuous indifference to public opinion on the whole which is
invested almost with a certain greatness. At least it is rarely other
than with greatness that we find such an indifference associated. It was
not for him to take the world into his confidence in matters with which
the world was not concerned. Let the scandalmongers draw what inferences
they pleased. It was a lofty and dignified procedure, but one that was
fraught with peril; and the Borgias have never ceased to pay the price
of that excessive dignity of reserve. For tongues must be wagging, and,
where knowledge is lacking, speculation will soon usurp its place, and
presently be invested with all the authority of “fact.”

Out of surmises touching that matter “which concerned the honour of the
King of France” grew presently--and contradictorily--the rumour that
Troche was gone to betray to France Valentinois’s intention of going
over to the Spanish side. A motive was certainly required to account for
Troche’s action; but the invention of motives does not appear ever to
have troubled the Cinquecentist.

It was now said that Troche was enraged at having been omitted from the
list of cardinals to be created at the forthcoming Consistory. It is
all mystery, even to the end he made; for, whereas some said that, after
being seized on board a ship that was bound for Corsica, Troche in his
despair threw himself overboard and was drowned, others reported that he
was brought back to Rome and strangled in a prison in Trastevere.

The following questions crave answer:

If it was Troche’s design to betray such a treachery of the Borgias
against France, what was he doing on board a vessel bound for Corsica
a fortnight after his flight from Rome? Would not his proper goal have
been the French camp in Naples, which he could have reached in a quarter
of that time, and where not only could he have vented his desire for
vengeance by betraying Alexander and Valentinois, but he could further
have found complete protection from pursuit?

It is idle and unprofitable to dwell further upon the end of Francesco
Troche. The matter is a complete mystery, and whilst theory is very well
as theory, it is dangerous to cause it to fill the place of fact.

Troche was drowned or was strangled as a consequence of his having fled
out of motives that were “against the honour of the King of France.” And
straightway the rumour spread of Valentinois’s intended treachery, and
the rumour was kept alive and swelled by Venice and Florence in pursuit
of their never-ceasing policy of discrediting Cesare with King Louis, to
the end that they might encompass his expedient ruin.

The lie was given to them to no small extent by the Pope, when, in
the Consistory of July 28, he announced Cesare’s departure to join the
French army in Naples with five hundred horse and two thousand foot
assembled for the purpose.

For this Cesare made now his preparations, and on the eve of departure
he went with his father--on the evening of August 5--to sup at the villa
of Cardinal Adriano Corneto, outside Rome.

Once before we have seen him supping at a villa of the Suburra on the
eve of setting out for Naples, and we know the tragedy that followed--a
tragedy which he has been accused of having brought about. Here again,
in a villa of the Suburra, at a supper on the eve of setting out for
Naples, Death was the unseen guest.

They stayed late at the vineyard of Cardinal Corneto, enjoying
the treacherous cool of the evening, breathing the death that was
omnipresent in Rome that summer, the pestilential fever which had
smitten Cardinal Giovanni Borgia (Seniore) on the 1st of that month, and
of which men were dying every day in the most alarming numbers.

On the morning of Saturday 12, Burchard tells us, the Pope felt ill, and
that evening he was taken with fever. On the 15th Burchard records that
he was bled, thirteen ounces of blood being taken from him. It relieved
him somewhat, and, seeking distraction, he bade some of the cardinals to
come and sit by his bed and play at cards.

Meanwhile, Cesare was also stricken, and in him the fever raged so
fierce and violently that he had himself immersed to the neck in a huge
jar of ice-cold water--a drastic treatment in consequence of which he
came to shed all the skin from his body.

On the 17th the Pope was much worse, and on the 18th, the end being at
hand, he was confessed by the Bishop of Culm, who administered Extreme
Unction, and that evening he died.

That, beyond all manner of question, is the true story of the passing of
Alexander VI, as revealed by the Diarium of Burchard, by the testimony
of the physician who attended him, and by the dispatches of the
Venetian, Ferrarese, and Florentine ambassadors. At this time of day it
is accepted by all serious historians, compelled to it by the burden of
evidence.

The ambassador of Ferrara had written to Duke Ercole, on August 14, that
it was no wonder the Pope and the duke were ill, as nearly everybody in
Rome was ill as a consequence of the bad air (“Per la mala condictione
de aere”).

Cardinal Soderini was also stricken with the fever, whilst Corneto was
taken ill on the day after that supper-party, and, like Cesare, is said
to have shed all the skin of his body before he recovered.

Even Villari and Gregorovius, so unrestrained when writing of the
Borgias, discard the extraordinary and utterly unwarranted stories of
Guicciardini, Giovio, and Bembo, which will presently be considered.
Gregorovius does this with a reluctance that is almost amusing, and
with many a fond, regretful, backward glance--so very apparent in his
manner--at the tale of villainy as told by Guicciardini and the others,
which the German scholar would have adopted but that he dared not for
his credit’s sake. This is not stated on mere assumption. It is obvious
to any one who reads Gregorovius’s histories.

Burchard tells us--as certainly matter for comment--that, during his
last illness, Alexander never once asked for Cesare nor ever once
mentioned the name of Lucrezia. So far as Cesare is concerned, the Pope
knew, no doubt, that he was ill and bedridden, for all that the gravity
of the duke’s condition would, probably, have been concealed from
him. That he should not have mentioned Lucrezia--nor, we suppose,
Giuffredo--is remarkable. Did he, with the hand of Death already upon
him, reproach himself with this paternity which, however usual and
commonplace in priests of all degrees, was none the less a scandal, and
the more scandalous in a measure as the rank of the offender was higher?
It may well be that in those last days that sinful, worldly old man
bethought him of the true scope and meaning of Christ’s Vicarship, which
he had so wantonly abused and dishonoured, and considered that to that
Judge before whom he was summoned to appear the sins of his predecessors
would be no justification or mitigation of his own. It may well be that,
grown introspective upon his bed of death, he tardily sought to thrust
from his mind the worldly things that had so absorbed it until the
spiritual were forgotten, and had given rise to all the scandal
concerning him that was spread through Christendom, to the shame and
dishonour of the Church whose champion he should have been.

Thus may it have come to pass that he summoned none of his children in
his last hours, nor suffered their names to cross his lips.

When the news of his father’s death was brought to Cesare, the duke, all
fever-racked as he was, more dead than living, considered his position
and issued his orders to Michele da Corella, that most faithful of all
his captains, who so richly shared with Cesare the execration of the
latter’s enemies.

Of tears for his father there is no record, just as at no time are we
allowed to see that stern spirit giving way to any emotion, conceiving
any affection, or working ever for the good of any but himself. Besides,
in such an hour as this, the consciousness of the danger in which
he stood by virtue of the Pope’s death and his own most inopportune
sickness, which disabled him from taking action to make his future
secure, must have concerned him to the exclusion of all else.

Meanwhile, however, Rome was quiet, held so in the iron grip of Michele
da Corella and the ducal troops. The Pope’s death was being kept secret
for the moment, and was not announced to the people until nightfall, by
when Corella had carried out his master’s orders, including the seizure
of the Pope’s treasure. And Burchard tells us how some of Valentinois’s
men entered the Vatican--all the gates of which were held by the ducal
troops--and, seizing Cardinal Casanova, they demanded, with a dagger
at his throat and a threat to fling his corpse from the windows if
he refused them, the Pope’s keys. These the cardinal surrendered, and
Corella possessed himself of plate and jewels to the value of some
200,000 ducats, besides two caskets containing about 100,000 ducats in
gold. Thereafter the servants of the palace completed the pillage by
ransacking the wardrobes and taking all they could find, so that nothing
was left in the papal apartments but the chairs, a few cushions, and the
tapestries of the walls.

All his life Alexander had been the victim of the most ribald calumnies.
Stories had ever sprung up and thriven, like ill weeds, about his name
and reputation. His sins, great and scandalous in themselves, were
swelled by popular rumour, under the spur of malice, to monstrous and
incredible proportions. As they had exaggerated and lied about the
manner of his life, so--with a consistency worthy of better scope--they
exaggerated and lied about the manner of his death, and, the age being
a credulous one, the stories were such that writers of more modern
and less credulous times dare not insist upon them, lest they should
discredit--as they do--what else has been alleged against him.

Thus when, in his last delirium, the Pope uttered some such words as: “I
am coming; I am coming. It is just. But wait a little,” and when those
words were repeated, it was straightway asserted that the Devil was the
being he thus addressed in that supreme hour. The story grew in detail;
that is inevitable with such matter. He had bargained with the devil,
it was said, for a pontificate of twelve years, and, the time being
completed, the devil was come for him. And presently, we even have a
description of Messer the Devil as he appeared on that occasion--in the
shape of a baboon. The Marquis Gonzaga of Mantua, in all seriousness,
writes to relate this. The chronicler Sanuto, receiving the now
popularly current story from another source, in all seriousness gives it
place in his Diarii, thus:

“The devil was seen to leap out of the room in the shape of a baboon.
And a cardinal ran to seize him, and, having caught him, would have
presented him to the Pope; but the Pope said, ‘Let him go, let him go.
It is the devil,’ and that night he fell ill and died.”(1)


  1  “Il diavolo sarebbe saltato fuori della camera in forma di babuino, et
un cardinale corso per piarlo, e preso volendolo presentar al papa,
il papa disse lasolo, lasolo ché ii diavolo. E poi la notte si amaló e
morite.”--Marino Sanuto, Diarii.


That story, transcending the things which this more practical age
considers possible, is universally rejected; but it is of vast
importance to the historical student; for it is to be borne in mind that
it finds a place in the pages of those same Diarii upon the authority
of which are accepted many defamatory stories without regard to their
extreme improbability so long as they are within the bounds of bare
possibility.

After Alexander was dead it was said that water boiled in his mouth, and
that steam issued from it as he lay in St. Peter’s, and much else of the
same sort, which the known laws of physiology compel so many of us very
reluctantly to account exaggerations. But, again, remember that the
source of these stories was the same as the source of many other
exaggerations not at issue with physiological laws.

The circumstances of Alexander’s funeral are in the highest degree
scandalous, and reflect the greatest discredit upon his age.

On the morrow, as the clergy were chanting the Libera me, Domine in St.
Peter’s, where the body was exposed on a catafalque in full pontificals,
a riot occurred, set on foot by the soldiers present for reasons which
Burchard--who records the event--does not make clear.

The clerics fled for shelter to the sacristy, the chants were cut short,
and the Pope’s body almost entirely abandoned.

But the most scandalous happening occurred twenty-four hours later. The
Pope’s remains were removed to the Chapel of Santa Maria delle Febbre
by six bearers who laughed and jested at the expense of the poor corpse,
which was in case to provoke the coarse mirth of the lower classes of an
age which, setting no value upon human life, knew no respect for death.
By virtue of the malady that had killed him, of his plethoric habit
of body, and of the sweltering August heat, the corpse was decomposing
rapidly, so that the face had become almost black and assumed an aspect
grotesquely horrible, fully described by Burchard:

“Factus est sicut pannus vel morus nigerrimus, livoris totus plenus,
nasus plenus, os amplissimum, lingua duplex in ore, que labia tota
implebat, os apertum et adeo horribile quod nemo viderit unquam vel esse
tale dixerit.”

Two carpenters waited in the chapel with the coffin which they had
brought; but, either through carelessness it had been made too narrow
and too short, or else the body, owing to its swollen condition, did
not readily fit into this receptable; whereupon, removing the mitre, for
which there was no room, they replaced it by a piece of old carpet, and
set themselves to force and pound the corpse into the coffin. And this
was done “without candle or any light being burned in honour of the
dead, and without the presence of any priest or other person to care
for the Pope’s remains.” No explanation of this is forthcoming; it was
probably due to the panic earlier occasioned the clergy by the ducal
men-at-arms.

The story that he had been poisoned was already spreading like a
conflagration through Rome, arising out of the appearance of the body,
which was such as was popularly associated with venenation.

But a Borgia in the rôle of a victim was altogether too unusual to be
acceptable, and too much opposed to the taste to which the public had
been educated; so the story must be edited and modified until suitable
for popular consumption. The supper-party at Cardinal Corneto’s villa
was remembered, and upon that a tale was founded, and trimmed by degrees
into plausible shape.

Alexander had intended to poison Corneto--so ran this tale--that he
might possess himself of the cardinal’s vast riches; in the main a
well-worn story by now. To this end Cesare had bribed a butler to pour
wine for the cardinal from a flask which he entrusted to him. Exit
Cesare. Exit presently the butler, carelessly leaving the poisoned wine
upon a buffet. (The drama, you will observe, is perfectly mechanical,
full of author’s interventions, and elementary in its “preparations”).
Enter the Pope. He thirsts, and calls for wine. A servant hastens; takes
up, of course, the poisoned flask in ignorance of its true quality, and
pours for his Beatitude. Whilst the Pope drinks re-enters Cesare, also
athirst, and, seating himself, he joins the Pope in the poisoned wine,
all unsuspicious and having taken no precautions to mark the
flask. Poetic justice is done, and down comes the curtain upon that
preposterous tragi-farce.

Such is the story which Guicciardini and Giovio and a host of other more
or less eminent historians have had the audacity to lay before their
readers as being the true circumstances of the death of Alexander VI.

It is a noteworthy matter that in all that concerns the history of the
House of Borgia, and more particularly those incidents in it that are
wrapped in mystery, circumstantial elucidation has a habit of proceeding
from the same quarters.

You will remember, for instance, that the Venetian Paolo Capello (though
not in Rome at the time) was one of those who was best informed in the
matter of the murder of the Duke of Gandia. And it was Capello again who
was possessed of the complete details of the scarcely less mysterious
business of Alfonso of Aragon. Another who on the subject of the murder
of Gandia “had no doubts”--as he himself expressed it--was Pietro
Martire d’Anghiera, in Spain at the time, whence he wrote to inform
Italy of the true circumstances of a case that had happened in Italy.

It is again Pietro Martire d’Anghiera who, on November 10, 1503, writes
from Burgos in Spain to inform Rome of the true facts of Alexander’s
death--for it is in that letter of his that the tale of the flask of
wine, as here set down, finds place for the first time.

It is unprofitable to pursue the matter further, since at this time
of day even the most reluctant to reject anything that tells against
a Borgia have been compelled to admit that the burden of evidence is
altogether too overwhelming in this instance, and that it is proved to
the hilt that Alexander died of the tertian fever then ravaging Rome.

And just as the Pope’s death was the subject of the wildest fictions
which have survived until very recent days, so too, was Cesare’s
recovery.

Again, it was the same Pietro Martire d’Anghiera who from Burgos wrote
to inform Rome of what was taking place in the privacy of the Duke of
Valentinois’s apartments in the Vatican. Under his facile and magic pen,
the jar of ice-cold water into which Cesare was believed to have been
plunged was transmuted into a mule which was ripped open that the
fever-stricken Cesare might be packed into the pulsating entrails, there
to sweat the fever out of him.

But so poor and sexless a beast as this seeming in the popular mind
inadequate to a man of Cesare’s mettle, it presently improved upon and
converted it into a bull--so much more appropriate, too, as being the
emblem of his house.

Nor does it seem that even then the story has gone far enough. Facilis
inventis addere. There comes a French writer with an essay on the
Borgias, than which--submitted as sober fact--nothing more amazingly
lurid has been written. In this, with a suggestive cleverness entirely
Gallic, he causes us to gather an impression of Cesare in the intestinal
sudatorium of that eventrated bull, as of one who is at once the
hierophant and devotee of a monstrous, foul, and unclean rite of some
unspeakable religion--a rite by comparison with which the Black Mass of
the Abbé Gribourg becomes a sweet and wholesome thing.

But hear the man himself:

“Cet homme de meurtres et d’inceste, incarné dans l’animal des
hécatombes et des bestialités antiques en évoque les monstrueuses
images. Je crois entendre le taureau de Phalaris et le taureau de
Pasiphaë répondre, de loin, par d’effrayants mugissements, aux cris
humains de ce bucentaure.”

That is the top note on this subject. Hereafter all must pale to
anti-climax.




CHAPTER II. PIUS III


The fever that racked Cesare Borgia’s body in those days can have been
as nothing to the fever that racked his mind, the despairing rage that
must have whelmed his soul to see the unexpected--the one contingency
against which he had not provided--cutting the very ground from
underneath his feet.

As he afterwards expressed himself to Macchiavelli, and as Macchiavelli
has left on record, Cesare had thought of everything, had provided for
everything that might happen on his father’s death, save that in such a
season--when more than ever he should have need for all his strength of
body and of mind--he should, himself, be lying at the point of death.

Scarce was Alexander’s body cold than the duke’s enemies began to lift
their heads. Already by the 20th of that month--two days after the Pope
had breathed his last--the Orsini were in arms and had led a rising, in
retort to which Michele da Corella fired their palace on Montegiordano.

Venice and Florence bethought them that the protection of France had
been expressly for the Church and not for Cesare personally. So the
Venetians at once supplied Guidobaldo da Montefeltre with troops
wherewith to reconquer his dominions, and by the 24th he was master of
S. Leo. In the city of Urbino itself Ramires, the governor, held out as
long as possible, then beat a retreat to Cesena, whilst Valentinois’s
partisans in Urbino were mercilessly slaughtered and their houses
pillaged.

Florence supported the Baglioni in the conquest of Magione from the
Borgias, and they aided Giacopo d’Appiano to repossess himself of
Piombino, which had so gladly seen him depart out of it eighteen months
ago.

From Magione, Gianpaolo Baglioni marches his Florentine troops to
Camerino to aid the only remaining Varano to regain the tyranny of his
fathers. The Vitelli are back in Città di Castello, carrying a golden
calf in triumph through the streets; and so by the end of August, within
less than a fortnight, all the appendages of the Romagna are lost
to Cesare, whilst at Cesare’s very gates the Orsini men-at-arms are
clamouring with insistent menace.

The Duke’s best friend, in that crisis, was his secretary Agabito
Gherardi. For it is eminently probable--as Alvisi opines--that it was
Gherardi who urged his master to make an alliance with the Colonna,
Gherardi himself being related to that powerful family. The alliance of
these old enemies--Colonna and Borgia--was in their common interests,
that they might stand against their common enemy, Orsini--the old
friends of the Borgias.

On August 22 Prospero Colonna came to Rome, and terms were made and
cemented, in the usual manner, by a betrothal--that of the little
Rodrigo--(Lucrezia’s child)--to a daughter of the House of Colonna.
On the same day the Sacred College confirmed Cesare in his office of
Captain-General and Gonfalonier of the Church, pending the election of a
new Pope.

Meanwhile, sick almost to the point of death, and scarce able to stir
hand or foot, so weak in body had he been left by the heroic treatment
to which he had submitted, Cesare continued mentally a miracle of energy
and self-possession. He issued orders for the fortifying of the Vatican,
and summoned from Romagna 200 horse and 1,000 foot to his aid in Rome,
bidding Remolino, who brought these troops, to quarter himself at
Orvieto, and there await his further orders.

Considering that the Colonna were fighting in Naples under the banner
of Gonzalo de Cordoba, it was naturally enough supposed, from Cesare’s
alliance with the former, that this time he was resolved to go over to
the side of Spain. Of this, M. de Trans came to protest to Valentinois
on behalf of Louis XII, to be answered by the duke’s assurances that the
alliance into which he had entered was strictly confined to the Colonna,
that it entailed no treaty with Spain; nor had he entered into any; that
his loyalty to the King of France continued unimpaired, and that he
was ready to support King Louis with the entire forces he disposed
of, whenever his Majesty should desire him so to do. In reply, he
was assured by the French ambassador and Cardinal Sanseverino of the
continued protection of Louis, and that France would aid him to maintain
his dominions in Italy and reconquer any that might have seceded; and
of this declaration copies were sent to Florence, Venice, and Bologna on
September 1, as a warning to those Powers not to engage in anything to
the hurt of Valentinois.

Thus sped the time of the novendiali--the nine days’ obsequies of the
dead Pope--which were commenced on September 4.

As during the conclave that was immediately to follow it was against
the law for armed men to be in Rome, Cesare was desired by the Sacred
College to withdraw his troops. He did so on September 2, and himself
went with them.

Cardinal Sanseverino and the French ambassador escorted him out of Rome
and saw him take the road to Nepi--a weak, fever-ravaged, emaciated man,
borne in a litter by a dozen of his halberdiers, his youth, his beauty,
his matchless strength of body all sapped from him by the insidious
disease which had but grudgingly spared his very life.

At Nepi he was awaited by his brother Giuffredo, who had preceded him
thither from Rome. A shadowy personage this Giuffredo, whose unimportant
personality is tantalizingly elusive in the pages where mention is made
of him. His incontinent wife, Doña Sancia, had gone to Naples under the
escort of Prospero Colonna, having left the Castle of Sant’ Angelo where
for some time she had been confined by order of her father-in-law, the
Pope, on account of the disorders of her frivolous life.

And now the advices of the fresh treaty between Cesare Borgia and the
King of France were producing their effect upon Venice and Florence, who
were given additional pause by the fierce jealousy of each other, which
was second only to their jealousy of the duke.

From Venice--with or without the sanction of his Government--Bartolomeo
d’Alviano had ridden south into the Romagna with his condotta
immediately upon receiving news of the death of Alexander, and, finding
Pandolfaccio Malatesta at Ravenna, he proceeded to accompany him back
to that Rimini which the tyrant had sold to Cesare. Rimini, however,
refused to receive him back, and showed fight to the forces under
d’Alviano. So that, for the moment, nothing was accomplished. Whereupon
the Republic, which at first had raised a feeble, make-believe protest
at the action of her condottiero, now deemed it as well to find a
pretext for supporting him. So Venice alleged that a courier of hers had
been stripped of a letter, and, with such an overwhelming cause as that
for hostilities, dispatched reinforcements to d’Alviano to the end that
he might restore Pandolfaccio to a dominion in which he was abhorred.
Further, d’Alviano was thereafter to proceed to do the like office for
Giovanni Sforza, who already had taken ship for Pesaro, and who was
restored to his lordship on September 3.

Thence, carrying the war into the Romagna itself, d’Alviano marched upon
Cesena. But the Romagna was staunch and loyal to her duke. The governor
had shut himself up in Cesena with what troops he could muster,
including a thousand veterans under the valiant Dionigio di Naldo,
and there, standing firm and resolute, he awaited the onslaught of the
Venetians.

D’Alviano advanced rapidly and cruelly, a devastator laying waste the
country in his passage, until to check him came suddenly the Borgia
troops, which had ventured upon a sally. The Venetians were routed and
put to flight.

On September 16 the restored tyrants of Rimini, Pesaro, Castello,
Perugia, Camerino, Urbino, and Sinigaglia entered into and signed at
Perugia a league, whose chiefs were Bartolomeo d’Alviano and Gianpaolo
Baglioni, for their common protection.

Florence was invited to join the allies. Intimidated, however, by
France, not only did the Signory refuse to be included, but--in her
usual manner--actually went so far as to advise Cesare Borgia of that
refusal and to offer him her services and help.

On the same date the Sacred College assembled in Rome, at the Mass of
the Holy Spirit, to beseech the grace of inspiration in the election of
the new Pontiff. The part usually played by the divine afflatus in
these matters was so fully understood and appreciated that the Venetian
ambassador received instructions from the Republic(1) to order the
Venetian cardinals to vote for Giuliano della Rovere, whilst the King of
France sent a letter--in his own hand--to the Sacred College desiring it
to elect his friend the Cardinal d’Amboise, and Spain, at the same time,
sought to influence the election of Carvajal.


  1  See Sanuto’s Diarrii.


The chances of the last-named do not appear ever to have amounted
to very much. The three best supported candidates were della Rovere,
d’Amboise, and Ascanio Sforza--who made his reappearance in Rome,
released from his French prison at last, in time to attend this
Conclave.

None of these three factions was strong enough to ensure the election
of its own candidate, but any two were strong enough to prevent the
election of the candidate of the third. Wherefore it happened that, as
a result of so much jealousy and competition, recourse was had to
temporizing by electing the oldest and feeblest cardinal in the College.
Thus there should presently be another election, and meantime the
candidates would improve the time by making their arrangements and
canvassing their supporters so as to control the votes of the College at
that future Conclave. Therefore Francesco Piccolomini, Cardinal of
Siena (nephew of Pius II), a feeble octogenarian, tormented by an ulcer,
which, in conjunction with an incompetent physician, was to cut his life
even shorter than they hoped, was placed upon the throne of St. Peter,
and assumed with the Pontificate the name of Pius III.

The new Pope was entirely favourable to Cesare Borgia, and confirmed him
in all his offices, signifying his displeasure to Venice at her attempt
upon the Romagna, and issuing briefs to the allied tyrants commanding
them to desist from their opposition to the will of the Holy See.

Cesare returned to Rome, still weak on his legs and ghastly to behold,
and on October 6 he received in St. Peter’s his confirmation as
Captain-General and Gonfalonier of the Church.

The Venetians had meanwhile been checked by a letter from Louis from
lending further assistance to the allies. The latter, however, continued
their hostilities in spite of that. They had captured Sinigaglia, and
now they made an attempt on Fano and Fermo, but were repulsed in both
places by Cesare’s loyal subjects. At the same time the Ordelaffi--who
in the old days had been deposed from the Tyranny of Forli to make room
for the Riarii--deemed the opportunity a good one to attempt to regain
their lordship; but their attempt, too, was frustrated.

Cesare sat impotent in Rome, no doubt vexed by his own inaction. He
cannot have lacked the will to go to the Romagna to support the subjects
who showed him such loyalty; but he lacked the means. Owing to the
French and Spanish dispute in Naples, his army had practically melted
away. The terms of his treaty with Louis compelled him to send the
bulk of it to the camp at Garigliano to support the French, who were in
trouble. The force that Remolino had quartered at Orvieto to await the
duke’s orders he had been unable to retain there. Growing uneasy at
their position, and finding it impossible either to advance or to
retreat, being threatened on the one side by the Baglioni and on the
other by the Orsini, these troops had steadily deserted; whilst most
of Cesare’s Spanish captains and their followers had gone to the aid of
their compatriots under Gonzalo de Cordoba in response to that captain’s
summons of every Spaniard in the peninsula.

Thus did it come about that Cesare had no force to afford his Romagna
subjects. His commissioners in the north did what was possible to repair
the damage effected by the allies, and they sent Dionigio di Naldo with
six hundred of his foot, and, further, a condotta of two hundred horse,
against Rimini. This was captured by them in one day and almost without
resistance, Pandolfaccio flying for his life to Pesaro.

Next the allies, by attempting to avenge the rout they had suffered
at Cesena, afforded the ducal troops an opportunity of scoring another
victory. They prepared a second attack against Cesare’s capital, and
with an army of considerable strength they advanced to the very walls of
the stronghold, laying the aqueduct in ruins and dismantling what other
buildings they found in their way. But in Cesena the gallant Pedro
Ramires lay in wait for them. Issuing to meet them, he not only put them
to flight and drove them for shelter into the fortress of Montebello,
but laid siege to them there and broke them utterly, with a loss, as was
reputed, of some three hundred men in slain alone.

The news of this came to cheer Valentinois, who, moreover, had now
the Pope and France to depend upon. Further, and in view of that
same protection, the Orsini were already treating with him for a
reconciliation, despite the fact that the Orsini blood was scarce dry
upon his hands. But he had a resolute, sly, and desperate enemy in
Venice, and on October 10 there arrived in Rome Bartolomeo d’Alviano and
Gianpaolo Baglioni, who repaired to the Venetian ambassador and informed
him that they were come in quest of the person of Valentinois, intending
his death.

To achieve their ends they united themselves to the Orsini, who were
now in arms in Rome, their attempted reconciliation with Cesare having
aborted. Valentinois’s peril became imminent, and from the Vatican he
withdrew for shelter to the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, going by way of the
underground passage built by his father.

Thence he summoned Michele da Corella, who was at Rocca Soriana with his
foot, and Taddeo della Volpe (a valiant captain and a great fighter, who
had already lost an eye in Cesare’s service) and Baldassare Scipione,
who were in the Neapolitan territory with their men-at-arms. He was
gathering his sinews for a spring, when suddenly the entire face of
affairs was altered and all plans were checked by the death of Pius III
on October 18, after a reign of twenty-six days.

Once more there was an end to Cesare’s credit. No man might say what the
future held in store. Giustiniani, indeed, wrote to his Government
that Cesare was about to withdraw to France, and that he had besought
a safe-conduct of the Orsini--which report is as true as many another
communication from the same Venetian pen, ever ready to write what
it hoped might be true; and it is flatly contradicted by the
better-informed Macchiavelli, who was writing at the same time:

“The duke is in Sant’ Angelo, and is more hopeful than ever of
accomplishing great things, presupposing a Pope according to the wishes
of his friends.”

But the Romagna was stirred once more to the turbulence from which it
had scarcely settled. Forli and Rimini were lost almost at once, the
Ordelaffi succeeding in capturing the former in this their second
attempt, whilst Pandolfaccio once more sat in his palace at Rimini,
having cut his way to it through a sturdy resistance. Against Imola
Bentivogli dispatched a force of two thousand foot; but this was beaten
off.

The authority of France appeared to have lost its weight, and in vain
did Cardinal d’Amboise thunder threats in the name of his friend King
Louis, and send envoys to Florence, Venice, Bologna, and Urbino,
to complain of the injuries that were being done to the Duke of
Valentinois.




CHAPTER III. JULIUS II


Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of S. Pietro in Vincoli, had much in his
character that was reminiscent of his terrible uncle, Sixtus IV.
Like that uncle of his, he had many failings highly unbecoming any
Christian--laic or ecclesiastic--which no one has attempted to screen;
and, incidentally, he cultivated morality in his private life and
observed his priestly vows of chastity as little as did any other
churchman of his day. For you may see him, through the eyes of Paride de
Grassi,(1) unable one Good Friday to remove his shoes for the adoration
of the cross in consequence of his foot’s affliction--ex morbo gallico.
But with one great and splendid virtue was he endowed in the eyes of the
enemies of the House of Borgia--contemporary, and subsequent down to
our times--a most profound, unchristian, and mordacious hatred of all
Borgias.


  1 Burchard’s successor in the office of Master of Ceremonies.


Roderigo Borgia had defeated him in the Conclave of 1492, and for twelve
years had kept him out of the coveted pontificate. You have seen how he
found expression for his furious jealousy at his rival’s success. You
have seen him endeavouring to his utmost to accomplish the deposition of
the Borgia Pope, wielding to that end the lever of simony and seeking a
fulcrum for it, first in the King of France and later in Ferdinand and
Isabella; but failing hopelessly in both instances. You have seen him,
when he realized the failure of an attempt which had made Rome too
dangerous for him and compelled him to remain in exile, suddenly veering
round to fawn and flatter and win the friendship of one whom his enmity
could not touch.

This man who, as Julius II, was presently to succeed Pius III, has
been accounted a shining light of virtue amid the dark turpitude of the
Church in the Renaissance. An ignis fatuus, perhaps; a Jack-o’-lanthorn
begotten of putrescence. Surely no more than that.

Dr. Jacob Burckhardt, in that able work of his to which reference
already has been made, follows the well-worn path of unrestrained
invective against the Borgias, giving to the usual empty assertions
the place which should be assigned to evidence and argument. Like his
predecessors along that path, he causes Giuliano della Rovere to
shine heroically by contrast--a foil to throw into greater relief the
blackness of Alexander. But he carries assertion rather further than do
others when he says of Cardinal della Rovere that “He ascended the steps
of St. Peter’s Chair without simony and amid general applause, and
with him ceased, at all events, the undisguised traffic in the highest
offices of the Church.”

Other writers in plenty have suggested this, but none has quite so
plainly and resoundingly thrown down the gauntlet, which we will make
bold to lift.

That Dr. Burckhardt wrote in other than good faith is not to be
imputed. It must therefore follow that an entry in the Diarium of the
Caerimoniarius under date of October 29, 1503, escaped him utterly in
the course of his researches. For the Diarium informs us that on that
day, in the Apostolic Palace, Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of S.
Pietro in Vincoli, concluded the terms of an agreement with the Duke of
Valentinois and the latter’s following of Spanish cardinals, by which
he undertook that, in consideration of his receiving the votes of these
Spanish cardinals and being elected Pope, he would confirm Cesare in his
office of Gonfalonier and Captain-General, and would preserve him in the
dominion of the Romagna. And, in consideration of that undertaking, the
Spanish cardinals, on their side, promised to give him their suffrages.

Here are the precise words in which Burchard records the transaction:

“Eadem die, 29 Octobris, Rmus. D. S. Petri ad Vincula venit in
palatio apostolico cum duce Valentino et cardinalibus suis Hispanis et
concluserunt capitula eorum per que, inter alia, cardinalis S. Petri ad
Vincula, postquam esset papa, crearet confalonierium Ecclesiae generalem
ducem ac ei faveret et in statibus suis (relinqueret) et vice versa dux
pape; et promiserunt omnes cardinalis Hispani dare votum pro Cardinali
S. Petri ad Vincula ad papatum.”

If that does not entail simony and sacrilege, then such things do
not exist at all. More, you shall hunt in vain for any accusation so
authoritative, formal and complete, regarding the simony practised by
Alexander VI on his election. And this same Julius, moreover, was the
Pope who later was to launch his famous Bull de Simoniaca Electione, to
add another stain to the besmirched escutcheon of the Borgia Pontiff.

His conciliation of Cesare and his obtaining, thus, the support of the
Spanish cardinals, who, being Alexander’s creatures, were now Cesare’s
very faithful servants, ensured the election of della Rovere; for,
whilst those cardinals’ votes did not suffice to place him in St.
Peter’s Chair, they would abundantly have sufficed to have kept him out
of it had Cesare so desired them.

In coming to terms with Cardinal della Rovere, Cesare made the first
great mistake of his career, took the first step towards ruin. He
should have known better than to have trusted such a man. He should have
remembered the ancient bitter rancour; should have recognized, in the
amity of later times, the amity of the self-seeker, and mistrusted it.
But della Rovere had acquired a reputation for honesty and for being
a man of his word. How far he deserved it you may judge from what is
presently to follow. He had acquired it, however, and Cesare, to his
undoing, attached faith to that reputation. He may, to some extent, have
counted upon the fact that, of Cardinal della Rovere’s bastard children,
only a daughter--Felice della Rovere--survived. Raffaele, the last of
his bastard boys, had died a year ago. Thus, Cesare may have concluded
that the cardinal having no sons whose fortunes he must advance, would
lack temptation to break faith with him.

From all this it resulted that, at the Conclave of November 1, Giuliano
della Rovere was elected Pope, and took the name of Julius II; whilst
Valentinois, confident now that his future was assured, left the
Castle of Sant’ Angelo to take up his residence at the Vatican, in the
Belvedere, with forty gentlemen constituting his suite.

On November 3 Julius II issued briefs to the Romagna, ordering obedience
to Cesare, with whom he was now in daily and friendliest intercourse.

In the Romagna, meanwhile, the disturbances had not only continued, but
they had taken a fresh turn. Venice, having reseated Malatesta on the
throne, now vented at last the covetousness she had ever, herself,
manifested of that dominion, and sent a force to drive him out again and
conquer Rimini for the Republic.

Florence, in a spasm of jealous anger at this, inquired was the Pope to
become the chaplain of Venice, and dispatched Macchiavelli to bear the
tale of these doings to Julius.

Under so much perpetual strife the strength of the Romagna was gradually
crumbling, and Cesare, angry with Florence for never going beyond
lip-service, expressed that anger to Macchiavelli, informing the
ambassador that the Signory could have saved the Romagna for him with a
hundred men-at-arms.

The duke sent for Giustiniani, the ambassador of Venice, who, however,
excused himself and did not go. This within a week of the new Pope’s
election, showing already how men discerned what was in store for
Valentinois. Giustiniani wrote to his Government that he had not gone
lest his going should give the duke importance in the eyes of others.(1)
The pettiness and meanness of the man, revealed in that dispatch, will
enable you to attach to Giustiniani the label that belongs to him.


  1  “Per non dar materia ad altri che fazino un po di lui mazor estimazion
di quel che fanno quando lo vedessero in parte alcuna
favorito.”--Giustiniani, Dispatch of November 6, 1503.


To cheer Valentinois in those days of depression came news that his
subjects of Imola had successfully resisted an attack on the part of the
Venetians. So stimulated was he that he prepared at once to go, himself,
into the Romagna, and obtained from the Pope, from d’Amboise, and
from Soderini, letters to Florence desiring the Signory to afford him
safe-conduct through Tuscany for himself and his army.

The Pope expressed himself, in his letter, that he would count such
safe-conduct as a great favour to himself, and urged the granting of it
out of his “love for Cesare,” owing to the latter’s “great virtues and
shining merits.”(2) Yet on the morrow of dispatching that brief, this
man, who was accounted honest, straightforward, and imbued with a
love of truth, informed Giustiniani--or else Giustiniani lied in his
dispatches--that he understood that the Venetians were assailing the
Romagna, not out of enmity to the Church, but to punish the demerits of
Cesare, and he made it plain to Giustiniani that, if he complained
of the conduct of the Venetians, it was on his own behalf and not on
Cesare’s, as his aim was to preserve the Romagna, not for the duke, but
for the Church.


  2  “In quo nobis rem gratissimam facietis ducis enim ipsum propter ejus
insignes virtutes et praeclara merita praecipuo affectur et caritate
praecipua complectimur.”--Archivio di Stato, Firenze. (See Alvisi, Doct.
96.)


With the aim we have no quarrel. It was laudable enough in a Pontiff.
But it foreshadows Cesare’s ruin, in spite of the love-protesting letter
to Florence, in spite of the bargain struck by virtue of which Julius
had obtained the pontificate. Whether the Pope went further in his
treachery, whether, having dispatched that brief to Florence, he sent
other communications to the Signory, is not ascertainable; but the
suspicion of some such secret action is inspired by what ensued.

On November 13 Cesare was ready to leave Rome; but no safe-conduct
had arrived. Out of all patience at this, he begged the Pope that the
captain of the pontifical navy should prepare him five galleons at
Ostia, by which he could take his foot to Genoa, and thence proceed into
Romagna by way of Ferrara.

Macchiavelli, at the same time, was frenziedly importuning Florence to
grant the duke the desired safe-conduct lest in despair Cesare should
make a treaty with Venice--“or with the devil”--and should go to Pisa,
employing all his money, strength, and influence to vent his wrath upon
the Signory. But the Signory knew more, perhaps, than did Macchiavelli,
for no attention was paid to his urgent advice.

On the 19th Cesare left Rome to set out for Genoa by way of Ostia, and
his departure threw Giustiniani into alarm--fearing that the duke would
now escape.

But there was no occasion for his fears. On the very day of Cesare’s
departure Julius sent fresh briefs to the Romagna, different indeed
from those of November 3. In these he now expressed his disapproval of
Alexander’s having conferred the vicarship of the Romagna upon Cesare
Borgia, and he exhorted all to range themselves under the banner of the
Church, under whose protection he intended to keep them.

Events followed quickly upon that. Two days later news reached the Pope
that the Venetians had captured Faenza, whereupon he sent a messenger
after Valentinois to suggest to the latter that he should surrender
Forli and the other fiefs into pontifical hands. With this Cesare
refused to comply, and, as a result, he was detained by the captain of
the navy, in obedience to the instructions from Julius. At the same time
the Pope broke the last link of the treaty with Cesare by appointing
a new Governor of Romagna in the person of Giovanni Sacchi, Bishop of
Ragusa. He commanded the latter to take possession of the Romagna in the
name of the Church, and he issued another brief--the third within three
weeks--demanding the State’s obedience to the new governor.

On November 26, Remolino, who had been at Ostia with Cesar; came to
Rome, and, throwing himself at the feet of the Pontiff, begged for mercy
for his lord, whom he now accounted lost. He promised Julius that Cesare
should give him the countersigns of the strongholds, together with
security for their surrender. This being all that the Pope could desire,
he issued orders that Cesare be brought back to Rome, and in Consistory
advised the Sacred College--by way, no doubt, of exculpating himself
to men who knew that he was refusing to pay the price at which he had
bought the Papacy--that the Venetians in the Romagna were not moving
against the Church, but against Cesare himself--wherefore he had
demanded of Cesare the surrender of the towns he held, that thus there
might be an end to the war.

It was specious--which is the best that can be said for it.

As for putting an end to the war, the papal brief was far indeed from
achieving any such thing, as was instantly plain from the reception it
met with in the Romagna, which persisted in its loyalty to Cesare in
despite of the very Pope himself. When that brief was read in Cesena a
wild tumult ensued, and the people ran through the streets clamouring
angrily for their duke.

It was very plain what short work would have been made of such men as
the Ordelaffi and the Malatesta had Cesare gone north. But Cesare was
fast at the Vatican, treated by the Pope with all outward friendliness
and consideration, but virtually a prisoner none the less. Julius
continued to press for the surrender of the Romagna strongholds,
which Remolino had promised in his master’s name; but Cesare persisted
obstinately to refuse, until the news reached him that Michele da
Corella and della Volpe, who had gone north with seven hundred horse to
support his Romagnuoli, had been cut to pieces in Tuscany by the army of
Gianpaolo Baglioni.

Cesare bore his burning grievance to the Pope. The Pope sympathized with
him most deeply; then went to write a letter to the Florentines to
thank them for what had befallen and to beg them to send him Michele
da Corella under a strong escort--that redoubtable captain having been
taken prisoner together with della Volpe.

Corella was known to be fully in the duke’s confidence, and there were
rumours that he was accused of many things perpetrated on the duke’s
behalf. Julius, bent now on Cesare’s ruin, desired to possess himself
of this man in the hope of being able to put him upon his trial under
charges which should reflect discredit upon Cesare.

At last the duke realized that he was betrayed, and that all was
lost, and so he submitted to the inevitable, and gave the Pope the
countersigns he craved. With these Julius at once dispatched an envoy
into the Romagna, and, knowing the temper of Cesare’s captains, he
insisted that this envoy should be accompanied by Piero d’Orvieto, as
Cesare’s own commissioner, to demand that surrender.

But the intrepid Pedro Ramires, who held Cesena, knowing the true facts
of the case, and conceiving how his duke had been constrained, instead
of making ready to yield, proceeded further to fortify for resistance.
When the commissioners appeared before his gates he ordered the
admission of Piero d’Orvieto. That done, he declared that he desired to
see his duke at liberty before he would surrender the citadel which he
held for him, and, taking d’Orvieto, he hanged him from the battlements
as a traitor and a bad servant who did a thing which the duke, had he
been at liberty, would never have had him do.

Moncalieri, the papal envoy, returned to Rome with the news, and this
so inflamed the Pope that the Cardinals Lodovico Borgia and Francesco
Remolino, together with other Borgia partisans, instantly fled from
Rome, where they no longer accounted themselves safe, and sought refuge
with Gonzalo de Cordoba in the Spanish camp at Naples, imploring his
protection at the same time for Cesare.

The Pope’s anger first vented itself in the confiscation of the Duke of
Valentinois’s property wherever possible, to satisfy the claims of the
Riarii (the Pope’s nephews) who demanded an indemnity of 50,000 ducats,
of Guidobaldo, who demanded 200,000 ducats, and of the Florentine
Republic, which claimed the same. The duke’s ruin was by now--within six
weeks of the election of Julius II--an accomplished fact; and many
were those who chose to fall with him rather than abandon him in his
extremity. They afford a spectacle of honour and loyalty that was
exceedingly rare in the Italy of the Renaissance; clinging to their
duke, even when the last ray of hope was quenched, they lightened for
him the tedium of those last days at the Vatican during which he was no
better than a prisoner of state.

Suddenly came news of Gonzalo de Cordoba’s splendid victory at
Garigliano--a victory which definitely broke the French and gave the
throne of Naples to Spain. Naturally this set Spanish influence once
more, and mightily, in the ascendant, and the Spanish cardinals,
together with the ambassador of Spain, came to exert with the Pope an
influence suddenly grown weighty.

As a consequence, Cesare, escorted by Carvajal, Cardinal of Santa Croce,
was permitted to depart to Ostia, whence he was to take ship for France.
Leastways, such was the understanding upon which he left the Vatican.
But the Pope was not minded, even now, to part with him so easily, and
his instructions to Carvajal were that at Ostia he should await further
orders before sailing.

But on December 26, news reaching the Spanish cardinal that the Romagna
fortresses--persuaded that Cesare had been liberated--had finally
surrendered, Carvajal took it upon himself to allow Cesare to depart,
upon receiving from him a written undertaking never to bear arms against
Pope Julius II.

So the Duke of Valentinois at last regained his freedom. Whether, in
repairing straight to Naples, as he did, he put a preconceived plan
into execution, or whether, even now, he mistrusted his enlargement, and
thought thus to make himself secure, cannot be ascertained. But
straight to Gonzalo de Cordoba’s Spanish camp he went, equipped with
a safe-conduct from the Great Captain, obtained for Cesare by Cardinal
Remolino.

There he found a court of friends already awaiting him, among whom were
his brother Giuffredo and the Cardinal Lodovico Borgia, and he received
from Gonzalo a very cordial welcome.

Spain was considering the invasion of Tuscany with the ultimate
object of assailing Milan and driving the French out of the peninsula
altogether. Piero de’Medici--killed at Garigliano--had no doubt been
serving Spain with some such end in view as the conquest of Florence,
and, though Piero was dead, there was no reason why the plan should be
abandoned; rather, all the more reason to carry it forward, since now
Spain would more directly profit by it. Bartolomeo d’Alviano was to have
commanded the army destined for that campaign; but Cesare, by virtue
of his friends and influence in Pisa, Siena, and Piombino, was so
preferable a captain for such an expedition that Gonzalo gave him charge
of it within a few days of his arrival at the Spanish camp.

To Cesare this would have been the thin end of a mighty edge. Here was
a chance to begin all over again, and, beginning thus, backed by Spanish
arms, there was no saying how far he might have gone. Meanwhile, what a
beginning! To avenge himself thus upon that Florentine Republic which,
under the protection of France, had dared at every turn to flout him and
had been the instrument of his ultimate ruin! Sweet to him would have
been the poetic justice he would have administered--as sweet to him
as it would have been terrible to Florence, upon which he would have
descended like another scourge of God.

Briskly and with high-running hopes he set about his preparations during
that spring of 1504 what time the Pope’s Holiness in Rome was seeking to
justify his treachery by heaping odium upon the Borgias. Thus he thought
to show that if he had broken faith, he had broken faith with knaves
deserving none. It was in pursuit of this that Michele da Corella was
now pressed with questions, which, however, yielded nothing, and that
Asquino de Colloredo (the sometime servant of Cardinal Michaeli)
was tortured into confessing that he had poisoned his master at the
instigation of Alexander and Cesare--as has been seen--which confession
Pope Julius was very quick to publish.

But in Naples, it may well be that Cesare cared nought for these
matters, busy and hopeful as he was just then. He dispatched Baldassare
da Scipione to Rome to enlist what lances he could find, and Scipione
put it about that his lord would soon be returning to his own and giving
his enemies something to think about.

And then, suddenly, out of clearest heavens, fell a thunderbolt to
shiver this last hope.

On the night of May 26, as Cesare was leaving Gonzalo’s quarters, where
he had supped, an officer stepped forward to demand his sword. He was
under arrest.

Julius II had out-manoeuvred him. He had written to Spain setting
forth what was his agreement with Valentinois in the matter of the
Romagna--the original agreement which was the price of the Pontificate,
had, of course, been conveniently effaced from the pontifical memory. He
addressed passionate complaints to Ferdinand and Isabella that Gonzalo
de Cordoba and Cardinal Carvajal between them were affording Valentinois
the means to break that agreement, and to undertake matters that were
hostile to the Holy See. And Ferdinand and Isabella had put it upon
Gonzalo de Cordoba, that most honourable and gallant captain, to do
this thing in gross violation of his safe-conduct and plighted word to
Valentinois. It was a deed under the shame of which the Great Captain
confessedly laboured to the end of his days, as his memory has laboured
under it ever since. For great captains are not afforded the immunity
enjoyed by priests and popes jointly with other wearers of the petticoat
from the consequences of falsehood and violated trust.

Fierce and bitter were Valentinois’s reproaches of the Great Captain for
this treachery--as fierce and bitter as they were unavailing. On August
20, 1504, Cesare Borgia took ship for Spain--a prisoner bound for a
Spanish dungeon. Thus, at the early age of twenty-nine, he passed from
Italy and the deeds that well might have filled a lifetime.

Conspicuous amid those he left behind him who remained loyal to their
duke was Baldassare Scipione, who published throughout Christendom a
cartel, wherein he challenged to trial by combat any Spaniard who dared
deny that the Duke of Valentinois had been detained a prisoner in Naples
in spite of the safe-conduct granted him in the name of Ferdinand and
Isabella, “with great shame and infamy to their crown.”(1)


  1  Quoted by Alvisi, on the authority of a letter of Luigi da Porto,
March 16, 1510, in Lettere Storiche.


This challenge was never taken up.

Amongst other loyal ones was that fine soldier of fortune, Taddeo della
Volpe, who, in his Florentine prison, refused all offers to enter the
service of the Signory until he had learnt that his lord was gone from
Italy.

Fracassa and Mirafuente had held Forli until they received guarantees
for Cesare’s safety (after he had left Ostia to repair to the Spanish
camp). They then rode out, with the honours of war, lance on thigh.
Dionigio di Naldo, that hardy captain of foot, entered the service of
Venice; but to the end he wore the device of his dear lord, and imposed
the same upon all who served under his banner.

Don Michele da Corella was liberated by Julius II after an interrogatory
which can have revealed nothing defamatory to Cesare or his father; as
it is unthinkable that a Pope who did all that man could do to ruin the
House of Borgia and to befoul its memory, should have preserved silence
touching any such revelations as were hoped for when Corella was put to
torture. That most faithful of all Cesare’s officers--and sharer of the
odium that has been heaped upon Cesare’s name--entered the service of
the Signory of Florence.




CHAPTER IV. ATROPOS


Vain were the exertions put forth by the Spanish cardinals to obtain
Cesare’s enlargement, and vainer still the efforts of his sister
Lucrezia, who wrote letter after letter to Francesco Gonzaga of
Mantua--now Gonfalonier of the Church, and a man of influence at the
Vatican--imploring him to use his interest with the Pope to the same
end.

Julius II remained unmoved, fearing the power of Cesare Borgia, and
resolved that he should trouble Italy no more. On the score of that, no
blame attaches to the Pope. The States which Borgia had conquered in
the name of the Church should remain adherent to the Church. Upon that
Julius was resolved, and the resolve was highly laudable. He would
have no duke who controlled such a following as did Cesare, using those
States as stepping-stones to greater dominions in which, no doubt, he
would later have absorbed them, alienating them, so, from the Holy See.

In all this Julius II was most fully justified. The odious matter in his
conduct, however, is the abominable treachery it entailed, following as
it did upon the undertaking by virtue of which he gained the tiara.

For some months after his arrival in Spain, Cesare was confined in the
prison of Chinchilla, whence--as a result, it is said, of an attempt
on his part to throw the governor bodily over the battlements--he was
removed to the fortress of Medina del Campo, and kept well guarded by
orders of the Pope.

Rumours that he had been liberated by the King of Spain overran the
Romagna more than once, and set the country in a ferment, even reaching
the Vatican and shaking the stout-hearted Julius into alarm.

One chance of regaining his ancient might, and wreaking a sweet and
terrific vengeance upon his betrayers came very close to him, but
passed him by. This chance occurred in 1505, when--Queen Isabella being
dead--King Ferdinand discovered that Gonzalo de Cordoba was playing him
false in Naples. The Spanish king conceived a plan--according to the
chronicles of Zurita--to employ Cesare as a flail for the punishment of
the Great Captain. He proposed to liberate the duke, set him at the
head of an army, and loose him upon Naples, trusting to the formidable
alliance of Cesare’s military talents with his hatred of Gonzalo--who
had betrayed him--to work the will of his Catholic Majesty.

Unfortunately for Cesare, there were difficulties. Ferdinand’s power was
no longer absolute in Castille now that Isabella was dead. He sought to
overcome these difficulties; but the process was a slow one, and in
the course of it, spurred also by increased proofs of his lieutenant’s
perfidy, Ferdinand lost patience, and determined--the case having grown
urgent--to go to Naples in person to deal with Gonzalo.

Plainly, Cesare’s good fortune, which once had been proverbial, had now
utterly deserted him.

He had received news of what was afoot, and his hopes had run high once
more, only to suffer cruel frustration when he learnt that Ferdinand had
sailed, himself, for Naples. In his despair the duke roused himself to a
last effort to win his freedom.

His treatment in prison was fairly liberal, such as is usually measured
out to state prisoners of consideration. He was allowed his own chaplain
and several attendants, and, whilst closely guarded and confined to the
Homenaje Tower of the fortress, yet he was not oppressively restrained.
He was accorded certain privileges and liberties; he enjoyed the faculty
of corresponding with the outer world, and even of receiving visits.
Amongst his visitors was the Count of Benavente--a powerful lord of
the neighbourhood, who, coming under the spell of Cesare’s fascination,
became so attached to him, and so resolved to do his will and effect his
liberation, that--says Zurita--he was prepared even to go the length of
accomplishing it by force of arms should no other way present itself.(1)


  1  Sanuto confirms Zurita, in the main, by letters received by the
Venetian Senate.


Another way, however, did present itself, and Benavente and the duke
hatched a plot of evasion in which they had the collaboration of the
chaplain and a servant of the governor’s, named Garcia.

One September night a cord was let down from the crenels of the tower,
and by this the duke was to descend from his window to the castle ditch,
where Benavente’s men awaited him. Garcia was to go with him since,
naturally, it would not be safe for the servants to remain behind, and
Garcia now let himself down that rope, hand over hand, from the terrible
height of the duke’s window. It was only when he had reached the end of
it that he discovered that the rope was not long enough, and that below
him there was still a chasm that might well have appalled even desperate
men.

To return was impossible. The duke above was growing impatient. Garcia
loosed his hold, and dropped the remainder of the distance, breaking
both his legs in the fall. Groaning, he lay there in the ditch, whilst
hand over hand now came the agile, athletic duke, unconscious of his
predecessor’s fate, and of what awaited him at the end. He reached it,
and was dangling there, perhaps undecided whether or not to take that
daring leap, when suddenly his doubts were resolved for him. His evasion
was already discovered. The castle was in alarm, and some one above him
cut the rope and precipitated him into the ditch.

Benavente’s men--we do not know how many of them were at hand--ran to
him instantly. They found him seriously injured, and that he, too, had
broken bones is beyond doubt. They lifted him up, and bore him with all
speed to the horses. They contrived, somehow, to mount him upon one,
and, holding him in the saddle, they rode off as fast as was possible
under the circumstances. There was no time to go back for the
unfortunate Garcia. The castle was all astir by now to stop the
fugitives, and to have returned would have been to suffer capture
themselves as well as the duke, without availing the servant.

So poor Garcia was left to his fate. He was found by the governor where
he had fallen, and he was immediately put to death.

If the people of Medina organized a pursuit it availed them nothing, for
Cesare was carried safely to Benavente’s stronghold at Villalon.

There he lay for some five or six weeks to recover from the hurts he
had taken in escaping, and to allow his hands--the bones of which were
broken--to become whole again. At last, being in the main recovered,
though with hands still bandaged, he set out with two attendants and
made for Santander. Thence they took ship to Castro Urdiales, Cesare
aiming now at reaching the kingdom of Navarre and the protection of his
brother-in-law the king.

At the inn at Santander, where, weary and famished, they sat down to
dine after one of the grooms had made arrangements for a boat, they had
a near escape of capture. The alcalde, hearing of the presence of these
strangers, and his suspicions being aroused by the recklessly high price
they had agreed to pay the owner of the vessel which they had engaged,
came to examine them. But they had a tale ready that they were
wheat-merchants in great haste to reach Bernico, that a cargo of wheat
awaited them there, and that they would suffer great loss by delay. The
tale was smooth enough to satisfy the alcalde, and they were allowed to
depart. They reached Castro Urdiales safely, but were delayed there for
two days, owing to the total lack of horses; and they were forced, in
the end, to proceed upon mules obtained from a neighbouring convent. On
these they rode to Durango, where they procured two fresh mules and
a horse, and so, after further similar vicissitudes, they arrived at
Pampeluna on December 3, 1506, and Cesare startled the Court of his
brother-in-law, King Jean of Navarre, by suddenly appearing in it--“like
the devil.”

The news of his evasion had already spread to Italy and set it in
a ferment, inspiring actual fear at the Vatican. The Romagna was
encouraged by it to break out into open and armed insurrection against
the harsh rule of Julius II--who seems to have been rendered positively
vindictive towards the Romagnuoli by their fidelity to Valentinois.
Thus had the Romagna fallen again into the old state of insufferable
oppression from which Cesare had once delivered it. The hopes of the
Romagnuoli rose in a measure, as the alarm spread among the enemies of
Cesare--for Florence and Venice shared now the anxiety of the Vatican.
Zurita, commenting upon this state of things, pays Cesare the following
compliment, which the facts confirm as just:

“The duke was such that his very presence was enough to set all Italy
agog; and he was greatly beloved, not only by men of war, but also by
many people of Tuscany and of the States of the Church.”

Cesare’s wife--Charlotte d’Albret--whom he had not seen since that
September of 1499, was at Bourges at the Court of her friend, the
saintly, repudiated first wife of Louis XII. It is to be supposed that
she would be advised of her husband’s presence at her brother’s Court;
but there is no information on this score, nor do we know that they ever
met.

Within four days of reaching Pampeluna Cesare dispatched his secretary
Federico into Italy to bear the news of his escape to his sister
Lucrezia at Ferrara, and a letter to Francesco Gonzaga, of Mantua, which
was little more than one of introduction, the more important matters to
be conveyed to Gonzaga going, no doubt, by word of mouth. Federico was
arrested at Bologna by order of Julius II, after he had discharged his
mission.

France was now Cesare’s only hope, and he wrote to Louis begging his
royal leave to come to take his rank as a prince of that country, and to
serve her.

You may justly have opined, long since, that the story here set down is
one never-ending record of treacheries and betrayals. But you will
find little to surpass the one to come. The behaviour of Louis at this
juncture is contemptible beyond words, obeying as it does the maxim
of that age, which had it that no inconvenient engagement should be
observed if there was opportunity for breaking it.

Following this detestable maxim, Louis XII had actually gone the
length of never paying to Charlotte d’Albret the dot of 100,000 livres
Tournois, to which he had engaged himself by written contract. When
Cesare, in prison at Medina and in straits for money, had solicited
payment through his brother-in-law of Navarre, his claim had been
contemptuously disregarded.

But there was worse to follow. Louis now answered Cesare’s request for
leave to come to France by a letter (quoted in full by M. Yriarte from
the Archives des Basses Pyrénées) in which his Very Christian Majesty
announces that the duchy of Valentinois and the County of Dyois have
been restored to the crown of France, as also the lordship of Issoudun.
And then follows the pretext, of whose basely paltry quality you shall
judge for yourselves. It runs:

“After the decease of the late Pope Alexander, when our people and our
army were seeking the recovery of the kingdom of Naples, he [Cesare]
went over to the side of our enemies, serving, favouring, and assisting
them at arms and otherwise against ourselves and our said people and
army, which resulted to us in great and irrecoverable loss.”

The climax is in the deliberate falsehood contained in the closing
words. Poor Cesare, who had served France at her call--in spite of
what was rumoured of his intentions--as long as he had a man-at-arms
to follow him, had gone to Naples only in the hour of his extreme need.
True, he had gone to offer himself to Spain as a condottiero when naught
else was left to him; but he took no army with him--he went alone, a
servant, not an ally, as that false letter pretends. He had never
come to draw his sword against France, and certainly no loss had been
suffered by France in consequence of any action of his. Louis’s army was
definitely routed at Garigliano, with Cesare’s troops fighting in its
ranks.

But Pope Alexander was dead; Cesare’s might in in Italy was dissipated;
his credit gone. There lay no profit for Louis in keeping faith with
him; there lay some profit in breaking it. Alas, that a king should
stain his honour with base and vulgar lies to minister to his cupidity,
and that he should set them down above his seal and signature to shame
him through centuries still in the womb of Time!

Cesare Borgia, landless, without right to any title, he that had held so
many, betrayed and abandoned on every side, had now nothing to offer in
the world’s market but his stout sword and his glad courage. These went
to the first bidder for them, who happened to be his brother-in-law King
Jean.

Navarre at the time was being snarled and quarrelled over by France and
Spain, both menacing its independence, each pretending to claims upon it
which do not, in themselves, concern us.

In addition, the country itself was torn by two factions--the Beaumontes
and the Agramontes--and it was entrusted to Cesare to restore Navarre
to peace and unity at home before proceeding--with the aid upon which
he depended from the Emperor Maximilian--to deal with the enemies beyond
her frontiers.

The Castle of Viana was being held by Louis de Beaumont--chief of the
faction that bore his name--and refused to surrender to the king.
To reduce it and compel Beaumont to obedience went Cesare as
Captain-General of Navarre, early in February of 1507. He commanded a
considerable force, some 10,000 strong, and with this and his cannon he
laid siege to the citadel.

The natural strength of the place was such as might have defied any
attempt to reduce it by force; but victuals were running low, and there
was every likelihood of its being speedily starved into surrender. To
frustrate this, Beaumont conceived the daring plan of attempting to send
in supplies from Mendavia. The attempt being made secretly, by night and
under a strong escort, was entirely successful; but, in retreating, the
Beaumontese were surprised in the dawn of that February morning by a
troop of reinforcements coming to Cesare’s camp. These, at sight of the
rebels, immediately gave the alarm.

The most hopeless confusion ensued in the town, where it was at once
imagined that a surprise attack was being made upon the Royalists, and
that they had to do with the entire rebel army.

Cesare, being aroused by the din and the blare of trumpets calling men
to arms, sprang for his weapons, armed himself in haste, flung himself
on a horse, and, without pausing so much as to issue a command to his
waiting men-at-arms, rode headlong down the street to the Puerta del
Sol. Under the archway of the gate his horse stumbled and came down with
him. With an oath, Cesare wrenched the animal to its feet again, gave
it the spur, and was away at a mad, furious gallop in pursuit of the
retreating Beaumont rearguard.

The citizens, crowding to the walls of Viana, watched that last reckless
ride of his with amazed, uncomprehending eyes. The peeping sun caught
his glittering armour as he sped, so that of a sudden he must have
seemed to them a thing of fire--meteoric, as had been his whole life’s
trajectory which was now swiftly dipping to its nadir.

Whether he was frenzied with the lust of battle, riding in the reckless
manner that was his wont, confident that his men followed, yet too
self-centred to ascertain, or whether--as seems more likely--it was
simply that his horse had bolted with him, will never be known until all
things are known.

Suddenly he was upon the rearguard of the fleeing rebels. His sword
flashed up and down; again and again they may have caught the gleam
of it from Viana’s walls, as he smote the foe. Irresistible as a
thunderbolt, he clove himself a way through those Beaumontese. He was
alone once more, a flying, dazzling figure of light, away beyond that
rearguard which he left scathed and disordered by his furious passage.
Still his mad career continued, and he bore down upon the main body of
the escort.

Beaumont sat his horse to watch, in such amazement as you may conceive,
the wild approach of this unknown rider.

Seeing him unsupported, some of the count’s men detached themselves
to return and meet this single foe and oblige him with the death he so
obviously appeared to seek.

They hedged him about--we do not know their number--and, engaging him,
they drew him from the road and down into the hollow space of a ravine.

And so, in the thirty-second year of his age, and in all the glory of
his matchless strength, his soul possessed of the lust of combat, sword
in hand, warding off the attack that rains upon him, and dealing death
about him, he meets his end. From the walls of Viana his resplendent
armour renders him still discernible, until, like a sun to its setting,
he passes below the rim of that ravine, and is lost to the watcher’s
view.

Death awaited him amid the shadows of that hollow place.

Unhorsed by now, he fought with no concern for the odds against him,
and did sore execution upon his assailants, ere a sword could find an
opening in his guard to combine with a gap in his armour and so drive
home. That blade had found, maybe, his lungs. Still he swung his sword,
swaying now upon his loosening knees. His mouth was full of blood.
It was growing dark. His hands began to fail him. He reeled like a
drunkard, sapped of strength, and then the end came quickly. Blows
unwarded showered upon him now.

He crashed down in all the glory of his rich armour, which those
brigand-soldiers already coveted. And thus he died--mercifully,
maybe happily, for he had no time in which to taste the bitterness of
death--that awful draught which he had forced upon so many.

Within a few moments of his falling, this man who had been a living
force, whose word had carried law from the Campagna to the Bolognese,
was so much naked, blood-smeared carrion--for those human vultures
stripped him to the skin; his very shirt must they have. And there,
a stark, livid corpse, of no more account than any dog that died
last Saturday, they left Cesare Borgia of France, Duke of Romagna and
Valentinois, Prince of Andria, and Lord of a dozen Tyrannies.

The body was found there anon by those who so tardily rode after their
leader, and his dismayed troopers bore those poor remains to Viana.
The king, arriving there that very day, horror-stricken at the news and
sight that awaited him, ordered Cesare a magnificent funeral, and so he
was laid to rest before the High Altar of Sainte Marie de Viane.

To rest? May the soul of him rest at least, for men--Christian men--have
refused to vouchsafe that privilege to his poor ashes.

Nearly two hundred years later--at the close of the seventeenth century,
a priest of God and a bishop, one who preached a gospel of love and
mercy so infinite that he dared believe by its lights no man to have
been damned, came to disturb the dust of Cesare Borgia. This Bishop
of Calahorra--lineal descendant in soul of that Pharisee who exalted
himself in God’s House, thrilled with titillations of delicious horror
at the desecrating presence of the base publican--had his pietist’s eyes
offended by the slab that marked Cesare Borgia’s resting-place.(1)


  1  It bore the following legend:

     AQUI YACE EN POCA TIERRA
     AL QUE TODO LE TEMIA
     EL QUE LA PAZ Y LA GUERRA
     EN LA SUA MANO TENIA.
     OH TU QUE VAS A BUSCAR
     COSAS DIGNAS DE LOAR
     SI TU LOAS LO MAS DIGNO
     AQUI PARE TU CAMINO
     NO CURES DE MAS ANDAR.

which, more or less literally may be Englished as follows: “Here in a
little earth, lies one whom all did fear; one whose hands dispensed both
peace and war. Oh, you that go in search of things deserving praise,
if you would praise the worthiest, then let your journey end here, nor
trouble to go farther.”

The pious, Christian bishop had read of this man--perhaps that life
of him published by the apostate Gregorio Leti under the pen-name of
Tommaso Tommasi, which had lately seen the light--and he ordered the
tomb’s removal from that holy place. And thus it befell that the ashes
of Cesare Borgia were scattered and lost.

Charlotte d’Albret was bereft of her one friend, Queen Jeanne, in that
same year of Cesare’s death. The Duchess of Valentinois withdrew to La
Motte­Feuilly, and for the seven years remaining of her life was never
seen other than in mourning; her very house was equipped with sombre,
funereal furniture, and so maintained until her end, which supports the
view that she had conceived affection and respect for the husband of
whom she had seen so little.

On March 14, 1514, that poor lady passed from a life which appears to
have offered her few joys.

Louise de Valentinois--a handsome damsel of the age of
fourteen--remained for three years under the tutelage of the Duchess of
Angoulême--the mother of King Francis I--to whom Charlotte d’Albret had
entrusted her child. Louise married, at the age of seventeen, Louis de
la Trémouille, Prince de Talmont and Vicomte de Thouars, known as the
Knight Sans Peur et Sans Reproche. She maintained some correspondence
with her aunt, Lucrezia Borgia, whom she had never seen, and ever signed
herself “Louise de Valentinois.” At the age of thirty--Trémouille having
been killed at Pavia--she married, in second nuptials, Philippe de
Bourbon-Busset.

Lucrezia died in 1519, one year after her mother, Vanozza de’Catanei,
with whom she corresponded to the end.



REQUIESCANT!





End of Project Gutenberg’s The Life of Cesare Borgia, by Raphael Sabatini

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CESARE BORGIA ***

***** This file should be named 3467-0.txt or 3467-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/6/3467/

Produced by John Stuart Middleton

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of Cesare Borgia, by Raphael Sabatini

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Life of Cesare Borgia

Author: Raphael Sabatini

Posting Date: February 9, 2009 [EBook #3467]
Release Date: October, 2002
Last Updated: October 13, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CESARE BORGIA ***




Produced by John Stuart Middleton





THE LIFE OF CESARE BORGIA

Of France, Duke of Valentinois and Romagna, Prince of Andria and Venafri
Count of Dyois, Lord of Piombino, Camerino and Urbino, Gonfalonier and
Captain-General of Holy Church

A History and Some Criticisms


By Raphael Sabatini




PREFACE

This is no Chronicle of Saints. Nor yet is it a History of Devils. It is
a record of certain very human, strenuous men in a very human, strenuous
age; a lustful, flamboyant age; an age red with blood and pale with
passion at white-heat; an age of steel and velvet, of vivid colour,
dazzling light and impenetrable shadow; an age of swift movement,
pitiless violence and high endeavour, of sharp antitheses and amazing
contrasts.

To judge it from the standpoint of this calm, deliberate, and correct
century--as we conceive our own to be--is for sedate middle-age to judge
from its own standpoint the reckless, hot, passionate, lustful humours
of youth, of youth that errs grievously and achieves greatly.

So to judge that epoch collectively is manifestly wrong, a hopeless
procedure if it be our aim to understand it and to be in sympathy with
it, as it becomes broad-minded age to be tolerantly in sympathy with the
youth whose follies it perceives. Life is an ephemeral business, and
we waste too much of it in judging where it would beseem us better to
accept, that we ourselves may come to be accepted by such future ages as
may pursue the study of us.

But if it be wrong to judge a past epoch collectively by the standards
of our own time, how much more is it not wrong to single out individuals
for judgement by those same standards, after detaching them for the
purpose from the environment in which they had their being? How false
must be the conception of them thus obtained! We view the individuals so
selected through a microscope of modern focus. They appear monstrous
and abnormal, and we straight-way assume them to be monsters and
abnormalities, never considering that the fault is in the adjustment
of the instrument through which we inspect them, and that until that is
corrected others of that same past age, if similarly viewed, must appear
similarly distorted.

Hence it follows that some study of an age must ever prelude and
accompany the study of its individuals, if comprehension is to wait upon
our labours. To proceed otherwise is to judge an individual Hottentot or
South Sea Islander by the code of manners that obtains in Belgravia or
Mayfair.

Mind being the seat of the soul, and literature being the expression of
the mind, literature, it follows, is the soul of an age, the surviving
and immortal part of it; and in the literature of the Cinquecento you
shall behold for the looking the ardent, unmoral, naïve soul of this
Renaissance that was sprawling in its lusty, naked infancy and bellowing
hungrily for the pap of knowledge, and for other things. You shall
infer something of the passionate mettle of this infant: his
tempestuous mirth, his fierce rages, his simplicity, his naïveté, his
inquisitiveness, his cunning, his deceit, his cruelty, his love of
sunshine and bright gewgaws.

To realize him as he was, you need but to bethink you that this was
the age in which the Decamerone of Giovanni Boccaccio, the Facetiae of
Poggio, the Satires of Filelfo, and the Hermaphroditus of Panormitano
afforded reading-matter to both sexes. This was the age in which the
learned and erudite Lorenzo Valla--of whom more anon--wrote his famous
indictment of virginity, condemning it as against nature with arguments
of a most insidious logic. This was the age in which Casa, Archbishop
of Benevento, wrote a most singular work of erotic philosophy, which,
coming from a churchman’s pen, will leave you cold with horror should
you chance to turn its pages. This was the age of the Discovery of Man;
the pagan age which stripped Christ of His divinity to bestow it upon
Plato, so that Marsilio Ficino actually burnt an altar-lamp before an
image of the Greek by whose teachings--in common with so many scholars
of his day--he sought to inform himself.

It was an age that had become unable to discriminate between the merits
of the Saints of the Church and the Harlots of the Town. Therefore it
honoured both alike, extolled the carnal merits of the one in much the
same terms as were employed to extol the spiritual merits of the other.
Thus when a famous Roman courtesan departed this life in the year 1511,
at the early age of twenty-six, she was accorded a splendid funeral and
an imposing tomb in the Chapel Santa Gregoria with a tablet bearing the
following inscription:

“IMPERIA CORTISANA ROMANA QUAE DIGNA TANTO NOMINE, RARAE INTER MORTALES
FORMAE SPECIMEN DEDIT.”

It was, in short, an age so universally immoral as scarcely to be termed
immoral, since immorality may be defined as a departure from the morals
that obtain a given time and in a given place. So that whilst from
our own standpoint the Cinquecento, taken collectively, is an age of
grossest licence and immorality, from the standpoint of the Cinquecento
itself few of its individuals might with justice be branded immoral.

For the rest, it was an epoch of reaction from the Age of Chivalry:
an epoch of unbounded luxury, of the cult and worship of the beautiful
externally; an epoch that set no store by any inward virtue, by truth
or honour; an epoch that laid it down as a maxim that no inconvenient
engagement should be kept if opportunity offered to evade it.

The history of the Cinquecento is a history developed in broken pledges,
trusts dishonoured and basest treacheries, as you shall come to conclude
before you have read far in the story that is here to be set down.

In a profligate age what can you look for but profligates? Is it just,
is it reasonable, or is it even honest to take a man or a family from
such an environment, for judgement by the canons of a later epoch? Yet
is it not the method that has been most frequently adopted in dealing
with the vast subject of the Borgias?

To avoid the dangers that must wait upon that error, the history of that
House shall here be taken up with the elevation of Calixtus III to the
Papal Throne; and the reign of the four Popes immediately preceding
Roderigo Borgia--who reigned as Alexander VI--shall briefly be surveyed
that a standard may be set by which to judge the man and the family that
form the real subject of this work.

The history of this amazing Pope Alexander is yet to be written. No
attempt has been made to exhaust it here. Yet of necessity he bulks
large in these pages; for the history of his dazzling, meteoric son is
so closely interwoven with his own that it is impossible to present the
one without dealing at considerable length with the other.

The sources from which the history of the House of Borgia has been
culled are not to be examined in a preface. They are too numerous,
and they require too minute and individual a consideration that their
precise value and degree of credibility may be ascertained. Abundantly
shall such examination be made in the course of this history, and in
a measure as the need arises to cite evidence for one side or for the
other shall that evidence be sifted.

Never, perhaps, has anything more true been written of the Borgias and
their history than the matter contained in the following lines of Rawdon
Brown in his Ragguagli sulla Vita e sulle Opere di Marino Sanuto: “It
seems to me that history has made use of the House of Borgia as of
a canvas upon which to depict the turpitudes of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries.”

Materials for the work were very ready to the hand; and although they
do not signally differ from the materials out of which the histories
of half a dozen Popes of the same epoch might be compiled, they are far
more abundant in the case of the Borgia Pope, for the excellent reason
that the Borgia Pope detaches from the background of the Renaissance far
more than any of his compeers by virtue of his importance as a political
force.

In this was reason to spare for his being libelled and lampooned even
beyond the usual extravagant wont. Slanders concerning him and his son
Cesare were readily circulated, and they will generally be found
to spring from those States which had most cause for jealousy and
resentment of the Borgia might--Venice, Florence, and Milan, amongst
others.

No rancour is so bitter as political rancour--save, perhaps, religious
rancour, which we shall also trace; no warfare more unscrupulous or more
prone to use the insidious weapons of slander than political warfare.
Of this such striking instances abound in our own time that there can
scarce be the need to labour the point. And from the form taken by such
slanders as are circulated in our own sedate and moderate epoch may be
conceived what might be said by political opponents in a fierce age that
knew no pudency and no restraint. All this in its proper place shall be
more closely examined.

For many of the charges brought against the House of Borgia some
testimony exists; for many others--and these are the more lurid,
sensational, and appalling covering as they do rape and murder,
adultery, incest, and the sin of the Cities of the Plain--no single
grain of real evidence is forthcoming. Indeed, at this time of day
evidence is no longer called for where the sins of the Borgias
are concerned. Oft-reiterated assertion has usurped the place of
evidence--for a lie sufficiently repeated comes to be credited by its
very utterer. And meanwhile the calumny has sped from tongue to tongue,
from pen to pen, gathering matter as it goes. The world absorbs the
stories; it devours them greedily so they be sensational, and writers
well aware of this have been pandering to that morbid appetite for some
centuries now with this subject of the Borgias. A salted, piquant tale
of vice, a ghastly story of moral turpitude and physical corruption,
a hair-raising narrative of horrors and abominations--these are the
stock-in-trade of the sensation-monger. With the authenticity of the
matters he retails such a one has no concern. “Se non é vero é ben
trovato,” is his motto, and in his heart the sensation-monger--of
whatsoever age--rather hopes the thing be true. He will certainly
make his public so believe it; for to discredit it would be to lose
nine-tenths of its sensational value. So he trims and adjusts his wares,
adds a touch or two of colour and what else he accounts necessary
to heighten their air of authenticity, to dissemble any peeping
spuriousness.

A form of hypnosis accompanies your study of the subject--a suggestion
that what is so positively and repeatedly stated must of necessity be
true, must of necessity have been proved by irrefutable evidence at some
time or other. So much you take for granted--for matters which began
their existence perhaps as tentative hypotheses have imperceptibly
developed into established facts.

Occasionally it happens that we find some such sentence as the following
summing up this deed or that one in the Borgia histories: “A deal of
mystery remains to be cleared up, but the Verdict of History assigns the
guilt to Cesare Borgia.”

Behold how easy it is to dispense with evidence. So that your tale
be well-salted and well-spiced, a fico for evidence! If it hangs not
overwell together in places, if there be contradictions, lacunae, or
openings for doubt, fling the Verdict of History into the gap, and so
strike any questioner into silence.

So far have matters gone in this connection that who undertakes to set
down to-day the history of Cesare Borgia, with intent to do just and
honest work, must find it impossible to tell a plain and straightforward
tale--to present him not as a villain of melodrama, not a monster,
ludicrous, grotesque, impossible, but as human being, a cold, relentless
egotist, it is true, using men for his own ends, terrible and even
treacherous in his reprisals, swift as a panther and as cruel where his
anger was aroused, yet with certain elements of greatness: a splendid
soldier, an unrivalled administrator, a man pre-eminently just, if
merciless in that same justice.

To present Cesare Borgia thus in a plain straightforward tale at this
time of day, would be to provoke the scorn and derision of those who
have made his acquaintance in the pages of that eminent German scholar,
Ferdinand Gregorovius, and of some other writers not quite so eminent
yet eminent enough to serve serious consideration. Hence has it been
necessary to examine at close quarters the findings of these great ones,
and to present certain criticisms of those same findings. The author is
overwhelmingly conscious of the invidious quality of that task; but he
is no less conscious of its inevitability if this tale is to be told at
all.

Whilst the actual sources of historical evidence shall be examined in
the course of this narrative, it may be well to examine at this stage
the sources of the popular conceptions of the Borgias, since there will
be no occasion later to allude to them.

Without entering here into a dissertation upon the historical romance,
it may be said that in proper hands it has been and should continue to
be one of the most valued and valuable expressions of the literary art.
To render and maintain it so, however, it is necessary that certain
well-defined limits should be set upon the licence which its writers
are to enjoy; it is necessary that the work should be honest work; that
preparation for it should be made by a sound, painstaking study of the
period to be represented, to the end that a true impression may first be
formed and then conveyed. Thus, considering how much more far-reaching
is the novel than any other form of literature, the good results that
must wait upon such endeavours are beyond question. The neglect of
them--the distortion of character to suit the romancer’s ends, the like
distortion of historical facts, the gross anachronisms arising out of
a lack of study, have done much to bring the historical romance into
disrepute. Many writers frankly make no pretence--leastways none that
can be discerned--of aiming at historical precision; others, however,
invest their work with a spurious scholarliness, go the length of citing
authorities to support the point of view which they have taken, and
which they lay before you as the fruit of strenuous lucubrations.

These are the dangerous ones, and of this type is Victor Hugo’s famous
tragedy Lucrezia Borgia, a work to which perhaps more than to any other
(not excepting Les Borgias in Crimes Célèbres of Alexandre Dumas) is due
the popular conception that prevails to-day of Cesare Borgia’s sister.

It is questionable whether anything has ever flowed from a distinguished
pen in which so many licences have been taken with the history of
individuals and of an epoch; in which there is so rich a crop of crude,
transpontine absurdities and flagrant, impossible anachronisms. Victor
Hugo was a writer of rare gifts, a fertile romancer and a great poet,
and it may be unjust to censure him for having taken the fullest
advantages of the licences conceded to both. But it would be difficult
to censure him too harshly for having--in his Lucrezia Borgia--struck a
pose of scholarliness, for having pretended and maintained that his work
was honest work founded upon the study of historical evidences. With
that piece of charlatanism he deceived the great mass of the unlettered
of France and of all Europe into believing that in his tragedy he
presented the true Lucrezia Borgia.

“If you do not believe me,” he declared, “read Tommaso Tommasi, read the
Diary of Burchard.”

Read, then, that Diary, extending over a period of twenty-three years,
from 1483 to 1506, of the Master of Ceremonies of the Vatican (which
largely contributes the groundwork of the present history), and the one
conclusion to which you will be forced is that Victor Hugo himself had
never read it, else he would have hesitated to bid you refer to a work
which does not support a single line that he has written.

As for Tommaso Tommasi--oh, the danger of a little learning! Into what
quagmires does it not lead those who flaunt it to impress you!

Tommasi’s place among historians is on precisely the same plane as
Alexandre Dumas’s. His Vita di Cesare Borgia is on the same historical
level as Les Borgias, much of which it supplied. Like Crimes Célèbres,
Tommasi’s book is invested with a certain air of being a narrative of
sober fact; but like Crimes Célèbres, it is none the less a work of
fiction.

This Tommaso Tommasi, whose real name was Gregorio Leti--and it is under
this that such works of his as are reprinted are published nowadays--was
a most prolific author of the seventeenth century, who, having turned
Calvinist, vented in his writings a mordacious hatred of the Papacy and
of the religion from which he had seceded. His Life of Cesare Borgia was
published in 1670. It enjoyed a considerable vogue, was translated into
French, and has been the chief source from which many writers of fiction
and some writers of “fact” have drawn for subsequent work to carry
forward the ceaseless defamation of the Borgias.

History should be as inexorable as Divine Justice. Before we admit
facts, not only should we call for evidence and analyse it when it is
forthcoming, but the very sources of such evidence should be examined,
that, as far as possible, we may ascertain what degree of credit they
deserve. In the study of the history of the Borgias, we repeat, there
has been too much acceptance without question, too much taking
for granted of matters whose incredibility frequently touches and
occasionally oversteps the confines of the impossible.

One man knew Cesare Borgia better, perhaps, than did any other
contemporary, of the many who have left more or less valuable records;
for the mind of that man was the acutest of its age, one of the acutest
Italy and the world have ever known. That man was Niccolô Macchiavelli,
Secretary of State to the Signory of Florence. He owed no benefits to
Cesare; he was the ambassador of a power that was ever inimical to the
Borgias; so that it is not to be dreamt that his judgement suffered from
any bias in Cesare’s favour. Yet he accounted Cesare Borgia--as we shall
see--the incarnation of an ideal conqueror and ruler; he took Cesare
Borgia as the model for his famous work The Prince, written as a grammar
of statecraft for the instruction in the art of government of that
weakling Giuliano de’Medici.

Macchiavelli pronounces upon Cesare Borgia the following verdict:

“If all the actions of the duke are taken into consideration, it will
be seen how great were the foundations he had laid to future power. Upon
these I do not think it superfluous to discourse, because I should not
know what better precept to lay before a new prince than the example of
his actions; and if success did not wait upon what dispositions he
had made, that was through no fault of his own, but the result of an
extraordinary and extreme malignity of fortune.”

In its proper place shall be considered what else Macchiavelli had to
say of Cesare Borgia and what to report of events that he witnessed
connected with Cesare Borgia’s career.

Meanwhile, the above summary of Macchiavelli’s judgement is put forward
as a justification for the writing of this book, which has for scope to
present to you the Cesare Borgia who served as the model for The Prince.

Before doing so, however, there is the rise of the House of Borgia to be
traced, and in the first two of the four books into which this history
will be divided it is Alexander VI, rather than his son, who will hold
the centre of the stage.

If the author has a mercy to crave of his critics, it is that they
will not impute it to him that he has set out with the express aim of
“whitewashing”--as the term goes--the family of Borgia. To whitewash is
to overlay, to mask the original fabric under a superadded surface. Too
much superadding has there been here already. By your leave, all
shall be stripped away. The grime shall be removed and the foulness of
inference, of surmise, of deliberate and cold-blooded malice, with which
centuries of scribblers, idle, fantastic, sensational, or venal, have
coated the substance of known facts.

But the grime shall be preserved and analysed side by side with the
actual substance, that you may judge if out of zeal to remove the former
any of the latter shall have been included in the scraping.

The author expresses his indebtedness to the following works which,
amongst others, have been studied for the purposes of the present
history:

  Alvisi, Odoardo, Cesare Borgia, Duca di Romagna.  Imola, 1878.
  Auton, Jean d’, Chroniques de Louis XII (Soc. de l’Hist. de France).
      Paris, 1889.
  Baldi, Bernardino, Della Vita e Fatti di Guidobaldo.  Milano, 1821.
  Barthélemy, Charles, Erreurs et Mensonges Historiques.  Paris, 1873.
  Bernardi, Andrea, Cronache Forlivese, 1476-1517.  Bologna, 1897.
  Bonnaffé, Edmond, Inventaire de la Duchesse de Valentinois, Paris,
      1878.
  Bonoli, Paolo, Istorie della Città di Forli.  Forli, 1661.
  Bourdeilles, Pierre, Vie des Hommes Illustres.  Leyde, 1666.
  Brown, Rawdon, Ragguagli Sulla Vita e sulle Opere di Marino Sanuto.
      Venezia, 1837.
  Buonaccorsi, Biagio, Diario.  Firenze, 1568.
  Burchard, Joannes, Diarium, sive Rerum Urbanarum Commentarii.
     (Edited by L. Thuasne.) Paris, 1885.
  Burckhardt, Jacob, Der Cultur der Renaissance in Italien.  Basel, 1860.
  Castiglione, Baldassare, Il Cortigiano.  Firenze, 1885.
  Chapelles, Grillon des, Esquisses Biographiques.  Paris, 1862.
  Cerri, Domenico, Borgia.  Tonino, 1857.
  Clementini, Cesare, Raccolto Istorico delle Fondatione di Rimino.
      Rimini, 1617.
  Corio, Bernardino, Storia di Milano.  Milano, 1885.
  Corvo, Baron, Chronicles of the House of Borgia.  London, 1901.
  Espinois, Henri de l’, Le Pape Alexandre VI (in the Revue des Questions
      Historiques, Vol. XXIX).  Paris, 1881.
  Giovio, Paolo, La Vita di Dicenove Uomini Illustri.  Venetia, 1561.
  Giovio, Paolo, Delle Istorie del Suo Tempo.  Venetia, 1608.
  Giustiniani, Antonio, Dispacci, 1502-1505.  (Edited by Pasquale Villari.)
      Firenze, 1876.
  Granata, F., Storia Civile di Capua.  1752.
  Gregorovius, Ferdinand, Geschichte der Stadt Rom im Mittelalter.
      Stuttgart, 1889.
  Gregorovius, Ferdinand, Lacrezia Borgia (Italian translation).  Firenze,
      1855.
  Guicciardini, Francesco, Istoria d’Italia.  Milan, 1803.
  Guingené, P. L., Histoire Littéraire d’Italie.  Milano, 1820.
  Infessura, Stefano, Diarum Rerum Romanum.  (Edited by 0. Tommassini.)
      Roma, 1887.
  Leonetti, A., Papa Alessandro VI.  Bologna, 1880.
  Leti, Gregorio (“Tommaso Tommasi”), Vita di Cesare Borgia, Milano, 1851.
  Lucaire, Achille, Alain le Grand, Sire d’Albret.  Paris, 1877.
  Macchiavelli, Niccolô, Il Principe.  Torino, 1853.
  Macchiavelli, Niccolô, Le Istorie Fiorentine.  Firenze, 1848.
  Macchiavelli, Niccolô, Opere Minori.  Firenze, 1852.
  Matarazzo, Francesco, Cronaca della Città di Perugia, 1492-1503.
      (Edited by F. Bonaini and F. Polidori.) In Archivio Storico
      Italiano, Firenze, 1851.
  Panvinio, Onofrio, Le Vite dei Pontefici.  Venezia, 1730.
  Pascale, Aq., Racconto del Sacco di Capova.  Napoli, 1632.
  Righi, B., Annali di Faenza.  Faenza, 1841.
  Sanazzaro, Opere.  Padua, 1723.
  Sanuto Marino, Diarii, Vols. I to V. (Edited by F. Stefani.) Venice,
      1879.
  Tartt, W. M., Pandolfo Collenuccio, Memoirs connected with his life.
      1868.
  “Tommaso Tommasi” (Gregorio Leti), Vita di Cesare Borgia.  1789.
  Varchi, Benedetto, Storia Fiorentina.  Florence, 1858.
  Visari, Gustavo, Vita degli Artefici.
  Villari, Pasquale, La Storia di Girolamo Savonarola, etc.  Florence,
      1861.
  Villari, Pasquale, Niccolò Machiavelli e I suoi Tempi.  Milano, 1895.
  Yriarte, Charles, La Vie de César Borgia.  Paris, 1889.
  Yriarte, Charles, Autour des Borgia.  Paris, 1891.
  Zurita, Geronimo, Historia del Rey Don Hernando el Catolico (in Anales).
      Çaragoça, 1610.



CONTENTS



BOOK I

THE HOUSE OF THE BULL


CHAPTER

    I.  THE RISE OF THE HOUSE OF BORGIA

   II.  THE REIGNS OF SIXTUS IV AND INNOCENT VIII

  III.  ALEXANDER VI

   IV.  BORGIA ALLIANCES



BOOK II

THE BULL PASCANT

    I.  THE FRENCH INVASION

   II.  THE POPE AND THE SUPERNATURAL

  III.  THE ROMAN BARONS

   IV.  THE MURDER OF THE DUKE OF GANDIA

    V.  THE RENUNCIATION OF THE PURPLE



BOOK III

THE BULL RAMPANT

    I.  THE DUCHESS OF VALENTINOIS

   II.  THE KNELL OF THE TYRANTS

  III.  IMOLA AND FORLI

   IV.  GONFALONIER OF THE CHURCH

    V.  THE MURDER OF ALFONSO OF ARAGON

   VI.  RIMINI AND PESARO

  VII.  THE SIEGE OF FAENZA

 VIII.  ASTORRE MANFREDI

   IX.  CASTEL BOLOGNESE AND PIOMBINO

    X.  THE END OF THE HOUSE OF ARAGON

   XI.  THE LETTER TO SILVIO SAVELLI

  XII.  LUCREZIA’S THIRD MARRIAGE

 XIII.  URBINO AND CAMERINO

  XIV.  THE REVOLT OF THE CONDOTTIERI

   XV.  MACCHIAVELLI’S LEGATION

  XVI.  RAMIRO DE LORQUA

 XVII.  “THE BEAUTIFUL STRATAGEM”

 VIII.  THE ZENITH



BOOK IV

THE BULL CADENT

    I.  THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER VI

   II.  PIUS III

  III.  JULIUS II

   IV.  ATROPOS




BOOK I

THE HOUSE OF THE BULL

“Borgia stirps: BOS: atque Ceres transcendit Olympo, Cantabat nomen
saecula cuncta suum.”

Michele Ferno




CHAPTER I. THE RISE OF THE HOUSE OF BORGIA


Although the House of Borgia, which gave to the Church of Rome two popes
and at least one saint,(1) is to be traced back to the eleventh century,
claiming as it does to have its source in the Kings of Aragon, we shall
take up its history for our purposes with the birth at the city of
Xativa, in the kingdom of Valencia, on December 30, 1378, of Alonso de
Borja, the son of Don Juan Domingo de Borja and his wife Doña Francisca.

     1  St. Francisco Borgia, S.J.--great-grandson of Pope
     Alexander VI, born at Gandia, in Spain, in 1510.


To this Don Alonso de Borja is due the rise of his family to its
stupendous eminence. An able, upright, vigorous-minded man, he became a
Professor and Doctor of Jurisprudence at the University of Lerida,
and afterwards served Alfonso I of Aragon, King of Naples and the Two
Sicilies, in the capacity of secretary. This office he filled with the
distinction that was to be expected from one so peculiarly fitted for it
by the character of the studies he had pursued.

He was made Bishop of Valencia, created Cardinal in 1444, and
finally--in 1455--ascended the throne of St. Peter as Calixtus III, an
old man, enfeebled in body, but with his extraordinary vigour of mind
all unimpaired.

Calixtus proved himself as much a nepotist as many another Pope before
and since. This needs not to be dilated upon here; suffice it that
in February of 1456 he gave the scarlet hat of Cardinal-Deacon of San
Niccoló, in Carcere Tulliano, to his nephew Don Roderigo de Lanzol y
Borja.

Born in 1431 at Xativa, the son of Juana de Borja (sister of Calixtus)
and her husband Don Jofrè de Lanzol, Roderigo was in his twenty-fifth
year at the time of his being raised to the purple, and in the following
year he was further created Vice-Chancellor of Holy Church with an
annual stipend of eight thousand florins. Like his uncle he had studied
jurisprudence--at the University of Bologna--and mentally and physically
he was extraordinarily endowed.

From the pen-portraits left of him by Gasparino of Verona, and Girolamo
Porzio, we know him for a tall, handsome man with black eyes and full
lips, elegant, courtly, joyous, and choicely eloquent, of such health
and vigour and endurance that he was insensible to any fatigue. Giasone
Maino of Milan refers to his “elegant appearance, serene brow, royal
glance, a countenance that at once expresses generosity and majesty, and
the genial and heroic air with which his whole personality is invested.”
 To a similar description of him Gasparino adds that “all women upon whom
he so much as casts his eyes he moves to love him; attracting them as
the lodestone attracts iron;” which is, it must be admitted, a most
undesirable reputation in a churchman.

A modern historian(1) who uses little restraint when writing of Roderigo
Borgia says of him that “he was a man of neither much energy nor
determined will,” and further that “the firmness and energy wanting to
his character were, however, often replaced by the constancy of his evil
passions, by which he was almost blinded.” How the constancy of evil
passions can replace firmness and energy as factors of worldly success
is not readily discernible, particularly if their possessor is blinded
by them. The historical worth of the stricture may safely be left to be
measured by its logical value. For the rest, to say that Roderigo Borgia
was wanting in energy and in will is to say something to which his
whole career gives the loud and derisive lie, as will--to some extent at
least--be seen in the course of this work.

     1  Pasquale Villari in his Machiavelli i suoi Tempi


His honours as Cardinal-Deacon and Vice-Chancellor of the Holy See he
owed to his uncle; but that he maintained and constantly improved his
position--and he a foreigner, be it remembered--under the reigns of
the four succeeding Popes--Pius II, Paul II, Sixtus IV, and Innocent
VIII--until finally, six-and-twenty years after the death of Calixtus
III, he ascended, himself, the Papal Throne, can be due only to the
unconquerable energy and stupendous talents which have placed him where
he stands in history--one of the greatest forces, for good or ill, that
ever occupied St. Peter’s Chair.

Say of him that he was ambitious, worldly, greedy of power, and a prey
to carnal lusts. All these he was. But for very sanity’s sake do not let
it be said that he was wanting either in energy or in will, for he was
energy and will incarnate.

Consider that with Calixtus III’s assumption of the Tiara Rome became
the Spaniard’s happy hunting-ground, and that into the Eternal City
streamed in their hundreds the Catalan adventurers--priests, clerks,
captains of fortune, and others--who came to seek advancement at the
hands of a Catalan Pope. This Spanish invasion Rome resented. She grew
restive under it.

Roderigo’s elder brother, Don Pedro Luis de Lanzol y Borja, was made
Gonfalonier of the Church, Castellan of all pontifical fortresses
and Governor of the Patrimony of St. Peter, with the title of Duke of
Spoleto and, later, Prefect of Rome, to the displacement of an Orsini
from that office. Calixtus invested this nephew with all temporal power
that it was in the Church’s privilege to bestow, to the end that he
might use it as a basis to overset the petty tyrannies of Romagna, and
to establish a feudal claim on the Kingdom of Naples.

Here already we see more than a hint of that Borgia ambition which was
to become a byword, and the first attempt of this family to found a
dynasty for itself and a State that should endure beyond the transient
tenure of the Pontificate, an aim that was later to be carried into
actual--if ephemeral--fulfilment by Cesare Borgia.

The Italians watched this growth of Spanish power with jealous, angry
eyes. The mighty House of Orsini, angered by the supplanting of one of
its members in the Prefecture of Rome, kept its resentment warm, and
waited. When in August of 1458 Calixtus III lay dying, the Orsini seized
the chance: they incited the city to ready insurgence, and with fire and
sword they drove the Spaniards out.

Don Pedro Luis made haste to depart, contrived to avoid the Orsini, who
had made him their special quarry, and getting a boat slipped down the
Tiber to Civita Vecchia, where he died suddenly some six weeks later,
thereby considerably increasing the wealth of Roderigo, his brother and
his heir.

Roderigo’s cousin, Don Luis Juan, Cardinal-Presbyter of Santi Quattro
Coronati, another member of the family who owed his advancement to his
uncle Calixtus, thought it also expedient to withdraw from that zone of
danger to men of his nationality and name.

Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja alone remained--leastways, the only prominent
member of his house--boldly to face the enmity of the majority of the
Sacred College, which had looked with grim disfavour upon his uncle’s
nepotism. Unintimidated, he entered the Conclave for the election of a
successor to Calixtus, and there the chance which so often prefers to
bestow its favours upon him who knows how to profit by them, gave him
the opportunity to establish himself as firmly as ever at the Vatican,
and further to advance his interests.

It fell out that when the scrutiny was taken, two cardinals stood
well in votes--the brilliant, cultured Enea Silvio Bartolomeo
de’ Piccolomini, Cardinal of Siena, and the French Cardinal
d’Estouteville--though neither had attained the minimum majority
demanded. Of these two, the lead in number of votes lay with the
Cardinal of Siena, and his election therefore might be completed
by Accession--that is, by the voices of such cardinals as had not
originally voted for him--until the minimum majority, which must exceed
two-thirds, should be made up.

The Cardinal Vice-Chancellor Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja led this
accession, with the result that the Cardinal of Siena became Pontiff--as
Pius II--and was naturally enough disposed to advance the interests of
the man who had been instrumental in helping him to that eminence. Thus,
his position at the Vatican, in the very face of all hostility, became
stronger and more prominent than ever.

A letter written two years later from the Baths at Petriolo by Pius II
to Roderigo when the latter was in Siena--whither he had been sent
by his Holiness to superintend the building of the Cathedral and
the Episcopal and Piccolomini palaces--is frequently cited by way of
establishing the young prelate’s dissolute ways. It is a letter at once
stern and affectionate, and it certainly leaves no doubt as to what
manner of man was the Cardinal Vice-Chancellor in his private life, and
to what manner of unecciesiastical pursuits he inclined. It is difficult
to discover in it any grounds upon which an apologist may build.


“BELOVED SON,

“When four days ago, in the gardens of Giovanni de Bichis, were
assembled several women of Siena addicted to worldly vanity, your
worthiness, as we have learnt, little remembering the office which you
fill, was entertained by them from the seventeenth to the twenty-second
hour. For companion you had one of your colleagues, one whom his years
if not the honour of the Holy See should have reminded of his duty. From
what we have heard, dancing was unrestrainedly indulged, and not one of
love’s attractions was absent, whilst your behaviour was no different
from that which might have been looked for in any worldly youth.
Touching what happened there, modesty imposes silence. Not only the
circumstance itself, but the very name of it is unworthy in one of your
rank. The husbands, parents, brothers, and relations of these young
women were excluded, in order that your amusements should be the more
unbridled. You with a few servants undertook to direct and lead those
dances. It is said that nothing is now talked of in Siena but your
frivolity. Certain it is that here at the baths, where the concourse
of ecclesiastics and laity is great, you are the topic of the day. Our
displeasure is unutterable, since all this reflects dishonourably upon
the sacerdotal estate and office. It will be said of us that we are
enriched and promoted not to the end that we may lead blameless lives,
but that we may procure the means to indulge our pleasures. Hence the
contempt of us entertained by temporal princes and powers and the daily
sarcasms of the laity. Hence also the reproof of our own mode of life
when we attempt to reprove others. The very Vicar of Christ is involved
in this contempt, since he appears to countenance such things. You,
beloved son, have charge of the Bishopric of Valencia, the first of
Spain; you are also Vice-Chancellor of the Church; and what renders your
conduct still more blameworthy is that you are among the cardinals, with
the Pope, one of the counsellors of the Holy See. We submit it to your
own judgement whether it becomes your dignity to court young women, to
send fruit and wine to her you love, and to have no thought for anything
but pleasure. We are censured on your account; the blessed memory of
your uncle Calixtus is vituperated, since in the judgement of many
he was wrong to have conferred so many honours upon you. If you seek
excuses in your youth, you are no longer so young that you cannot
understand what duties are imposed upon you by your dignity. A cardinal
should be irreproachable, a model of moral conduct to all. And what just
cause have we for resentment when temporal princes bestow upon us titles
that are little honourable, dispute with us our possessions, and attempt
to bend us to their will? In truth it is we who inflict these wounds
upon ourselves, and it is we who occasion ourselves these troubles,
undermining more and more each day by our deeds the authority of the
Church. Our guerdon is shame in this world and condign punishment in the
next. May your prudence therefore set a restraint upon these vanities
and keep you mindful of your dignity, and prevent that you be known for
a gallant among married and unmarried women. But should similar facts
recur, we shall be compelled to signify that they have happened against
our will and to our sorrow, and our censure must be attended by your
shame. We have always loved you, and we have held you worthy of our
favour as a man of upright and honest nature. Act therefore in such
a manner that we may maintain such an opinion of you, and nothing can
better conduce to this than that you should lead a well-ordered life.
Your age, which is such as still to promise improvement, admits that we
should admonish you paternally.”

“PETRIOLO, June 11, 1460.”


Such a letter is calculated to shock us in our modern notions of a
churchman. To us this conduct on the part of a prelate is scandalous
beyond words; that it was scandalous even then is obvious from the
Pontiff’s letter; but that it was scandalous in an infinitely lesser
degree is no less obvious from the very fact that the Pontiff wrote
that letter (and in such terms) instead of incontinently unfrocking the
offender.

In considering Roderigo’s conduct, you are to consider--as has been
urged already--the age in which he lived. You are to remember that it
was an age in which the passions and the emotions wore no such masks as
they wear to-day, but went naked and knew no shame of their nudity; an
age in which personal modesty was as little studied as hypocrisy, and in
which men, wore their vices as openly as their virtues.

No amount of simple statement can convey an adequate notion of the
corrupt state of the clergy at the time. To form any just appreciation
of this, it is necessary to take a peep at some of the documents that
have survived--such a document, for instance, as that Bull of this Pope
Pius II which forbade priests from plying the trades of keeping taverns,
gaming-houses, and brothels.

Ponder also that under his successor, Sixtus IV, the tax levied upon the
courtesans of Rome enriched the pontifical coffers to the extent of
some 20,000 ducats yearly. Ponder further that when the vicar of
the libidinous Innocent VIII published in 1490 an edict against
the universal concubinage practised by the clergy, forbidding its
continuation under pain of excommunication, all that it earned him was
the severe censure of the Holy Father, who disagreed with the measure
and who straightway repealed and cancelled the edict.(1)


     1  See Burchard’s Diarium, Thuasne Edition, Vol. II. p.442
     et seq.


All this being considered, and man being admittedly a creature of his
environment, can we still pretend to horror at this Roderigo and at the
fact that being the man he was--prelate though he might be--handsome,
brilliant, courted, in the full vigour of youth, and a voluptuary by
nature, he should have succumbed to the temptations by which he was
surrounded?

One factor only could have caused him to use more restraint--the good
example of his peers. That example he most certainly had not.

Virtue is a comparative estate, when all is said; and before we can find
that Roderigo was vile, that he deserves unqualified condemnation for
his conduct, we must ascertain that he was more or less exceptional in
his licence, that he was less scrupulous than his fellows. Do we find
that? To find the contrary we do not need to go beyond the matter which
provoked that letter from the Pontiff. For we see that he was not even
alone, as an ecclesiastic, in the adventure; that he had for associate
on that amorous frolic one Giacopo Ammanati, Cardinal-Presbyter of
San Crisogno, Roderigo’s senior and an ordained priest, which--without
seeking to make undue capital out of the circumstance--we may mention
that Roderigo was not. He was a Cardinal-Deacon, be it remembered.(1) We
know that the very Pontiff who admonished these young prelates, though
now admittedly a man of saintly ways, had been a very pretty fellow
himself in his lusty young days in Siena; we know that Roderigo’s
uncle--the Calixtus to whom Pius II refers in that letter as of “blessed
memory”--had at least one acknowledged son.(2) We know that Piero and
Girolamo Riario, though styled by Pope Sixtus IV his “nephews,” were
generally recognized to be his sons.(3) And we know that the numerous
bastards of Innocent VIII--Roderigo’s immediate precursor on the
Pontifical Throne--were openly acknowledged by their father. We know, in
short, that it was the universal custom of the clergy to forget its vows
of celibacy, and to circumvent them by dispensing with the outward
form and sacrament of marriage; and we have it on the word of Pius II
himself, that “if there are good reasons for enjoining the celibacy of
the clergy, there are better and stronger for enjoining them to marry.”


     1  He was not ordained priest until 1471, after the election
     of Sixtus IV.

     2  Don Francisco de Borja, born at Valencia in 1441.

     3  Macchiavelli, Istorie Fiorentine.


What more is there to say? If we must be scandalized, let us be
scandalized by the times rather than by the man. Upon what reasonable
grounds can we demand that he should be different from his fellows; and
if we find him no different, what right or reason have we for picking
him out and rendering him the object of unparalleled obloquy?

If we are to deal justly with Roderigo Borgia, we must admit that, in
so far as his concessions to his lusts are concerned, he was a typical
churchman of his day; neither more nor less--as will presently grow
abundantly clear.

It may be objected by some that had such been the case the Pope would
not have written him such a letter as is here cited. But consider a
moment the close relations existing between them. Roderigo was the
nephew of the late Pope; in a great measure Pius II owed his election,
as we have seen, to Roderigo’s action in the Conclave. That his interest
in him apart from that was paternal and affectionate is shown in every
line of that letter. And consider further that Roderigo’s companion
is shown by that letter to be equally guilty in so far as the acts
themselves are to be weighed, guilty in a greater degree when we
remember his seniority and his actual priesthood. Yet to Cardinal
Ammanati the Pope wrote no such admonition. Is not that sufficient proof
that his admonition of Roderigo was dictated purely by his personal
affection for him?

In this same year 1460 was born to Cardinal Roderigo a son--Don Pedro
Luis de Borja--by a spinster (mulier soluta) unnamed. This son was
publicly acknowledged and cared for by the cardinal.

Seven years later--in 1467--he became the father of a daughter--Girolama
de Borja--by a spinster, whose name again does not transpire. Like Pedro
Luis she too was openly acknowledged by Cardinal Roderigo. It was widely
believed that this child’s mother was Madonna Giovanna de’ Catanei, who
soon became quite openly the cardinal’s mistress, and was maintained by
him in such state as might have become a maîtresse en titre. But, as we
shall see later, the fact of that maternity of Girolama is doubtful in
the extreme. It was never established, and it is difficult to understand
why not if it were the fact.

Meanwhile Paul II--Pietro Barbo, Cardinal of Venice--had succeeded Pius
II in 1464, and in 1471 the latter was in his turn succeeded by
the formidable Sixtus IV--Cardinal Francesco Maria della Rovere--a
Franciscan of the lowest origin, who by his energy and talents had
become general of his order and had afterwards been raised to the
dignity of the purple.

It was Cardinal Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja who, in his official capacity
of Archdeacon of Holy Church, performed the ceremony of coronation and
placed the triple crown on the head of Pope Sixtus. It is probable that
this was his last official act as Arch­deacon, for in that same year
1471, at the age of forty, he was ordained priest and consecrated Bishop
of Albano.




CHAPTER II. THE REIGNS OF SIXTUS IV AND INNOCENT VIII


The rule of Sixtus was as vigorous as it was scandalous. To say--as has
been said--that with his succession to St. Peter’s Chair came for the
Church a still sadder time than that which had preceded it, is not
altogether true. Politically, at least, Sixtus did much to strengthen
the position of the Holy See and of the Pontificate. He was not long in
giving the Roman factions a taste of his stern quality. If he employed
unscrupulous means, he employed them against unscrupulous men--on the
sound principle of similia similibus curantur--and to some extent they
were justified by the ends in view.

He found the temporal throne of the Pontiffs tottering when he ascended
it. Stefano Porcaro and his distinguished following already in 1453 had
attempted the overthrow of the pontifical authority, inspired, no doubt,
by the attacks that had been levelled against it by the erudite and
daring Lorenzo Valla.

This Valla was the distinguished translator of Homer, Herodotus, and
Thucydides, who more than any one of his epoch advanced the movement of
Greek and Latin learning, which, whilst it had the effect of arresting
the development of Italian literature, enriched Europe by opening up to
it the sources of ancient erudition, of philosophy, poetry, and literary
taste. Towards the year 1435 he drifted to the court of Alfonso of
Aragon, whose secretary he ultimately became. Some years later he
attacked the Temporal Power and urged the secularization of the States
of the Church. “Ut Papa,” he wrote, “tantum Vicarius Christi sit, et
non etiam Coesari.” In his De falso credita et ementita Constantini
Donatione, he showed that the decretals of the Donation of Constantine,
upon which rests the Pope’s claim to the Pontifical States, was an
impudent forgery, that Constantine had never had the power to give,
nor had given, Rome to the Popes, and that they had no right to govern
there. He backed up this terrible indictment by a round attack upon the
clergy, its general corruption and its practices of simony; and as a
result he fell into the hands of the Inquisition. There it might have
gone very ill with him but that King Alfonso rescued him from the
clutches of that dread priestly tribunal.

Meanwhile, he had fired his petard. If a pretext had been wanting to
warrant the taking up of arms against the Papacy, that pretext Valla had
afforded. Never was the temporal power of the Church in such danger, and
ultimately it must inevitably have succumbed but for the coming of so
strong and unscrupulous a man as Sixtus IV to stamp out the patrician
factions that were heading the hostile movement.

His election, it is generally admitted, was simoniacal; and by simony he
raised the funds necessary for his campaign to reestablish and support
the papal authority. This simony of his, says Dr. Jacob Burckhardt,
“grew to unheard-of proportions, and extended from the appointment of
cardinals down to the sale of the smallest benefice.”

Had he employed these means of raising funds for none but the purpose
of putting down the assailants of the Pontificate, a measure of
justification (political if not ecclesiastical) might be argued in his
favour. Unfortunately, having discovered these ready sources of revenue,
he continued to exploit them for purposes far less easy to condone.

As a nepotist Sixtus was almost unsurpassed in the history of the
Papacy. Four of his nephews and their aggrandizement were the particular
objects of his attentions, and two of these--as we have already
said--Piero and Girolamo Riario, were universally recognized to be his
sons.

Piero, who was a simple friar of twenty-six years of age at the time
that his father became Pope, was given the Archbishopric of Florence,
made Patriarch of Constantinople, and created Cardinal to the title of
San Sisto, with a revenue of 60,000 crowns.

We have it on the word of Cardinal Ammanati(1)--the same gentleman who,
with Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja made so scandalously merry in de Bichis’
garden at Siena--that Cardinal Riario’s luxury “exceeded all that had
been displayed by our forefathers or that can even be imagined by our
descendants”; and Macchiavelli tells us(2) that “although of very low
origin and mean rearing, no sooner had he obtained the scarlet hat than
he displayed a pride and ambition so vast that the Pontificate seemed
too small for him, and he gave a feast in Rome which would have appeared
extraordinary even for a king, the expense exceeding 20,000 florins.”

     1  In a letter to Francesco Gonzaga.

     2  Istorie Florentine.


Knowing so much, it is not difficult to understand that in one year or
less he should have dissipated 200,000 florins, and found himself in
debt to the extent of a further 60,000.

In 1473, Sixtus being at the time all but at war with Florence, this
Cardinal Riario visited Venice and Milan. In the latter State he was
planning with Duke Galeazzo Maria that the latter should become King of
Lombardy, and then assist him with money and troops to master Rome and
ascend the Papal Throne--which, it appears, Sixtus was quite willing
to yield to him--thus putting the Papacy on a hereditary basis like any
other secular State.

It is as well, perhaps, that he should have died on his return to Rome
in January of 1474--worn out by his excesses and debaucheries, say some;
of poison administered by the Venetians, say others--leaving a mass of
debts, contracted in his transactions with the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, to be cleared up by the Vicar of Christ.

His brother Girolamo, meanwhile, had married Caterina Sforza, a natural
daughter of Duke Galeazzo Maria. She brought him as her dowry the City
of Imola, and in addition to this he received from his Holiness the City
of Forli, to which end the Ordelaffi were dispossessed of it. Here again
we have a papal attempt to found a family dynasty, and an attempt that
might have been carried further under circumstances more propitious and
had not Death come to check their schemes.

The only one of the four “nephews” of Sixtus--and to this one was
imputed no nearer kinship--who was destined to make any lasting mark
in history was Giuliano della Rovere. He was raised by his uncle to the
purple with the title of San Pietro in Vincoli, and thirty-two years
later he was to become Pope (as Julius II). Of him we shall hear much in
the course of this story.

Under the pontificate of Sixtus IV the position and influence of
Cardinal Roderigo were greatly increased, for once again the Spanish
Cardinal had made the most of his opportunities. As at the election of
Pius II, so at the election of Sixtus IV it was Cardinal Roderigo who
led the act of accession which gave the new Pope his tiara, and for
this act Roderigo--in common with the Cardinals Orsini and Gonzaga who
acceded with him--was richly rewarded and advanced, receiving as his
immediate guerdon the wealthy Abbey of Subiaco.

At about this time, 1470, must have begun the relations between Cardinal
Roderigo and Giovanna Catanei, or Vannozza Catanei, as she is styled in
contemporary documents--Vannozza being a corruption or abbreviation of
Giovannozza, an affectionate form of Giovanna.

Who she was, or whence she came, are facts that have never been
ascertained. She is generally assumed to have been a Roman; but there
are no obvious grounds for the assumption, her name, for instance,
being common to many parts of Italy. And just as we have no sources of
information upon her origin, neither have we any elements from which
to paint her portrait. Gregorovius rests the probability that she was
beautiful upon the known characteristics and fastidious tastes of
the cardinal. Since it is unthinkable that such a man would have been
captivated by an ugly woman or would have been held by a stupid one,
it is fairly reasonable to conclude that she was beautiful and
ready-witted.

All that we do know of her up to the time of her liaison with Cardinal
Roderigo is that she was born on July 13, 1442, this fact being
ascertainable by a simple calculation from the elements afforded by the
inscription on her tomb in Santa Maria del Popolo:

Vix ann. LXXVI m. IV d. XII Objit anno MDXVIII XXVI, Nov.

And again, just as we know nothing of her family origin, neither have we
any evidence of what her circumstances were when she caught the magnetic
eye of Cardinal Roderigo de Lanzol y Borja--or Borgia as by now his
name, which had undergone italianization, was more generally spelled.

Infessura states in his diaries that Roderigo desiring later--as Pope
Alexander VI--to create cardinal his son by her, Cesare Borgia, he
caused false witness to be borne to the fact that Cesare was the
legitimate son of one Domenico d’Arignano, to whom he, the Pope, had
in fact married her. Guicciardini(1) makes the same statement, without,
however, mentioning name of this d’Arignano.

     1  Istoria d’Italia.


Now, bastards were by canon law excluded from the purple, and it is
probably upon this circumstance that both Infessura and Guicciardini
have built the assumption that some such means as these had been adopted
to circumvent the law, and--as so often happens in chronicles concerning
the Borgias--the assumption is straightway stated as a fact. But
there were other ways of circumventing awkward commandments, and,
unfortunately for the accuracy of these statements of Infessura and
Guicciardini, another way was taken in this instance. As early as
1480, Pope Sixtus IV had granted Cesare Borgia--in a Bull dated October
1(1)--dispensation from proving the legitimacy of his birth. This
entirely removed the necessity for any such subsequent measures as those
which are suggested by these chroniclers.

     1  See the supplement to the Appendix of Thuasne’s edition
     of Burchard’s Diarium.


Moreover, had Cardinal Roderigo desired to fasten the paternity of
Cesare on another, there was ready to his hand Vannozza’s actual
husband, Giorgio della Croce.(2) When exactly this man became her
husband is not to be ascertained. All that we know is that he was so in
1480, and that she was living with him in that year in a house in Piazza
Pizzo di Merlo (now Piazza Sforza Cesarini) not far from the house on
Banchi Vecchi which Cardinal Roderigo, as Vice-Chancellor, had converted
into a palace for himself, and a palace so sumptuous as to excite the
wonder of that magnificent age.

     2  D’Arignano is as much a fiction as the rest of
     Infessura’s story.


This Giorgio della Croce was a Milanese, under the protection of
Cardinal Roderigo, who had obtained for him a post at the Vatican as
apostolic secretary. According to some, he married him to Vannozza in
order to afford her an official husband and thus cloak his own relations
with her. It is an assumption which you will hesitate to accept. If we
know our Cardinal Roderigo at all, he was never the man to pursue his
pleasures in a hole-and-corner fashion, nor one to bethink him of a
cloak for his amusements. Had he but done so, scandalmongers would
have had less to fasten upon in their work of playing havoc with his
reputation. What is far more likely is that della Croce owed Cardinal
Roderigo’s protection and the appointment as apostolic secretary to his
own complacency in the matter of his wife’s relations with the splendid
prelate. However we look at it, the figure cut in this story by della
Croce is not heroic.

Between the years 1474 and 1476, Vannozza bore Roderigo two sons, Cesare
Borgia (afterwards Cardinal of Valencia and Duke of Valentinois), the
central figure of our story, and Giovanni Borgia (afterwards Duke of
Gandia).

Lucrezia Borgia, we know from documentary evidence before us, was born
on April 19, 1479.

But there is a mystery about the precise respective ages of Vannozza’s
two eldest sons, and we fear that at this time of day it has become
impossible to establish beyond reasonable doubt which was the firstborn;
and this in spite of the documents discovered by Gregorovius and his
assertion that they remove all doubt and enable him definitely to assert
that Giovanni was born in 1474 and Cesare in 1476.

Let us look at these documents. They are letters from ambassadors to
their masters; probably correct, and the more credible since they
happen to agree and corroborate one another; still, not so utterly and
absolutely reliable as to suffice to remove the doubts engendered by the
no less reliable documents whose evidence contradicts them.

The first letters quoted by Gregorovius are from the ambassador
Gianandrea Boccaccio to his master, the Duke of Ferrara, in 1493. In
these he mentions Cesare Borgia as being sixteen to seventeen years of
age at the time. But the very manner of writing--“sixteen to seventeen
years”--is a common way of vaguely suggesting age rather than positively
stating it. So we may pass that evidence over, as of secondary
importance.

Next is a letter from Gerardo Saraceni to the Duke of Ferrara, dated
October 26, 1501, and it is more valuable, claiming as it does to be the
relation of something which his Holiness told the writer. It is in the
post-scriptum that this ambassador says: “The Pope gave me to understand
that the said Duchess [Lucrezia Borgia] will complete twenty-two years
of age next April, and at that same time the Duke of Romagna will
complete his twenty-sixth year.”(1)


  1  “Facendomi intendere the epsa Duchessa é di etá di anni ventidui, li
quali finiranno a questo Aprile; in el qual tempo anche lo Illmo. Duca
di Romagna fornirá anni ventisei.”


This certainly fixes the year of Cesare’s birth as 1476; but we are
to remember that Saraceni is speaking of something that the Pope had
recently told him; exactly how recently does not transpire. An error
would easily be possible in so far as the age of Cesare is concerned.
In so far as the age of Lucrezia is concerned, an error is not only
possible, but has actually been committed by Saraceni. At least the age
given in his letter is wrong by one year, as we know by a legal document
drawn up in February of 1491--Lucrezia’s contract of marriage with Don
Juan Cherubin de Centelles.(2)


  2  A contract never executed.


According to this protocol in old Spanish, dated February 26, 1491,
Lucrezia completed her twelfth year on April 19, 1491,(3) which
definitely and positively gives us the date of her birth as April 19,
1479.


  3  “Item mes attenent que dita Dona Lucretia a XVIIII de Abril prop.
vinent entrará in edat de dotze anys.”


A quite extraordinary error is that made by Gregorovius when he
says that Lucrezia Borgia was born on April 18, 1480, extraordinary
considering that he made it apparently with this very protocol under his
eyes, and cites it, in fact (Document IV in the Appendix to his Lucrezia
Borgia) as his authority.

To return, however, to Cesare and Giovanni, there is yet another
evidence quoted by Gregorovius in support of his contention that the
latter was the elder and born in 1474; but it is of the same nature and
of no more, nor less, value than those already mentioned.

Worthy of more consideration in view of their greater official and
legal character are the Ossuna documents, given in the Supplement of the
Appendix in Thuasne’s edition of Burchard’s Diary, namely:


(a) October 1, 1480.--A Bull from Sixtus IV, already mentioned,
dispensing Cesare from proving his legitimacy. In this he is referred to
as in his sixth year--“in sexto tuo aetatis anno.”

This, assuming Boccaccio’s letter to be correct in the matter of April
being the month of Cesare’s birth, fixes the year of his birth as 1475.


(b) August 16, 1482.--A Bull of Sixtus IV, appointing Roderigo Borgia
administrator of Cesare’s benefices. In this he is mentioned as being
seven years of age (i.e., presumably in his eighth year), which again
gives us his birth-year as 1475.


(c) September 12, 1484.--A Bull of Sixtus IV, appointing Cesare
treasurer of the Church of Carthage. In this he is mentioned as in his
ninth year--“in nono tuo aetatis anno.” This is at variance with the
other two, and gives us 1476 as the year of his birth.

To these evidences, conflicting as they are, may be added Burchard’s
mention in his diary under date of September 12, 1491, that Cesare was
then seventeen years of age. This would make him out to have been born
in 1474.


Clearly the matter cannot definitely be settled upon such evidence as we
have. All that we can positively assert is that he was born between the
years 1474 and 1476, and we cannot, we think, do better for the purposes
of this story than assume his birth-year to have been 1475.

We know that between those same years, or in one or the other of them,
was born Giovanni Borgia; but just as the same confusion prevails with
regard to his exact age, so is it impossible to determine with any
finality whether he was Cesare’s junior or senior.

The one document that appears to us to be the most important in this
connection is that of the inscription on their mother’s tomb. This runs:

FAUSTIAE CATHANAE, CESARE VALENTINAE, JOHANNAE CANDIAE, JUFFREDO
SCYLATII, ET LUCRETIA FERRARIAE DUCIB. FILIIS NOBILI PROBITATE INSIGNI,
RELIGIONE EXIMIA, ETC., ETC.


If Giovanni was, as is claimed, the eldest of her children, why does his
name come second? If Cesare was her second son, why does his name take
the first place on that inscription?

It has been urged that if Cesare was the elder of these two, he, and not
Giovanni, would have succeeded to the Duchy of Gandia on the death of
Pedro Luis--Cardinal Roderigo’s eldest son, by an unknown mother. But
that does not follow inevitably; for it is to be remembered that Cesare
was already destined for an ecclesiastical career, and it may well be
that his father was reluctant to change his plans.

Meanwhile the turbulent reign of Sixtus IV went on, until his ambition
to increase his dominions had the result of plunging the whole of Italy
into war.

Lorenzo de’Medici had thwarted the Pope’s purposes in Romagna, coming to
the assistance of Città di Castello when this was attacked in the Pope’s
interest by the warlike Giuliano della Rovere. To avenge himself for
this, and to remove a formidable obstacle to his family’s advancement,
the Pope inspired the Pazzi conspiracy against the lives of the famous
masters of Florence. The conspiracy failed; for although Giuliano
de’Medici fell stabbed to the heart--before Christ’s altar, and at the
very moment of the elevation of the Host--Lorenzo escaped with slight
hurt, and, by the very risk to which he had been exposed, rallied the
Florentines to him more closely than ever.

Open war was the only bolt remaining in the papal quiver, and open
war he declared, preluding it by a Bull of Excommunication against the
Florentines. Naples took sides with the Pope. Venice and Milan came to
the support of Florence, whereupon Milan’s attentions were diverted to
her own affairs, Genoa being cunningly set in revolt against her.

In 1480 a peace was patched up; but it was short-lived. A few months
later war flared out again from the Holy See, against Florence this
time, and on the pretext of its having joined the Venetians against
the Pope in the late war. A complication now arose, created by the
Venetians, who seized the opportunity to forward their own ambitions and
increase their territories on the mainland, and upon a pretext of the
pettiest themselves declared war upon Ferrara. Genoa and some minor
tyrannies were drawn into the quarrel on the one side, whilst on the
other Florence, Naples, Mantua, Milan, and Bologna stood by Ferrara.
Whilst the papal forces were holding in check the Neapolitans who
sought to pass north to aid Ferrara, whilst the Roman Campagna was being
harassed by the Colonna, and Milan was engaged with Genoa, the Venetians
invested Ferrara, forced her to starvation and to yielding-point.
Thereupon the Pope, perceiving the trend of affairs, and that the only
likely profit to be derived from the campaign would lie with Venice,
suddenly changed sides that he might avoid a contingency so far removed
from all his aims.

He made a treaty with Naples, and permitted the Neapolitan army passage
through his territories, of which they availed themselves to convey
supplies to Ferrara and neutralize the siege. At the same time the Pope
excommunicated the Venetians, and urged all Italy to make war upon them.

In this fashion the campaign dragged on to every one’s disadvantage and
without any decisive battle fought, until at last the peace of Bagnolo
was concluded in August of 1484, and the opposing armies withdrew from
Ferrara.

The news of it literally killed Sixtus. When the ambassadors declared
to him the terms of the treaty he was thrown into a violent rage, and
declared the peace to be at once shameful and humiliating. The gout from
which he suffered flew to his heart, and on the following day--August
12, 1484--he died.

Two things he did during his reign to the material advantage of
the Church, however much he may have neglected the spiritual. He
strengthened her hold upon her temporal possessions and he enriched the
Vatican by the addition of the Sistine Chapel. For the decoration
of this he procured the best Tuscan talent of his day--and of many
days--and brought Alessandro Filipeppi (Botticelli), Pietro Vannuccio
(Il Perugino), and Domenico Bigordi (IL Ghirlandajo) from Florence to
adorn its walls with their frescoes.(1)


  1  The glory of the Sistine Chapel, however, is Michelangelo’s “Last
Judgement,” which was added later, in the reign of Pope Julius II
(Giuliano della Rovere).


In the last years of the reign of Pope Sixtus, Cardinal Roderigo’s
family had suffered a loss and undergone an increase.

In 1481 Vannozza bore him another son--Giuffredo Borgia, and in the
following year died his eldest son (by an unknown mother) Pedro Luis de
Borgia, who had reached the age of twenty-two and was betrothed at the
time of his decease to the Princess Maria d’Aragona.

In January of that same year, 1482, Cardinal Roderigo had married his
daughter Girolama--now aged fifteen--to Giovanni Andrea Cesarini, the
scion of a patrician Roman house. The alliance strengthened the bonds of
good feeling which for some considerable time had prevailed between the
two families. Unfortunately the young couple were not destined to many
years of life together, as in 1483 both died.

Of Cesare all that we know at this period is what we learn from the
Papal Bulls conferring several benefices upon him. In July 1482 he was
granted the revenues from the prebendals and canonries of Valencia; in
the following month he was appointed Canon of Valencia and apostolic
notary. In April 1484 he was made Provost of Alba, and in September
of the same year treasurer of the Church of Carthage. No doubt he was
living with his mother, his brothers, and his sister at the house in the
Piazza Pizzo di Merlo, where an ample if not magnificent establishment
was maintained.

By this time Cardinal Roderigo’s wealth and power had grown to
stupendous proportions, and he lived in a splendour well worthy of his
lofty rank. He was now fifty-three years of age, still retaining the air
and vigour of a man in his very prime, which, no doubt, he owed as much
as to anything to his abstemious and singularly sparing table-habits. He
derived a stupendous income from his numerous abbeys in Italy and
Spain, his three bishoprics of Valencia, Porto, and Carthage, and
his ecclesiastical offices, among which the Vice-Chancellorship alone
yielded him annually eight thousand florins.(1)


  1  The gold florin, ducat, or crown was equal to ten shillings of our
present money, and had a purchasing power of five times that amount.


Volterra refers with wonder to the abundance of his plate, to his
pearls, his gold embroideries, and his books, the splendid equipment of
his beds, the trappings of his horses, and other similar furnishings in
gold, in silver, and in silk. In short, he was the wealthiest prince of
the Church of his day, and he lived with a magnificence worthy of a king
or of the Pope himself.

Of the actual man, Volterra, writing in 1586, says: “He is of a spirit
capable of anything, and of a great intelligence. A ready speaker,
and of distinction, notwithstanding his indifferent literary culture;
naturally astute, and of marvellous talent in the conduct of affairs.”

In the year in which Volterra wrote of Cardinal Roderigo in such terms
Vannozza was left a widow by the death of Giorgio della Croce. Her
widowhood was short, however, for in the same year--on June 6--she took
a second husband, possibly at the instance of Roderigo Borgia, who
did not wish to leave her unprotected; that, at least, is the general
inference, although there is very little evidence upon which to base it.
This second husband was Carlo Canale, a Mantovese scholar who had served
Cardinal Francesco Gonzaga in the capacity of chamberlain, and who had
come to Rome on the death of his patron.

The marriage contract shows that by this time Vannozza had removed her
residence to Piazza Branchis. In addition to this she had by this
time acquired a villa with its beautiful gardens and vine­yards in the
Suburra near S. Pietro in Vincoli. She is also known to have been the
proprietor of an inn--the Albergo del Leone--in Via del Orso, opposite
the Torre di Nona, for she figures with della Croce in a contract
regarding a lease of it in 1483.

With her entrance into second nuptials, her relations with Cardinal
Roderigo came to an end, and his two children by her, then in
Rome--Lucrezia and Giuffredo--went to take up their residence with
Adriana Orsini (née de Mila) at the Orsini Palace on Monte Giordano. She
was a cousin of Roderigo’s, and the widow of Lodovico Orsini, by whom
she had a son, Orso Orsini, who from early youth had been betrothed to
Giulia Farnese, the daughter of a patrician family, still comparatively
obscure, but destined through this very girl to rise to conspicuous
eminence.

For her surpassing beauty this Giulia Farnese has been surnamed La
Bella--and as Giulia La Bella was she known in her day--and she has been
immortalized by Pinturicchio and Guglielmo della Porta. She sat to the
former as a model for his Madonna in the Borgia Tower of the Vatican,
and to the latter for the statue of Truth which adorns the tomb of her
brother Alessandro Farnese, who became Pope Paul III.

Here in Adriana Orsini’s house, where his daughter Lucrezia was being
educated, Cardinal Roderigo, now at the mature age of some six-and-fifty
years, made the acquaintance and became enamoured of this beautiful
golden-headed Giulia, some forty years his junior. To the fact that she
presently became his mistress--somewhere about the same time that
she became Orso Orsini’s wife--is due the sudden rise of the House of
Farnese. This began with her handsome, dissolute brother Alessandro’s
elevation to the purple by her lover, and grew to vast proportions
during his subsequent and eminently scandalous occupation of the Papal
Throne as Paul III.

In the year 1490 Lucrezia was the only one of Roderigo’s children by
Vannozza who remained in Rome.

Giovanni Borgia was in Spain, whither he had gone on the death of his
brother Pedro Luis, to take posession of the Duchy of Gandia, which the
power of his father’s wealth and vast influence at the Valencian Court
had obtained for that same Pedro Luis. To this Giovanni now succeeded.

Cesare Borgia--now aged fifteen--had for some two years been studying
his humanities in an atmosphere of Latinity at the Sapienza of Perugia.
There, if we are to believe the praises of him uttered by Pompilio, he
was already revealing his unusual talents and a precocious wit. In
the preface of the Syllabica on the art of Prosody dedicated to him by
Pompilio, the latter hails him as the hope and ornament of the Hous of
Borgia--“Borgiae familiae spes et decus.”

From Perugia he was moved in 1491 to the famous University of Pisa, a
college frequented by the best of Italy. For preceptor he had Giovanni
Vera of Arcilla, a Spanish gentleman who was later created a cardinal by
Cesare’s father. There in Pisa Cesare maintained an establishment of a
magnificence in keeping with his father’s rank and with the example set
him by that same father.

It was Cardinal Roderigo’s wish that Cesare should follow an
ecclesiastical career; and the studies of canon law which he pursued
under Filippo Decis, the most rated lecturer on canon law of his day,
were such as peculiarly to fit him for that end and for the highest
honours the Church might have to bestow upon him later. At the age of
seventeen, while still at Pisa, he was appointed prothonotary of the
Church and preconized Bishop of Pampeluna.

Sixtus IV died, as we have seen, in August 1482. The death of a Pope
was almost invariably the signal for disturbances in Rome, and they
certainly were not wanting on this occasion. The Riario palaces were
stormed and looted, and Girolamo Riario--the Pope’s “nepot”--threw
himself into the castle of Sant’ Angelo with his forces.

The Orsini and Colonna were in arms, “so that in a few days
incendiarism, robbery, and murder raged in several parts of the city.
The cardinals besought the Count to surrender the castle to the Sacred
College, withdraw his troops, and deliver Rome from the fear of his
forces; and he, that he might win the favour of the future Pope, obeyed,
and withdrew to Imola.”(1)


  1  Macchiavelli, Istorie Fiorentine.


The cardinals, having thus contrived to restore some semblance of order,
proceeded to the creation of a new Pontiff, and a Genoese, Giovanni
Battista Cibo, Cardinal of Malfetta, was elected and took the name of
Innocent VIII.

Again, as in the case of Sixtus, there is no lack of those who charge
this Pontiff with having obtained his election by simony. The Cardinals
Giovanni d’ Aragona (brother to the King of Naples) and Ascanio Sforza
(brother of Lodovico, Duke of Milan) are said to have disposed of their
votes in the most open and shameless manner, practically putting them
up for sale to the highest bidder. Italy rang with the scandal of it, we
are told.

Under Innocent’s lethargic rule the Church again began to lose much of
the vigour with which Sixtus had inspired it. If the reign of Sixtus
had been scandalous, infinitely worse was that of Innocent--a sordid,
grasping sensualist, without even the one redeeming virtue of strength
that had been his predecessor’s. Nepotism had characterized many
previous pontificates; open paternity was to characterize his, for he
was the first Pope who, in flagrant violation of canon law, acknowledged
his children for his own. He proceeded to provide for some seven
bastards, and that provision appears to have been the only aim and scope
of his pontificate.

Not content with raising money by the sale of preferments, Innocent
established a traffic in indulgences, the like of which had never been
seen before. In the Rome of his day you might, had you the money, buy
anything, from a cardinal’s hat to a pardon for the murder of your
father.

The most conspicuous of his bastards was Francesco Cibo--conspicuous
chiefly for the cupidity which distinguished him as it distinguished the
Pope his father. For the rest he was a poor-spirited fellow who sorely
disappointed Lorenzo de’Medici, whose daughter Maddalena he received
in marriage. Lorenzo had believed that, backed by the Pope’s influence,
Francesco would establish for himself a dynasty in Romagna. But father
and son were alike too invertebrate--the one to inspire, the other to
execute any such designs as had already been attempted by the nepots of
Calixtus III and Sixtus IV.

Under the weak and scandalous rule of Innocent VIII Rome appears to
have been abandoned to the most utter lawlessness. Anarchy, robbery, and
murder preyed upon the city. No morning dawned without revealing corpses
in the streets; and if by chance the murderer was caught, there was
pardon for him if he could afford to buy it, or Tor di Nona and the
hangman’s noose if he could not.

It is not wonderful that when at last Innocent VIII died Infessura
should have blessed the day that freed the world of such a monster.

But his death did not happen until 1492. A feeble old man, he had become
subject to lethargic or cataleptic trances, which had several times
already deceived those in attendance into believing him dead. He grew
weaker and weaker, and it became impossible to nourish him upon anything
but woman’s milk. Towards the end came, Infessura tells us, a Hebrew
physician who claimed to have a prescription by which he could save the
Pope’s life. For his infusion(1) he needed young human blood, and to
obtain it he took three boys of the age of ten, and gave them a ducat
apiece for as much as he might require of them. Unfortunately he took so
much that the three boys incontinently died of his phlebotomy, and the
Hebrew was obliged to take to flight to save his own life, for the Pope,
being informed of what had taken place, execrated the deed and ordered
the physician’s arrest. “Judeus quidem aufugit, et Papa sanatus not
est,” concludes Infessura.


  1  The silly interpretation of this afforded by later writers, that this
physician attempted transfusion of blood--silly, because unthinkable in
an age which knew nothing of the circulation of the blood--has already
been exploded.

Innocent VIII breathed his last on July 25, 1492.




CHAPTER III. ALEXANDER VI


The ceremonies connected with the obsequies of Pope Innocent VIII
lasted--as prescribed--nine days; they were concluded on August 5, 1492,
and, says Infessura naïvely, “sic finita fuit eius memoria.”

The Sacred College consisted at the time of twenty-seven cardinals, four
of whom were absent at distant sees and unable to reach Rome in time
for the immuring of the Conclave. The twenty-three present were, in the
order of their seniority: Roderigo Borgia, Oliviero Caraffa, Giuliano
della Rovere, Battista Zeno, Giovanni Michieli, Giorgio Costa, Girolamo
della Rovere, Paolo Fregosi, Domenico della Rovere, Giovanni dei
Conti, Giovanni Giacomo Sclafetani, Lorenzo Cibo, Ardicino della Porta,
Antoniotto Pallavicino, Maffeo Gerardo, Francesco Piccolomini, Raffaele
Riario, Giovanni Battista Savelli, Giovanni Colonna, Giovanni Orsini,
Ascanio Maria Sforza, Giovanni de’Medici, and Francesco Sanseverino.

On August 6 they assembled in St. Peter’s to hear the Sacred Mass of the
Holy Ghost, which was said by Giuliano della Rovere on the tomb of the
Prince of the Apostles, and to listen to the discourse “Pro eligendo
Pontefice,” delivered by the learned and eloquent Bishop of Carthage.
Thereafter the Cardinals swore upon the Gospels faithfully to observe
their trust, and thereupon the Conclave was immured.

According to the dispatches of Valori, the Ferrarese ambassador in Rome,
it was expected that either the Cardinal of Naples (Oliviero Caraffa)
or the Cardinal of Lisbon (Giorgio Costa) would be elected to the
Pontificate; and according to the dispatch of Cavalieri the ambassador
of Modena, the King of France had deposited 200,000 ducats with a Roman
banker to forward the election of Giuliano della Rovere. Nevertheless,
early on the morning of August 11 it was announced that Roderigo Borgia
was elected Pope, and we have it on the word of Valori that the election
was unanimous, for he wrote on the morrow to the Council of Eight (the
Signory of Florence) that after long contention Alexander VI was created
“omnium consensum--ne li manco un solo voto.”

The subject of this election is one with which we rarely find an author
dealing temperately or with a proper and sane restraint. To vituperate
in superlatives seems common to most who have taken in hand this and
other episodes in the history of the Borgias. Every fresh writer who
comes to the task appears to be mainly inspired by a desire to emulate
his forerunners, allowing his pen to riot zestfully in the accumulation
of scandalous matter, and seeking to increase if possible its lurid
quality by a degree or two. As a rule there is not even an attempt made
to put forward evidence in substantiation of anything that is alleged.
Wild and sweeping statement takes the place that should be held by calm
deduction and reasoned comment.

“He was the worst Pontiff that ever filled St. Peter’s Chair,” is one
of these sweeping statements, culled from the pages of an able, modern,
Italian author, whose writings, sound in all that concerns other
matters, are strewn with the most foolish extravagances and flagrant
inaccuracies in connection with Alexander VI and his family.

To say of him, as that writer says, that “he was the worst Pontiff
that ever filled St. Peter’s Chair,” can only be justified by an utter
ignorance of papal history. You have but to compare him calmly and
honestly--your mind stripped of preconceptions--with the wretched
and wholly contemptible Innocent VIII whom he succeeded, or with the
latter’s precursor, the terrible Sixtus IV.

That he was better than these men, morally or ecclesiastically, is
not to be pretended; that he was worse--measuring achievement by
opportunity--is strenuously to be denied. For the rest, that he was
infinitely more gifted and infinitely more a man of affairs is not to be
gainsaid by any impartial critic.

If we take him out of the background of history in which he is set, and
judge him singly and individually, we behold a man who, as a churchman
and Christ’s Vicar, fills us with horror and loathing, as a scandalous
exception from what we are justified in supposing from his office must
have been the rule. Therefore, that he may be judged by the standard of
his own time if he is to be judged at all, if we are even to attempt to
understand him, have we given a sketch of the careers of those Popes who
immediately preceded him, with whom as Vice-Chancellor he was intimately
associated, and whose examples were the only papal examples that he
possessed.

That this should justify his course we do not pretend. A good churchman
in his place would have bethought him of his duty to the Master whose
Vicar he was, and would have aimed at the sorely needed reform. But we
are not concerned to study him as a good churchman. It is by no means
clear that we are concerned to study him as a churchman at all. The
Papacy had by this time become far less of an ecclesiastical than a
political force; the weapons of the Church were there, but they were
being employed for the furtherance not of churchly, but of worldly aims.
If the Pontiffs in the pages of this history remembered or evoked their
spiritual authority, it was but to employ it as an instrument for the
advancement of their temporal schemes. And personal considerations
entered largely into these.

Self-aggrandizement, insufferable in a cleric, is an ambition not
altogether unpardonable in a temporal prince; and if Alexander aimed at
self-aggrandizement and at the founding of a permanent dynasty for
his family, he did not lack examples in the careers of those among his
predecessors with whom he had been associated.

That the Papacy was Christ’s Vicarage was a fact that had long since
been obscured by the conception that the Papacy was a kingdom of this
world. In striving, then, for worldly eminence by every means in his
power, Alexander is no more blameworthy than any other. What, then,
remains? The fact that he succeeded better than any of his forerunners.
But are we on that account to select him for the special object of our
vituperation? The Papacy had tumbled into a slough of materialism in
which it was to wallow even after the Reformation had given it pause
and warning. Under what obligation was Alexander VI, more than any other
Pope, to pull it out of that slough? As he found it, so he carried it
on, as much a self-seeker, as much a worldly prince, as much a family
man and as little a churchman as any of those who had gone immediately
before him.

By the outrageous discrepancy between the Papacy’s professed and actual
aims it was fast becoming an object of execration, and it is Alexander’s
misfortune that, coming when he did, he has remained as the type of his
class.

The mighty of this world shall never want for detractors. The mean and
insignificant, writhing under the consciousness of his shortcomings,
ministers to his self-love by vilifying the great that he may lessen
the gap between himself and them. To achieve greatness is to achieve
enemies. It is to excite envy; and as envy no seed can raise up such a
crop of hatred.

Does this need labouring? Have we not abundant instances about us of the
vulgar tittle-tattle and scandalous unfounded gossip which, born Heaven
alone knows on what back-stairs or in what servants’ hall, circulates
currently to the detriment of the distinguished in every walk of
life? And the more conspicuously great the individual, the greater
the incentive to slander him, for the interest of the slander is
commensurate with the eminence of the personage assailed.

Such to a great extent is the case of Alexander VI. He was too powerful
for the stomachs of many of his contemporaries, and he and his son
Cesare had a way of achieving their ends. Since that could not be
denied, it remained to inveigh loudly against the means adopted; and
with pious uplifting of hands and eyes, to cry, “Shame!” and “Horror!”
 and “The like has never been heard of!” in wilful blindness to what had
been happening at the Vatican for generations.

Later writers take up the tale of it. It is a fine subject about
which to make phrases, and the passion for phrase-making will at times
outweigh the respect for truth. Thus Villari with his “the worst Pontiff
that ever filled St. Peter’s Chair,” and again, elsewhere, echoing what
many a writer has said before him from Guicciardini downwards, in
utter and diametric opposition to the true facts of the case: “The
announcement of his election was received throughout Italy with
universal dismay.” To this he adds the ubiquitous story of King
Ferrante’s bursting into tears at the news--“though never before known
to weep for the death of his own children.”

Let us pause a moment to contemplate the grief the Neapolitan King. What
picture is evoked in your minds by that statement of his bursting into
tears at Alexander’s election? We see--do we not?--a pious, noble soul,
horror-stricken at the sight of the Papacy’s corruption; a truly sublime
figure, whose tears will surely stand to his credit in heaven; a great
heart breaking; a venerable head bowed down with lofty, righteous grief,
weeping over the grave of Christian hopes. Such surely is the image we
are meant to see by Guicciardini and his many hollow echoers.

Turn we now for corroboration of that noble picture to the history of
this same Ferrante. A shock awaits us. We find, in this bastard of
the great and brilliant Alfonso a cruel, greedy, covetous monster, so
treacherous and so fiendishly brutal that we are compelled to extend
him the charity of supposing him to be something less than sane. Let us
consider but one of his characteristics. He loved to have his enemies
under his own supervision, and he kept them so--the living ones caged
and guarded, the dead ones embalmed and habited as in life; and this
collection of mummies was his pride and delight. More, and worse could
we tell you of him. But--ex pede, Herculem.

This man shed tears we are told. Not another word. It is left to our
imagination to paint for us a picture of this weeping; it is left to us
to conclude that these precious tears were symbolical of the grief of
Italy herself; that the catastrophe that provoked them must have been
terrible indeed.

But now that we know what manner of man was this who wept, see how
different is the inference that we may draw from his sorrow. Can we
still imagine it--as we are desired to do--to have sprung from a lofty,
Christian piety? Let us track those tears to their very source, and we
shall find it to be compounded of rage and fear.

Ferrante saw trouble ahead of him with Lodovico Sforza, concerning a
matter which shall be considered in the next chapter, and not at all
would it suit him at such a time that such a Pope as Alexander--who, he
had every reason to suppose, would be on the side of Lodovico--should
rule in Rome.

So he had set himself, by every means in his power, to oppose Roderigo’s
election. His rage at the news that all his efforts had been vain,
his fear of a man of Roderigo’s mettle, and his undoubted dread of
the consequences to himself of his frustrated opposition of that man’s
election, may indeed have loosened the tears of this Ferrante who had
not even wept at the death of his own children. We say “may” advisedly;
for the matter, from beginning to end, is one of speculation. If we
leave it for the realm of fact, we have to ask--Were there any tears
at all? Upon what authority rests the statement of the Florentine
historian? What, in fact, does he say?

“It is well known that the King of Naples, for all that in public he
dissembled the pain it caused him, signified to the queen, his
wife, with tears--which were Unusual in him even on the death of his
children--that a Pope had been created who would be most pernicious to
Italy.”

So that, when all is said, Ferrante shed his kingly tears to his wife
in private, and to her in private he delivered his opinion of the new
Pontiff. How, then, came Guicciardini to know of the matter? True, he
says, “It is well known”--meaning that he had those tears upon hearsay.
It is, of course, possible that Ferrante’s queen may have repeated what
passed between herself and the king; but that would surely have been in
contravention of the wishes of her husband, who had, be it remembered,
“dissembled his grief in public.” And Ferrante does not impress one
as the sort of husband whose wishes his wife would be bold enough to
contravene.

It is surprising that upon no better authority than this should these
precious tears of Ferrante’s have been crystallized in history.

If this trivial instance has been dealt with at such length it is
because, for one reason, it is typical of the foundation of so many
of the Borgia legends, and, for another, because when history has been
carefully sifted for evidence of the “universal dismay with which the
election of Roderigo Borgia was received” King Ferrante’s is the only
case of dismay that comes through the mesh at all. Therefore was it
expedient to examine it minutely.

That “universal dismay”--like the tears of Ferrante--rests upon the word
of Guicciardini. He says that “men were filled with dread and horror by
this election, because it had been effected by such evil ways [con arte
si brutte]; and no less because the nature and condition of the person
elected were largely known to many.”

Guicciardini is to be read with the greatest caution and reserve when he
deals with Rome. His bias against, and his enmity of, the Papacy are as
obvious as they are notorious, and in his endeavours to bring it as much
as possible into discredit he does not even spare his generous patrons,
the Medicean Popes--Leo X and Clement VII. If he finds it impossible to
restrain his invective against these Pontiffs, who heaped favours and
honours upon him, what but virulence can be expected of him when
he writes of Alexander VI? He is largely to blame for the flagrant
exaggeration of many of the charges brought against the Borgias; that he
hated them we know, and that when he wrote of them he dipped his golden
Tuscan pen in vitriol and set down what he desired the world to believe
rather than what contemporary documents would have revealed to him,
we can prove here and now from that one statement of his which we have
quoted.

Who were the men who were filled with dismay, horror, or dread at
Roderigo’s election?

The Milanese? No. For we know that Cardinal Ascanio Sforza, the Duke
of Milan’s brother, was the most active worker in favour of Roderigo’s
election, and that this same election was received and celebrated in
Milan with public rejoicings.

The Florentines? No. For the Medici were friendly to the House of
Borgia, and we know that they welcomed the election, and that from
Florence Manfredi--the Ferrarese ambassador--wrote home: “It is said he
will be a glorious Pontiff” (“Dicesi che sará glorioso Pontefice”).

Were Venice, Genoa, Mantua, Siena, or Lucca dismayed by this election?
Surely not, if the superlatively laudatory congratulations of their
various ambassadors are of any account.

Venice confessed that “a better pastor could not have been found for the
Church,” since he had proved himself “a chief full of experience and an
excellent cardinal.”

Genoa said that “his merit lay not in having been elected, but in having
been desired.”

Mantua declared that it “had long awaited the pontificate of one who,
during forty years, had rendered himself, by his wisdom and justice,
capable of any office.”

Siena expressed its joy at seeing the summit of eminence attained by
a Pope solely upon his merits--“Pervenuto alla dignitá pontificale
meramente per meriti proprii.”

Lucca praised the excellent choice made, and extolled the
accomplishments, the wisdom, and experience of the Pontiff.

Not dismay, then, but actual rejoicing must have been almost universal
in Italy on the election of Pope Alexander VI. And very properly--always
considering the Pontificate as the temporal State it was then being
accounted; for Roderigo’s influence was vast, his intelligence was
renowned, and had again and again been proved, and his administrative
talents and capacity for affairs were known to all. He was well-born,
cultured, of a fine and noble presence, and his wealth was colossal,
comprising the archbishoprics of Valencia and Porto, the bishoprics of
Majorca, Carthage, Agria, the abbeys of Subiaco, the Monastery of Our
Lady of Bellefontaine, the deaconry of Sancta Maria in Via Lata, and his
offices of Vice-Chancellor and Dean of Holy Church.

We are told that he gained his election by simony. It is very
probable that he did. But the accusation has never been categorically
established, and until that happens it would be well to moderate
the vituperation hurled at him. Charges of that simony are common;
conclusive proof there is none. We find Giacomo Trotti, the French
ambassador in Milan, writing to the Duke of Ferrara a fortnight after
Roderigo’s election that “the Papacy has been sold by simony and a
thousand rascalities, which is a thing ignominious and detestable.”

Ignominious and detestable indeed, if true; but be it remembered that
Trotti was the ambassador of France, whose candidate, backed by French
influence and French gold, as we have seen, was della Rovere; and, even
if his statement was true, the “ignominious and detestable thing” was at
least no novelty. Yet Guicciardini, treating of this matter, says: “He
gained the Pontificate owing to discord between the Cardinals Ascanio
Sforza and Giuliano di San Pietro in Vincoli; and still more because, in
a manner without precedent in that age [con esempio nuovo in quella etá]
he openly bought the votes of many cardinals, some with money, some with
promises of his offices and benefices, which were very great.”

Again Guicciardini betrays his bias by attempting to render Roderigo’s
course, assuming it for the moment to be truly represented, peculiarly
odious by this assertion that it was without precedent in that age.

Without precedent! What of the accusations of simony against Innocent
VIII, which rest upon a much sounder basis than these against Alexander,
and what of those against Sixtus IV? Further, if a simoniacal election
was unprecedented, what of Lorenzo Valla’s fierce indictment of
simony--for which he so narrowly escaped the clutches of the Inquisition
some sixty years before this date?

Simony was rampant at the time, and it is the rankest hypocrisy to make
this outcry against Alexander’s uses of it, and to forget the others.

Whether he really was elected by simony or not depends largely--so far
as the evidence available goes--upon what we are to consider as
simony. If payment in the literal sense was made or promised, then
unquestionably simony there was. But this, though often asserted, still
awaits proof. If the conferring of the benefices vacated by a cardinal
on his elevation to the Pontificate is to be considered simony, then
there never was a Pope yet against whom the charge could not be levelled
and established.

Consider that by his election to the Pontificate his Archbishoprics,
offices, nay, his very house itself--which at the time of which we write
it was customary to abandon to pillage--are vacated; and remember that,
as Pope, they are now in his gift and that they must of necessity be
bestowed upon somebody. In a time in which Pontiffs are imbued with a
spiritual sense of their office and duties, they will naturally make
such bestowals upon those whom they consider best fitted to use them
for the greater honour and glory of God. But we are dealing with no such
spiritual golden age as that when we deal with the Cinquecento, as we
have already seen; and, therefore, all that we can expect of a Pope is
that he should bestow the preferment he has vacated upon those among
the cardinals whom he believes to be devoted to himself. Considering his
election in a temporal sense, it is natural that he should behave as any
other temporal prince; that he should remember those to whom he owes
the Pontificate, and that he should reward them suitably. Alexander
VI certainly pursued such a course, and the greatest profit from his
election was derived by the Cardinal Sforza who--as Roderigo himself
admitted--had certainly exerted all his influence with the Sacred
College to gain him the Pontificate. Alexander gave him the vacated
Vice-Chancellorship (for which, when all is said, Ascanio Sforza was
excellently fitted), his vacated palace on Banchi Vecchi, the town of
Nepi, and the bishopric of Agri.

To Orsini he gave the Church of Carthage and the legation of Marche; to
Colonna the Abbey of Subiaco; to Savelli the legation of Perugia (from
which he afterwards recalled him, not finding him suited to so difficult
a charge); to Raffaele Riario went Spanish benefices worth four thousand
ducats yearly; to Sanseverino Roderigo’s house in Milan, whilst he
consented that Sanseverino’s nephew--known as Fracassa--should enter
the service of the Church with a condotta of a hundred men-at-arms and a
stipend of thirteen thousand ducats yearly.

Guicciardini says of all this that Ascanio Sforza induced many of the
cardinals “to that abominable contract, and not only by request and
persuasion, but by example; because, corrupt and of an insatiable
appetite for riches, he bargained for himself, as the reward of so much
turpitude, the Vice-Chancellorships, churches, fortresses [the very
plurals betray the frenzy of exaggeration dictated by his malice] and
his [Roderigo’s] palace in Rome full of furniture of great value.”

What possible proof can Guicciardini have--what possible proof can there
be--of such a “bargain”? It rests upon purest assumption formed after
those properties had changed hands--Ascanio being rewarded by them for
his valuable services, and, also--so far as the Vice-Chancellorship was
concerned--being suitably preferred. To say that Ascanio received
them in consequence of a “bargain” and as the price of his vote and
electioneering services is not only an easy thing to say, but it is the
obvious thing for any one to say who aims at defaming.

It is surprising that we should find in Guicciardini no mention of the
four mule-loads of silver removed before the election from Cardinal
Roderigo’s palace on Banchi Vecchi to Cardinal Ascanio’s palace in
Trastevere. This is generally alleged to have been part of the price
of Ascanio’s services. Whether it was so, or whether, as has also been
urged, it was merely removed to save it from the pillaging by the mob
of the palace of the cardinal elected to the Pontificate, the fact is
interesting as indicating in either case Cardinal Roderigo’s assurance
of his election.

M. Yriarte does not hesitate to say: “We know to-day, by the dispatches
of Valori, the narrative of Girolamo Porzio, and the Diarium of
Burchard, the Master of Ceremonies, each of the stipulations made with
the electors whose votes were bought.”

Now whilst we do know from Valori and Porzio what benefices Alexander
actually conferred, we do not know, nor could they possibly have
told us, what stipulations had been made which these benefices were
insinuated to satisfy.

Burchard’s Diarium might be of more authority on this subject, for
Burchard was the Master of Ceremonies at the Vatican; but, unfortunately
for the accuracy of M. Yriarte’s statement, Burchard is silent on the
subject, for the excellent reason that there is no diary for the period
under consideration. Burchard’s narrative is interrupted on the death of
Innocent VIII, on July 12, and not resumed until December 2, when it is
not retrospective.

There is, it is true, the Diarium of Infessura. But that is of no more
authority on such a matter than the narrative of Porzio or the letters
of Valori.

Lord Acton--in his essay upon this subject--has not been content to rest
the imputation of simony upon such grounds as satisfied M. Yriarte. He
has realized that the only testimony of any real value in such a case
would be the actual evidence of such cardinals as might be willing
to bear witness to the attempt to bribe them. And he takes it for
granted--as who would not at this time of day, and in view of such
positive statements as abound?--that such evidence has been duly
collected; thus, he tells us confidently that the charge rests upon the
evidence of those cardinals who refused Roderigo’s bribes.

That it most certainly does not. If it did there would be an end to
the matter, and so much ink would not have been spilled over it; but no
single cardinal has left any such evidence as Lord Acton supposes and
alleges. It suffices to consider that, according to the only evidences
available--the Casanatense Codices(1) and the dispatches of that same
Valori(2) whom M. Yriarte so confidently cites, Roderigo Borgia’s
election was unanimous. Who, then, were these cardinals who refused
his bribes? Or are we to suppose that, notwithstanding that refusal--a
refusal which we may justifiably suppose to have been a scandalized and
righteously indignant one--they still afforded him their votes?


  1  “...essendo concordi tutti i cardinali, quasi da contrari voti rivolti
tutti in favore di uno solo, crearono lui sommo ponteflce” (Casanatense
MSS). See P. Leonetti, Alessandro VI. 2 “Fu pubblicato il Cardinale
Vice-Cancelliere in Sommo Pontefice Alessandro VI(to) nuncupato, el
quale dopo una lunga contentione fu creato omnium consensum--ne ii manco
un solo voto” (Valori’s letter to the Otto di Pratica, August 12,
1492). See Supplement to Appendix in E. Thuasne’s edition of Burchard’s
Diarium.


This charge of simony was levelled with the object of making Alexander
VI appear singularly heinous. So much has that object engrossed and
blinded those inspired by it, that, of itself, it betrays them. Had
their horror been honest, had it sprung from true principles, had it
been born of any but a desire to befoul and bespatter at all costs
Roderigo Borgia, it is not against him that they would have hurled their
denunciations, but against the whole College of Cardinals which took
part in the sacrilege and which included three future Popes.(1)


  1  Cardinals Piccolomini, de’Medici, and Giuliano della Rovere.


Assuming not only that there was simony, but that it was on as wholesale
a scale as was alleged, and that for gold--coined or in the form of
benefices--Roderigo bought the cardinal’s votes, what then? He bought
them, true. But they--they sold him their sacred trust, their duty
to their God, their priestly honour, their holy vows. For the gold he
offered them they bartered these. So much admitted, then surely, in that
transaction, those cardinals were the prostitutes! The man who bought
so much of them, at least, was on no baser level than were they.
Yet invective singles him out for its one object, and so betrays the
aforethought malice of its inspiration.

Our quarrel is with that; with that, and with those writers who have
taken Alexander’s simony for granted--eagerly almost--for the purpose
of heaping odium upon him by making him appear a scandalous exception to
the prevailing rule.

If, nevertheless, we hold, as we have said, that simony probably did
take place, we do so, not so much upon the inconclusive evidence of the
fact, as upon the circumstance that it had become almost an established
custom to purchase the tiara, and that Roderigo Borgia--since his
ambition clearly urged him to the Pontificate--would have been an
exception had he refrained.

It may seem that to have disputed so long to conclude by admitting so
much is no better than a waste of labour. Not so, we hope. Our aim has
been to correct the adjustment of the focus and properly to trim the
light in which Roderigo Borgia is to be viewed, to the end that you may
see him as he was--neither better nor worse--the creature of his
times, of his environment, and of the system in which he was reared and
trained. Thus shall you also get a clearer view of his son Cesare, when
presently he takes the stage more prominently.

During the seventeen days of the interregnum between the death of
Innocent and the election of Alexander the wild scenes usual to
such seasons had been taking place in Rome; and, notwithstanding the
Cardinal-Chamberlain’s prompt action in seizing the gates and bridges,
and the patrols’ endeavours to maintain order, crime was unfettered
to such an extent that some 220 murders are computed to have taken
place--giving the terrible average of thirteen a day.

It was a very natural epilogue to the lax rule of the lethargic
Innocent. One of the first acts of Alexander’s reign was to deal
summarily with this lawlessness. He put down violence with a hard hand
that knew no mercy. He razed to the ground the house of a murderer
caught red-handed, and hanged him above the ruins, and so dealt
generally that such order came to prevail as had never before been known
in Rome.

Infessura tells us how, in the very month of his election, he appointed
inspectors of prisons and four commissioners to administer justice,
and that he himself gave audience on Tuesdays and settled disputes,
concluding, “et justitiam mirabili modo facere coepit.”

He paid all salaries promptly--a striking departure, it would seem,
from what had been usual under his predecessor--and the effect of his
improved and strenuous legislation was shortly seen in the diminished
prices of commodities.

He was crowned Pope on August 6, on the steps of the Basilica of
St. Peter, by the Cardinal-Archdeacon Piccolomini. The ceremony was
celebrated with a splendour worthy of the splendid figure that was its
centre. Through the eyes of Michele Ferno--despite his admission that
he is unable to convey a worthy notion of the spectacle--you may see the
gorgeous procession to the Lateran in which Alexander VI showed himself
to the applauding Romans; the multitude of richly adorned men, gay and
festive; the seven hundred priests and prelates, with their familiars
the splendid cavalcade of knights and nobles of Rome; the archers and
Turkish horsemen, and the Palatine Guard, with its great halberds and
flashing shields; the twelve white horses, with their golden bridles,
led by footmen; and then Alexander himself on a snow-white horse,
“serene of brow and of majestic dignity,” his hand uplifted--the
Fisherman’s Ring upon its forefinger--to bless the kneeling populace.
The chronicler flings into superlatives when he comes to praise the
personal beauty of the man, his physical vigour and health, “which go to
increase the veneration shown him.”

Thus in the brilliant sunshine of that Italian August, amid the plaudits
of assembled Rome, amid banners and flowers, music and incense, the
flash of steel and the blaze of decorations with the Borgian arms
everywhere displayed--or, a grazing steer gules--Alexander VI passes to
the Vatican, the aim and summit of his vast ambition.

Friends and enemies alike have sung the splendours of that coronation,
and the Bull device--as you can imagine--plays a considerable part in
those verses, be they paeans or lampoons. The former allude to Borgia as
“the Bull,” from the majesty and might of the animal that was displayed
upon their shield; the latter render it the subject of much scurrilous
invective, to which it lends itself as readily. And thereafter, in
almost all verse of their epoch, writers ever say “the Bull” when they
mean the Borgia.




CHAPTER IV. BORGIA ALLIANCES


At the time of his father’s election to the throne of St. Peter, Cesare
Borgia--now in his eighteenth year--was still at the University of Pisa.

It is a little odd, considering the great affection for his children
which was ever one of Roderigo’s most conspicuous characteristics,
that he should not have ordered Cesare to Rome at once, to share in the
general rejoicings. It has been suggested that Alexander wished to avoid
giving scandal by the presence of his children at such a time. But that
again looks like a judgement formed upon modern standards, for by the
standards of his day one cannot conceive that he would have given
very much scandal; moreover, it is to be remembered that Lucrezia and
Giuffredo, at least, were in Rome at the time of their father’s election
to the tiara.

However that may be, Cesare did not quit Pisa until August of that year
1492, and even then not for Rome, but for Spoleto--in accordance with
his father’s orders--where he took up his residence in the castle.
Thence he wrote a letter to Piero de’Medici, which is interesting,
firstly, as showing the good relations prevailing between them;
secondly, as refuting a story in Guicciardini, wherewith that historian,
ready, as ever, to belittle the Borgias, attempts to show him cutting a
poor figure. He tells us(1) that, whilst at Pisa, Cesare had occasion
to make an appeal to Piero de’Medici in the matter of a criminal case
connected with one of his familiars; that he went to Florence and waited
several hours in vain for an audience, whereafter he returned to Pisa
“accounting himself despised and not a little injured.”


  1  Istoria d’Italia, tom. V.


No doubt Guicciardini is as mistaken in this as in many another matter,
for the letter written from Spoleto expresses his regret that, on
the occasion of his passage through Florence (on his way from Pisa to
Spoleto), he should not have had time to visit Piero, particularly as
there was a matter upon which he desired urgently to consult with him.
He recommends to Piero his faithful Remolino, whose ambition it is to
occupy the chair of canon law at the University of Pisa, and begs his
good offices in that connection. That Juan Vera, Cesare’s preceptor
and the bearer of that letter, took back a favourable answer is highly
probable, for in Fabroni’s Hist. Acad. Pisan we find this Remolino duly
established as a lecturer on canon law in the following year.

The letter is further of interest as showing Cesare’s full consciousness
of the importance of his position; its tone and its signature--“your
brother, Cesar de Borgia, Elect of Valencia”--being such as were usual
between princes.

The two chief aims of Alexander VI, from the very beginning of his
pontificate, were to re-establish the power of the Church, which was
then the most despised of the temporal States of Italy, and to promote
the fortune of his children. Already on the very day of his coronation
he conferred upon Cesare the bishopric of Valencia, whose revenues
amounted to an annual yield of sixteen thousand ducats. For the time
being, however, he had his hands very full of other matters, and it
behoved him to move slowly at first and with the extremest caution.

The clouds of war were lowering heavily over Italy when Alexander came
to St. Peter’s throne, and it was his first concern to find for himself
a safe position against the coming of the threatening storm. The chief
menace to the general peace was Lodovico Maria Sforza, surnamed Il
Moro,(1) who sat as regent for his nephew, Duke Gian Galeazzo, upon
the throne of Milan. That regency he had usurped from Gian Galeazzo’s
mother, and he was now in a fair way to usurp the throne itself. He kept
his nephew virtually a prisoner in the Castle of Pavia, together with
his young bride, Isabella of Aragon, who had been sent thither by her
father, the Duke of Calabria, heir to the crown of Naples.


  1  Touching Lodovico Maria’s by-name of “Il Moro”--which is generally
translated as “The Moor,” whilst in one writer we have found him
mentioned as “Black Lodovico,” Benedetto Varchi’s explanation (in his
Storia Fiorentina) may be of interest. He tells us that Lodovico was not
so called on account of any swarthiness of complexion, as is supposed by
Guicciardini, because, on the contrary, he was fair; nor yet on account
of his device, showing a Moorish squire, who, brush in hand, dusts the
gown of a young woman in regal apparel, with the motto, “Per Italia
nettar d’ogni bruttura”; this device of the Moor, he tells us, was a
rébus or pun upon the word “moro,” which also means the mulberry, and
was so meant by Lodovico. The mulberry burgeons at the end of winter
and blossoms very early. Thus Lodovico symbolized his own prudence and
readiness to seize opportunity betimes.


Gian Galeazzo thus bestowed, Lodovico Maria went calmly about the
business of governing, like one who did not mean to relinquish the
regency save to become duke. But it happened that a boy was born to the
young prisoners at Pavia, whereupon, spurred perhaps into activity by
this parenthood and stimulated by the thought that they had now a son’s
interests to fight for as well as their own, they made appeal to King
Ferrante of Naples that he should enforce his grandson-in-law’s rights
to the throne of Milan. King Ferrante could desire nothing better, for
if his grandchild and her husband reigned in Milan, and by his favour
and contriving, great should be his influence in the North of Italy.
Therefore he stood their friend.

Matters were at this stage when Alexander VI ascended the papal throne.

This election gave Ferrante pause, for, as we have seen, he had schemed
for a Pope devoted to his interests, who would stand by him in the
coming strife, and his schemes were rudely shaken now. Whilst he was
still cogitating the matter of his next move, the wretched Francesco
Cibo (Pope Innocent’s son) offered to sell the papal fiefs of Cervetri
and Anguillara, which had been made over to him by his father, to
Gentile Orsini--the head of his powerful house. And Gentile purchased
them under a contract signed at the palace of Cardinal Giuliano della
Rovere, on September 3, for the sum of forty thousand ducats advanced
him by Ferrante.

Alexander protested strongly against this illegal transaction, for
Cervetri and Anguillara were fiefs of the Church, and neither had Cibo
the right to sell nor Orsini the right to buy them. Moreover, that they
should be in the hands of a powerful vassal of Naples such as Orsini
suited the Pope as little as it suited Lodovico Maria Sforza. It stirred
the latter into taking measures against the move he feared Ferrante
might make to enforce Gian Galeazzo’s claims.

Lodovico Maria went about this with that sly shrewdness so
characteristic of him, so well symbolized by his mulberry badge--a
humorous shrewdness almost, which makes him one of the most delightful
rogues in history, just as he was one of the most debonair and cultured.
He may indeed be considered as one of the types of the subtle, crafty,
selfish politician that was the ideal of Macchiavelli.

You see him, then, effacing the tight-lipped, cunning smile from his
comely face and pointing out to Venice with a grave, sober countenance
how little it can suit her to have the Neapolitan Spaniards ruffling
it in the north, as must happen if Ferrante has his way with Milan.
The truth of this was so obvious that Venice made haste to enter into
a league with him, and into the camp thus formed came, for their own
sakes, Mantua, Ferrara, and Siena. The league was powerful enough thus
to cause Ferrante to think twice before he took up the cudgels for Gian
Galeazzo. If Lodovico could include the Pope, the league’s might would
be so paralysing that Ferrante would cease to think at all about his
grandchildren’s affairs.

Foreseeing this, Ferrante had perforce to dry the tears Guicciardini has
it that he shed, and, replacing them by a smile, servile and obsequious,
repaired, hat in hand, to protest his friendship for the Pope’s
Holiness.

And so, in December of 1492, came the Prince of Altamura--Ferrante’s
second son--to Rome to lay his father’s homage at the feet of the
Pontiff, and at the same time to implore his Holiness to refuse the King
of Hungary the dispensation the latter was asking of the Holy See, to
enable him to repudiate his wife, Donna Leonora--Ferrante’s daughter.

Altamura was received in Rome and sumptuously entertained by the
Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere. This cardinal had failed, as we have
seen, to gain the Pontificate for himself, despite the French influence
by which he had been supported. Writhing under his defeat, and hating
the man who had defeated him with a hatred so bitter and venomous
that the imprint of it is on almost every act of his life--from the
facilities he afforded for the assignment to Orsini of the papal fiefs
that Cibo had to sell--he was already scheming for the overthrow of
Alexander. To this end he needed great and powerful friends; to this end
had he lent himself to the Cibo-Orsini transaction; to this end did he
manifest himself the warm well-wisher of Ferrante; to this end did he
cordially welcome the latter’s son and envoy, and promise his support to
Ferrante’s petition.

But the Holy Father was by no means as anxious for the friendship of
the old wolf of Naples. The matter of the King of Hungary was one that
required consideration, and, meanwhile, he may have hinted slyly there
was between Naples and Rome a little matter of two fiefs to be adjusted.

Thus his most shrewd Holiness thought to gain a little time, and in that
time he might look about him and consider what alliances would suit his
interests best.

At this Cardinal della Rovere, in high dudgeon, flung out of Rome and
away to his Castle of Ostia to fortify--to wield the sword of St. Paul,
since he had missed the keys of St. Peter. It was a shrewd move.
He foresaw the injured dignity of the Spanish House of Naples, and
Ferrante’s wrath at the Pope’s light treatment of him and apathy for
his interests; and the cardinal knew that with Ferrante were allied the
mighty houses of Colonna and Orsini. Thus, by his political divorcement
from the Holy See, he flung in his lot with theirs, hoping for red war
and the deposition of Alexander.

But surely he forgot Milan and Lodovico Maria, whose brother, Ascanio
Sforza, was at the Pope’s elbow, the energetic friend to whose efforts
Alexander owed the tiara, and who was therefore hated by della Rovere
perhaps as bitterly as Alexander himself.

Alexander went calmly about the business of fortifying the Vatican and
the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, and gathering mercenaries into his service.
And, lest any attempt should be made upon his life when he went abroad,
he did so with an imposing escort of men-at-arms; which so vexed and
fretted King Ferrante, that he did not omit to comment upon it in
scathing terms in a letter that presently we shall consider. For the
rest, the Pope’s Holiness preserved an unruffled front in the face of
the hostile preparations that were toward in the kingdom of Naples,
knowing that he could check them when he chose to lift his finger and
beckon the Sforza into alliance. And presently Naples heard an alarming
rumour that Lodovico Maria had, in fact, made overtures to the Pope,
and that the Pope had met these advances to the extent of betrothing
his daughter Lucrezia to Giovanni Sforza, Lord of Pesaro and cousin to
Lodovico.

So back to the Vatican went the Neapolitan envoys with definite
proposals of an alliance to be cemented by a marriage between Giuffredo
Borgia--aged twelve--and Ferrante’s granddaughter Lucrezia of Aragon.
The Pope, with his plans but half-matured as yet, temporized, was
evasive, and continued to arm and to recruit. At last, his arrangements
completed, he abruptly broke off his negotiations with Naples, and on
April 25, 1493, publicly proclaimed that he had joined the northern
league.

The fury of Ferrante, who realized that he had been played with and
outwitted, was expressed in a rabid letter to his ambassador at the
Court of Spain.

“This Pope,” he wrote, “leads a life that is the abomination of all,
without respect for the seat he occupies. He cares for nothing save to
aggrandize his children, by fair means or foul, and this is his sole
desire. From the beginning of his Pontificate he has done nothing but
disturb the peace, molesting everybody, now in one way, now in another.
Rome is more full of soldiers than of priests, and when he goes abroad
it is with troops of men-at-arms about him, with helmets on their heads
and lances by their sides, all his thoughts being given to war and to
our hurt; nor does he overlook anything that can be used against us, not
only inciting in France the Prince of Salerno and other of our rebels,
but befriending every bad character in Italy whom he deems our enemy;
and in all things he proceeds with the fraud and dissimulation natural
to him, and to make money he sells even the smallest office and
preferment.”

Thus Ferrante of the man whose friendship he had been seeking some six
weeks earlier, and who had rejected his advances. It is as well to know
the precise conditions under which that letter was indited, for extracts
from it are too often quoted against Alexander. These conditions known,
and known the man who wrote it, the letter’s proper value is at once
apparent.

It was Ferrante’s hope, and no doubt the hope of Giuliano della Rovere,
that the King of Spain would lend an ear to these grievances, and move
in the matter of attempting to depose Alexander; but an event more
important than any other in the whole history of Spain--or of Europe,
for that matter--was at the moment claiming its full attention, and the
trifling affairs of the King of Naples--trifling by comparison--went
all unheeded. For this was the year in which the Genoese navigator,
Cristofero Colombo, returned to tell of the new and marvellous world
he had discovered beyond the seas, and Ferdinand and Isabella were
addressing an appeal to the Pope--as Ruler of the World--to establish
them in the possession of the discovered continent. Whereupon the Pope
drew a line from pole to pole, and granted to Spain the dominion over
all lands discovered, or to be discovered, one hundred miles westward of
Cape Verde and the Azores.

And thus Ferrante’s appeal to Spain against a Pope who showed himself so
ready and complaisant a friend to Spain went unheeded by Ferdinand and
Isabella. And what time the Neapolitan nursed his bitter chagrin, the
alliance between Rome and Milan was consolidated by the marriage of
Lucrezia Borgia to Giovanni Sforza, the comely weakling who was Lord of
Pesaro and Cotignola.

Lucrezia Borgia’s story has been told elsewhere; her rehabilitation
has been undertaken by a great historian(1) among others, and all
serious-minded students must be satisfied at this time of day that the
Lucrezia Borgia of Hugo’s tragedy is a creature of fiction, bearing
little or no resemblance to the poor lady who was a pawn in the
ambitious game played by her father and her brother Cesare, before she
withdrew to Ferrara, where eventually she died in child-birth in her
forty-first year. We know that she left the duke, her husband, stricken
with a grief that was shared by his subjects, to whom she had so deeply
endeared herself by her exemplary life and loving rule.(2)


  1  Ferdinand Gregorovius, Lucrezia Borgia.
2 See, inter alia, the letters of Alfonso d’Este and Giovanni Gonzaga on
her death, quoted in Gregorovius, Lucrezia Borgia.


Later, in the course of this narrative, where she crosses the story
of her brother Cesare, it will be necessary to deal with some of
the revolting calumnies concerning her that were circulated, and, in
passing, shall be revealed the sources of the malice that inspired them
and the nature of the evidence upon which they rest, to the eternal
shame alike of those pretended writers of fact and those avowed writers
of fiction who, as dead to scruples as to chivalry, have not hesitated
to make her serve their base melodramatic or pornographic ends.

At present, however, there is no more than her first marriage to be
recorded. She was fourteen years of age at the time, and, like all the
Borgias, of a rare personal beauty, with blue eyes and golden hair.
Twice before, already, had she entered into betrothal contracts with
gentlemen of her father’s native Spain; but his ever-soaring ambition
had caused him successively to cancel both those unfulfilled contracts.
A husband worthy of the daughter of Cardinal Roderigo Borgia was no
longer worthy of the daughter of Pope Alexander VI, for whom an alliance
must now be sought among Italy’s princely houses. And so she came to be
bestowed upon the Lord of Pesaro, with a dowry of 30,000 ducats.

Her nuptials were celebrated in the Vatican on June 12, 1493, in
the splendid manner worthy of the rank of all concerned and of the
reputation for magnificence which the Borgia had acquired. That night
the Pope gave a supper-party, at which were present some ten cardinals
and a number of ladies and gentlemen of Rome, besides the ambassadors
of Ferrara, Venice, Milan, and France. There was vocal and instrumental
music, a comedy was performed, the ladies danced, and they appear to
have carried their gaieties well into the dawn. Hardly the sort of scene
for which the Vatican was the ideal stage. Yet at the time it should
have given little or no scandal. But what a scandal was there not,
shortly afterwards, in connection with it, and how that scandal was
heaped up later, by stories so revolting of the doings of that night
that one is appalled at the minds that conceived them and the credulity
that accepted them.

Infessura writes of what he heard, and he writes venomously, as he
betrays by the bitter sarcasm with which he refers to the fifty silver
cups filled with sweetmeats which the Pope tossed into the laps of
ladies present at the earlier part of the celebration. “He did it,”
 says Infessura, “to the greater honour and glory of Almighty God and the
Church of Rome.” Beyond that he ventures into no great detail, checking
himself betimes, however, with a suggested motive for reticence a
thousand times worse than any formal accusation. Thus: “Much else is
said, of which I do not write, because either it is not true, or, if
true, incredible.”(1)


  1  “Et multa alia dicta sunt; que hic non scribo, que aut non sunt; vel
si sunt, incredibilia” (Infessura, Diarium).


It is amazing that the veil which Infessura drew with those words should
have been pierced--not indeed by the cold light of fact, but by the hot
eye of prurient imagination; amazing that he should be quoted at all--he
who was not present--considering that we have the testimony of what did
take place from the pen of an eye-witness, in a letter from Gianandrea
Boccaccio, the ambassador of Ferrara, to his master.

At the end of his letter, which describes the proceedings and the
wedding-gifts and their presentation, he tells us how the night was
spent. “Afterwards the ladies danced, and, as an interlude, a worthy
comedy was performed, with much music and singing, the Pope and all the
rest of us being present throughout. What else shall I add? It would
make a long letter. The whole night was spent in this manner; let your
lordship decide whether well or ill.”

Is not that sufficient to stop the foul mouth of inventive slander? What
need to suggest happenings unspeakable? Yet it is the fashion to quote
the last sentence above from Boccaccio’s letter in the original--“totam
noctem comsumpsimus; judicet modo Ex(ma.) Dominatio vestra si bene
o male”--as though decency forbade its translation; and at once this
poisonous reticence does its work, and the imagination--and not only
that of the unlettered--is fired, and all manner of abominations are
speculatively conceived.

Infessura, being absent, says that the comedies performed were
licentious (“lascive”). But what comedies of that age were not? It was
an age which had not yet invented modesty, as we understand it. That
Boccaccio, who was present, saw nothing unusual in the comedy--there
was only one, according to him--is proved by his description of it as
“worthy” (“una degna commedia.”)

M. Yriarte on this same subject(1) is not only petty, but grotesque.
He chooses to relate the incident from the point of view of Infessura,
whom, by the way, he translates with an amazing freedom,(2) and he makes
bold to add regarding Gianandrea Boccaccio that: “It must also be
said that the ambassador of Ferrara, either because he did not see
everything, or because he was less austere than Infessura, was not
shocked by the comedies, etc.” (“soit qu’il n’ait pas tout vu, soit
qu’il ait été moins austère qu’Infessura, n’est pas choqué....”)


  1  La Vie de César Borgia.
2 Thus in the matter of the fifty silver cups tossed by the Pope into
the ladies’ laps, “sinum” is the word employed by Infessura--a word
which has too loosely been given its general translation of “bosom,”
 ignoring that it equally means “lap” and that “lap” it obviously means
in this instance. M. Yriarte, however, goes a step further, and prefers
to translate it as “corsage,” which at once, and unpleasantly, falsifies
the picture; and he adds matter to dot the I’s to an extent certainly
not warranted even by Infessura.


M. Yriarte, you observe, does not scruple to opine that Boccaccio, who
was present, did not see everything; but he has no doubt that Infessura,
who was not present, and who wrote from “hearsay,” missed nothing.

Alas! Too much of the history of the Borgias has been written in this
spirit, and the discrimination in the selection of authorities has ever
been with a view to obtaining the more sensational rather than the more
truthful narrative.

Although it is known that Cesare came to Rome in the early part of
1493--for his presence there is reported by Gianandrea Boccaccio
in March of that year--there is no mention of him at this time in
connection with his sister’s wedding. Apparently, then, he was not
present, although it is impossible to suggest where he might have been
at the time.

Boccaccio draws a picture of him in that letter, which is worthy of
attention, “On the day before yesterday I found Cesare at home in
Trastevere. He was on the point of setting out to go hunting, and
entirely in secular habit; that is to say, dressed in silk and armed.
Riding together, we talked a while. I am among his most intimate
acquaintances. He is man of great talent and of an excellent nature; his
manners are those of the son of a great prince; above everything, he is
joyous and light-hearted. He is very modest, much superior to, and of a
much finer appearance than, his brother the Duke of Gandia, who also is
not short of natural gifts. The archbishop never had any inclination for
the priesthood. But his benefice yields him over 16,000 ducats.”

It may not be amiss--though perhaps no longer very necessary, after what
has been written--to say a word at this stage on the social position of
bastards in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, to emphasize the fact
that no stigma attached to Cesare Borgia or to any other member of his
father’s family on the score of the illegitimacy of their birth.

It is sufficient to consider the marriages they contracted to perceive
that, however shocking the circumstances may appear to modern notions,
the circumstance of their father being a Pope not only cannot have been
accounted extraordinarily scandalous (if scandalous at all) but, on the
contrary, rendered them eligible for alliances even princely.

In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries we see the bastard born of
a noble, as noble as his father, displaying his father’s arms without
debruisement and enjoying his rank and inheritance unchallenged on the
score of his birth, even though that inheritance should be a throne--as
witness Lucrezia’s husband Giovanni, who, though a bastard of the house
of Sforza, succeeded, nevertheless, his father in the Tyranny of Pesaro
and Cotignola.

Later we shall see this same Lucrezia, her illegitimacy notwithstanding,
married into the noble House of Este and seated upon the throne of
Ferrara. And before then we shall have seen the bastard Cesare married
to a daughter of the royal House of Navarre. Already we have seen the
bastard Francesco Cibo take to wife the daughter of the great Lorenzo
de’Medici, and we have seen the bastard Girolamo Riario married to
Caterina Sforza--a natural daughter of the ducal House of Milan--and we
have seen the pair installed in the Tyranny of Imola and Forli. A score
of other instances might be added; but these should suffice.

The matter calls for the making of no philosophies, craves no
explaining, and, above all, needs no apology. It clears itself.
The fifteenth and sixteenth centuries--more just than our own more
enlightened times--attributed no shame to the men and women born out of
wedlock, saw no reason--as no reason is there, Christian or Pagan--why
they should suffer for a condition that was none of their contriving.

To mention it may be of help in visualizing and understanding that
direct and forceful epoch, and may even suggest some lenience in
considering a Pope’s carnal paternity. To those to whom the point of
view of the Renaissance does not promptly suggest itself from this plain
statement of fact, all unargued as we leave it, we recommend a perusal
of Gianpietro de Crescenzi’s Il Nobile Romano.

The marriage of Lucrezia Borgia to Giovanni Sforza tightened the
relations between the Pope and Milan, as the Pope intended. Meanwhile,
however, the crafty and mistrustful Lodovico, having no illusions as
to the true values of his allies, and realizing them to be self-seekers
like himself, with interests that were fundamentally different from his
own, perceived that they were likely only to adhere to him for just
so long as it suited their own ends. He bethought him, therefore, of
looking about him for other means by which to crush the power of Naples.
France was casting longing eyes upon Italy, and it seemed to Lodovico
that in France was a ready catspaw. Charles VIII, as the representative
of the House of Anjou, had a certain meagre claim upon the throne of
Naples; if he could be induced to ride south, lance on thigh, and press
that claim there would be an end to the dominion of the House of Aragon,
and so an end to Lodovico’s fears of a Neapolitan interference with his
own occupation of the throne of Milan.

To an ordinary schemer that should have been enough; but as a schemer
Lodovico was wholly extraordinary. His plans grew in the maturing, and
took in side-issues, until he saw that Naples should be to Charles VIII
as the cheese within the mouse-trap. Let his advent into Italy to break
the power of Naples be free and open; but, once within, he should find
Milan and the northern allies between himself and his retreat, and
Lodovico’s should it be to bring him to his knees. Thus schemed Lodovico
to shiver, first Naples and then France, before hurling the latter back
across the Alps. A daring, bold, and yet simple plan of action. And what
a power in Italy should not Lodovico derive from its success!

Forthwith he got secretly to work upon it, sending his invitation to
Charles to come and make good his claim to Naples, offering the French
troops free passage through his territory.(1) And in the character
of his invitation he played upon the nature of malformed, ambitious
Charles, whose brain was stuffed with romance and chivalric
rhodomontades. The conquest of Naples was an easy affair, no more than
a step in the glorious enterprise that awaited the French king, for
from Naples he could cross to engage the Turk, and win back the Holy
Sepulchre, thus becoming a second Charles the Great.


  1  See Corlo, Storia di Milano, and Lodovico’s letter to Charles VIII,
quoted therein, lib. vii.


Thus Lodovico Maria the crafty, to dazzle Charles the romantic, and to
take the bull of impending invasion by the very horns.

We have seen the failure of the appeal to Spain against the Pope made
by the King of Naples. To that failure was now added the tightening of
Rome’s relations with Milan by the marriage between Lucrezia Borgia and
Giovanni Sforza, and Ferrante--rumours of a French invasion, with
Naples for its objective being already in the air--realized that nothing
remained him but to make another attempt to conciliate the Pope’s
Holiness. And this time he went about his negotiations in a manner
better calculated to serve his ends, since his need was grown more
urgent. He sent the Prince of Altamura again to Rome for the ostensible
purpose of settling the vexatious matter of Cervetri and Anguillara and
making alliance with the Holy Father, whilst behind Altamura was the
Neapolitan army ready to move upon Rome should the envoy fail this time.

But on the terms now put forward, Alexander was willing to negotiate,
and so a peace was patched up between Naples and the Holy See, the
conditions of which were that Orsini should retain the fiefs for his
lifetime, but that they should revert to Holy Church on his death, and
that he should pay the Church for the life-lease of them the sum of
40,000 ducats, which already he had paid to Francesco Cibo; that the
peace should be consolidated by the marriage of the Pope’s bastard,
Giuffredo, with Sancia of Aragon, the natural daughter of the Duke of
Calabria, heir to the throne of Naples, and that she should bring the
Principality of Squillace and the County of Coriate as her dowry.

The other condition demanded by Naples--at the suggestion of Cardinal
Giuliano della Rovere--was that the Pope should disgrace and dismiss
his Vice­Chancellor, Ascanio Sforza, which would have shattered the
pontifical relations with Milan. To this, however, the Pope would not
agree, but he met Naples in the matter to the extent of consenting to
overlook Cardinal della Rovere’s defection and receive him back into
favour.

On these terms the peace was at last concluded in August of 1493, and
immediately afterwards there arrived in Rome the Sieur Peron de Basche,
an envoy from the King of France charged with the mission to prevent any
alliance between Rome and Naples.

The Frenchman was behind the fair. The Pope took the only course
possible under the awkward circumstances, and refused to see the
ambasssador. Thereupon the offended King of France held a grand council
“in which were proposed and treated many things against the Pope and for
the reform of the Church.”

These royal outbursts of Christianity, these pious kingly frenzies to
unseat an unworthy Pontiff and reform the Church, follow always, you
will observe, upon the miscarriage of royal wishes.

In the Consistory of September 1493 the Pope created twelve new
cardinals to strengthen the Sacred College in general and his own hand
in particular.

Amongst these new creations were the Pope’s son Cesare, and Alessandro
Farnese, the brother of the beautiful Giulia. The grant of the red hat
to the latter appears to have caused some scandal, for, owing to the
Pope’s relations with his sister, to which it was openly said that
Farnese owed the purple, he received the by-name of Cardinal della
Gonella--Cardinal of the Petticoat.

That was the first important step in the fortunes of the House of
Farnese, which was to give dukes to Parma, and reach the throne of Spain
(in the person of Isabella Farnese) before becoming extinct in 1758.





BOOK II. THE BULL PASCANT

Roma Bovem invenit tunc, cum fundatur aratro, Et nunc lapsa suo est ecce
renata Bove.

From an inscription quoted by Bernardino Coaxo.





CHAPTER I. THE FRENCH INVASION


You see Cesare Borgia, now in his nineteenth year, raised to the purple
with the title of Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria Nuova--notwithstanding
which, however, he continues to be known in preference, and, indeed, to
sign himself by the title of his archbishopric, Cardinal of Valencia.

It is hardly necessary to mention that, although already Bishop of
Pampeluna and Archbishop of Valencia, he had received so far only his
first tonsure. He never did receive any ecclesiastical orders beyond the
minor and revocable ones.

It was said by Infessura, and has since been repeated by a multitude of
historians, upon no better authority than that of this writer on hearsay
and inveterate gossip, that, to raise Cesare to the purple, Alexander
was forced to prove the legitimacy of that young man’s birth, and that
to this end he procured false witnesses to swear that he was “the son of
Vannozza de’ Catanei and her husband, Domenico d’Arignano.” Already has
this been touched upon in an earlier chapter, here it was shown that
Vannozza never had a husband of the name of d’Arignano, and it might
reasonably be supposed that this circumstance alone would have sufficed
to restrain any serious writer from accepting and repeating Infessura’s
unauthoritative statement.

But if more they needed, it was ready to their hands in the Bull
of Sixtus IV of October 1, 1480--to which also allusion has been
made--dispensing Cesare from proving his legitimacy: “Super defectum
natalium od ordines et quoecumque beneficia.”

Besides that, of what avail would any false swearing have been,
considering that Cesare was openly named Borgia, that he was openly
acknowledged by his father, and that in the very Bull above mentioned he
is stated to be the son of Roderigo Borgia?

This is another instance of the lightness, the recklessness with which
Alexander VI has been accused of unseemly and illicit conduct, which it
may not be amiss to mention at this stage, since, if not the accusation
itself, at least the matter that occasioned it belongs chronologically
here.

During the first months of his reign--following in the footsteps of
predecessors who had made additions to the Vatican--Alexander set
about the building of the Borgia Tower. For its decoration he brought
Perugino, Pinturicchio, Volterrano, and Peruzzi to Rome. Concerning
Pinturicchio and Alexander, Vasari tells us, in his Vita degli Artefici,
that over the door of one of the rooms in the Borgia Tower the artist
painted a picture of the Virgin Mary in the likeness of Giulia Farnese
(who posed to him as the model) with Alexander kneeling to her in
adoration, arrayed in full pontificals.

Such a thing would have been horrible, revolting, sacrilegious.
Fortunately it does not even amount to a truth untruly told; and well
would it be if all the lies against the Borgias were as easy to refute.
True, Pinturicchio did paint Giulia Farnese as the Madonna; true also
that he did paint Alexander kneeling in adoration--but not to the
Madonna, not in the same picture at all. The Madonna for which Giulia
Farnese was the model is over a doorway, as Vasari says. The kneeling
Alexander is in another room, and the object of his adoration is the
Saviour rising from His tomb.

Yet one reputable writer after another has repeated that lie of
Vasari’s, and shocked us by the scandalous spectacle of a Pope so
debauched and lewd that he kneels in pontificals, in adoration, at the
feet of his mistress depicted as the Virgin Mary.

In October of that same year of 1493 Cesare accompanied his father on a
visit to Orvieto, a journey which appears to have been partly undertaken
in response to an invitation from Giulia Farnese’s brother Alessandro.

Orvieto was falling at the time into decay and ruin, no longer the
prosperous centre it had been less than a hundred years earlier; but the
shrewd eye of Alexander perceived its value as a stronghold, to be used
as an outpost of Rome or as a refuge in time of danger, and he proceeded
to repair and fortify it. In the following summer Cesare was invested
with its governorship, at the request of its inhabitants, who sent an
embassy to the Pope with their proposal,--by way, no doubt, of showing
their gratitude for his interest in the town.

But in the meantime, towards the end of 1493, King Ferrante’s uneasiness
at the ever-swelling rumours of the impending French invasion was
quickened by the fact that the Pope had not yet sent his son Giuffredo
to Naples to marry Donna Sancia, as had been contracted. Ferrante feared
the intrigues of Milan with Alexander, and that the latter might
be induced, after all, to join the northern league. In a frenzy of
apprehension, the old king was at last on the point of going to Milan to
throw himself at the feet of Lodovico Sforza, who was now his only hope,
when news reached him that his ambassadors had been ordered to leave
France.

That death-blow to his hopes was a death-blow to the man himself. Upon
receiving the news he was smitten by an apoplexy, and upon January 25,
1494, he departed this life without the consolation of being able to
suppose that any of his schemes had done anything to avert the impending
ruin of his house.

In spite of all Alexander’s intercessions and representations,
calculated to induce Charles VIII to abandon his descent upon Italy; in
spite, no less, of the counsel he received at home from such far-seeing
men as had his ear, the Christian King was now determined upon the
expedition and his preparations were well advanced. In the month of
March he assumed the title of King of Sicily, and sent formal intimation
of it to Alexander, demanding his investiture at the hands of the Pope
and offering to pay him a heavy annual tribute. Alexander was thus given
to choose between the wrath of France and the wrath of Naples, and--to
put the basest construction on his motives--he saw that the peril from
an enemy on his very frontiers would be more imminent than that of an
enemy beyond the Alps. It is also possible that he chose to be guided by
his sense of justice and to do in the matter what he considered right.
By whatever motive he was prompted, the result was that he refused to
accede to the wishes of the Christian King.

The Consistory which received the French ambassador--Peron de
Basche--became the scene of stormy remonstrances, Cardinal Giuliano
della Rovere, of course, supporting the ambassador and being supported
in his act of insubordination by the Vice-Chancellor Ascanio Sforza
(who represented his brother Lodovico in the matter) and the Cardinals
Sanseverino, Colonna, and Savelli, all attached to French interests.
Peron de Basche so far presumed, no doubt emboldened by this support, as
to threaten the Pope with deposition if he persisted in his refusal to
obey the King of France.

You see once more that kingly attitude, and you shall see it yet again
presently and be convinced of its precise worth. In one hand a bribe of
heavy annual tribute, in the other a threat of deposition; it was thus
they conducted their business with the Holy Father. In this instance his
Holiness took the threat, and dismissed the insolent ambassador. Della
Rovere, conceiving that in France he had a stouter ally than in Naples,
and seeing that he had once more incurred the papal anger by his
open enmity, fled back to Ostia; and, not feeling safe there, for the
pontifical forces were advancing upon his fortress, took ship to Genoa,
and thence to France, to plot the Pope’s ruin with the exasperated
Charles; and, the charge of simony being the only weapon with which
they could attack Alexander’s seat upon the papal throne, the charge of
simony was once more brandished.

His Holiness took the matter with a becoming and stately calm. He sent
his nephew, Giovanni Borgia, to Naples to crown Alfonso, and with him
went Giuffredo Borgia to carry out the marriage contract with Alfonso’s
daughter, and thus strengthen the alliance between Rome and Naples.

By the autumn Charles had crossed the Alps with the most formidable army
that had ever been sent out of France, full ninety thousand strong. And
so badly was the war conducted by the Neapolitan generals who were sent
to hold him in check that the appearance of the French under the very
walls of Rome was almost such as to take the Pope by surprise. Charles’s
advance from the north had been so swift and unhindered that Alexander
contemptuously said the French soldiers had come into Italy with wooden
spurs and chalk in their hands to mark their lodgings.

Charles had been well received by the intriguing Lodovico Sforza, with
whom he visited the Castle of Pavia and the unfortunate Gian Galeazzo,
who from long confinement, chagrin, and other causes was now reduced
to the sorriest condition. Indeed, on October 22, some days after that
visit, the wretched prince expired. Whether or not Lodovico had him
poisoned, as has been alleged--a charge, which, after all, rests on no
proof, nor even upon the word of any person of reliance--his death most
certainly lies at his ambitious uncle’s door.

Charles was at Piacenza when the news of Gian Galeazzo’s death reached
him. Like the good Christian that he accounted himself, he ordered the
most solemn and imposing obsequies for the poor youth for whom in life
he had done nothing.

Gian Galeazzo left a heart-broken girl-widow and two children to succeed
him to the throne he had never been allowed to occupy--the eldest,
Francesco Sforza, being a boy of five. Nevertheless, Lodovico was
elected Duke of Milan. Not only did he suborn the Parliament of Milan
to that end, but he induced the Emperor to confirm him in the title. To
this the Emperor consented, seeking to mask the unscrupulous deed by a
pitiful sophism. He expounded that the throne of Milan should originally
have been Lodovico’s, and never Galeazzo Maria’s (Gian Galeazzo’s
father), because the latter was born before Francesco Sforza had become
Duke of Milan, whereas Lodovico was born when he already was so.

The obsequies of Gian Galeazzo completed, Charles pushed on. From
Florence he issued his manifesto, and although this confined itself to
claiming the kingdom of Naples, and said no word of punishing the Pope
for his disobedience in crowning Alfonso and being now in alliance with
him, it stirred up grave uneasiness at the Vatican.

The Pope’s position was becoming extremely difficult; nevertheless,
he wore the boldest possible face when he received the ambassadors of
France, and on December 9 refused to grant the letters patent of passage
through the Pontifical States which the French demanded. Thereupon
Charles advanced threateningly upon Rome, and was joined now by those
turbulent barons Orsini, Colonna, and Savelli.

Alexander VI has been widely accused of effecting a volte-face at this
stage and betraying his Neapolitan allies; but his conduct, properly
considered, can hardly amount to that. What concessions he made to
France were such as a wise and inadequately supported man must make to
an army ninety thousand strong. To be recklessly and quixotically heroic
is not within the function of Popes; moreover, Alexander had Rome to
think of, for Charles had sent word that, if he were resisted he would
leave all in ruins, whereas if a free passage were accorded him he would
do no hurt nor suffer any pillage to be done in Rome.

So the Pope did the only thing consistent with prudence: he made a
virtue of necessity and gave way where it was utterly impossible for him
to resist. He permitted Charles the passage through his territory which
Charles was perfectly able to take for himself if refused. There ensued
an interchange of compliments between Pope and King, and early in
January Charles entered Rome in such warlike panoply as struck terror
into the hearts of all beholders. Of that entrance Paolo Giovio has left
us an impressive picture.

The vanguard was composed of Swiss and German mercenaries--tall fellows,
these professional warriors, superb in their carriage and stepping
in time to the beat of their drums; they were dressed in variegated,
close-fitting garments that revealed all their athletic symmetry. A
fourth of them were armed with long, square-bladed halberts, new to
Italy; the remainder trailed their ten-foot pikes, and carried a short
sword at their belts, whilst to every thousand of them there were a
hundred arquebusiers. After them came the French infantry, without
armour save the officers, who wore steel corselets and head-pieces.
These, again, were followed by five thousand Gascon arbalisters, each
shouldering his arbalest--a phalanx of short, rude fellows, not to be
compared with the stately Swiss. Next came the cavalry, advancing in
squadrons, glittering and resplendent in their steel casings; 2,500 of
these were in full heavy armour, wielding iron maces and the ponderous
lances that were usual also in Italy. Every man-at-arms had with him
three horses, mounted by a squire and two valets (four men going to the
lance in France). Some 5,000 of the cavalry were more lightly armed, in
corselets and head-piece only, and they carried long wooden bows in the
English fashion; whilst some were armed with pikes, intended to complete
the work of the heavier cavalry. These were followed by 200 knights--the
very flower of French chivalry for birth and valour--shouldering their
heavy iron maces, their armour covered by purple, gold-embroidered
surcoats. Behind them came 400 mounted archers forming the bodyguard of
the king.

The misshapen monarch himself was the very caricature of a man, hideous
and grotesque as a gargoyle. He was short of stature, spindle-shanked,
rachitic and malformed, and of his face, with its colossal nose, loose
mouth and shallow brow, Giovio says that “it was the ugliest ever seen
on man.”

Such was the person of the young king--he was twenty-four years of age
at the time--who poured his legions into Rome, and all full-armed as if
for work of immediate destruction. Seen, as they were, by torchlight
and the blaze of kindled bonfires--for night had fallen long before
the rearguard had entered the city--they looked vague, fantastic, and
terrifying. But the most awe-inspiring sight of all was kept for the
end; it consisted of the thirty-six pieces of artillery which brought
up the rear, each piece upon a carriage swiftly drawn by horses, and
the longest measuring eight feet, weighing six thousand pounds, and
discharging an iron ball as big as a man’s head.

The king lay in the Palace of San Marco, where a lodging had been
prepared for him, and thither on the day after his entrance came Cesare
Borgia, with six Cardinals, from the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, whither
the Pope had withdrawn, to wait upon his Christian Majesty. Charles
immediately revealed the full and exigent nature of his demands. He
required the Pope’s aid and counsel in the conquest of Naples, upon
which he was proceeding; that Cesare Borgia be delivered into his hands
as a hostage to ensure the Pope’s friendliness; and that the Castle of
Sant’ Angelo be handed over to him to be used as a retreat in case of
need or danger. Further, he demanded that Prince Djem--the brother of
Sultan Bajazet, who was in the Pope’s hands--should be delivered up to
him as a further hostage.

This Djem (Gem, or Zizim, as his name is variously spelled) was the
second son of Mahomet II, whose throne he had disputed with his brother
Bajazet on their father’s death. He had raised an army to enforce his
claim, and had not lacked for partisans; but he was defeated and put
to flight by his brother. For safety he had delivered himself up to the
Knights of Rhodes, whom he knew to be Bajazet’s implacable enemies.
They made him very welcome, for d’Aubusson, the Grand Master of Rhodes,
realized that the possession of the prince’s person was a very fortunate
circumstance for Christianity, since by means of such a hostage the
Turk could be kept in submission. Accordingly d’Aubusson had sent him to
France, and wrote: “While Djem lives, and is in our hands, Bajazet will
never dare to make war upon Christians, who will thus enjoy great peace.
Thus is it salutary that Djem should remain in our power.” And in France
Djem had been well received and treated with every consideration due to
a person of his princely rank.

But he appears to have become a subject of contention among the
Powers, several of which urged that he could be of greater service to
Christianity in their hands than in those of France. Thus, the King of
Hungary had demanded him because, being a neighbour of Bajazet’s, he
was constantly in apprehension of Turkish raids. Ferdinand of Spain had
desired him because the possession of him would assist the Catholic King
in the expulsion of the Moors. Ferrante of Naples had craved him because
he lived in perpetual terror of a Turkish invasion.

In the end he had been sent to Rome, whither he went willingly under
the advice of the Knights of Rhodes, whose prisoner he really considered
himself. They had discovered that Bajazet was offering enormous bribes
to Charles for the surrender of him, and they feared lest Charles should
succumb to the temptation.

So Prince Djem had come to Rome in the reign of Pope Innocent VIII, and
there he had since remained, Sultan Bajazet making the Pope an annual
allowance of forty thousand ducats for his brother’s safe custody. He
was a willing prisoner, or rather a willing exile, for, far from being
kept a prisoner, he was treated at Rome with every consideration,
associating freely with those about the Pontifical Court, and being
frequently seen abroad in company with the Pope and the Duke of Gandia.

Now Charles was aware that the Pope, in his dread of a French invasion,
and seeing vain all his efforts to dissuade Charles from making his
descent upon Italy, had appealed for aid to Bajazet. For so doing he has
been severely censured, and with some justice, for the picture of the
Head of Christianity making appeal to the infidel to assist him against
Christians is not an edifying one. Still, it receives some measure
of justification when we reflect what was the attitude of these same
Christians towards their Head.

Bajazet himself, thrown into a panic at the thought of Djem falling into
the hands of a king who proposed to make a raid upon him, answered the
Pope begging his Holiness to “have Djem removed from the tribulations of
this world, and his soul transported to another, where he might enjoy a
greater peace.” For this service he offered the Pope 300,000 ducats, to
be paid on delivery of the prince’s body; and, if the price was high, so
was the service required, for it would have ensured Bajazet a peace of
mind he could not hope to enjoy while his brother lived.

This letter was intercepted by Giovanni della Rovere, the Prefect of
Sinigaglia, who very promptly handed it to his brother, the Cardinal
Giuliano. The cardinal, in his turn, laid it before the King of France,
who now demanded of the Pope the surrender of the person of this Djem as
a further hostage.

Alexander began by rejecting the king’s proposals severally and
collectively, but Charles pressed him to reconsider his refusal, and so,
being again between the sword and the wall, the Pope was compelled to
submit. A treaty was drawn up and signed on January 15, the king, on
his side, promising to recognize the Pope and to uphold him in all his
rights.

On the following day Charles made solemn act of veneration to the
Pontiff in Consistory, kissing his ring and his foot, and professing
obedience to him as the kings of France, his forbears, had ever done.
Words for deeds!

Charles remained twelve days longer in Rome, and set out at last, on
January 28, upon the conquest of Naples. First he went solemnly to take
his leave of the Pope, and they parted with every outward mark of a
mutual esteem which they most certainly cannot have experienced. When
Charles knelt for the Pope’s blessing, Alexander raised him up and
embraced him; whilst Cesare completed the show of friendliness by
presenting Charles with six beautiful chargers.

They set out immediately afterwards, the French king taking with him
his hostages, neither of which he was destined to retain for long, with
Cesare riding in the place of honour on his right.

The army lay at Marino that night, and on the following at Velletri. In
the latter city Charles was met by an ambassador of Spain--Antonio da
Fonseca. Ferdinand and Isabella were moved at last to befriend their
cousins of Naples, whom all else had now abandoned, and at the same time
serve their own interests. Their ambassador demanded that Charles should
abandon his enterprise and return to France, or else be prepared for war
with Spain.

It is eminently probable that Cesare had knowledge of this ultimatum to
Charles, and that his knowledge influenced his conduct. However that may
be, he slipped out of Velletri in the dead of that same night disguised
as a groom. Half a mile out of the town, Francesco del Sacco, an officer
of the Podestá of Velletri, awaited him with a horse, and on this he
sped back to Rome, where he arrived on the night of the 30th. He went
straight to the house of one Antonio Flores, an auditor of the Tribunal
of the Ruota and a person of his confidence, who through his influence
and protection was destined to rise to the eminence of the archbishopric
of Avignon and Papal Nuncio to the Court of France.

Cesare remained at Flores’s house, sending word to the Pope of his
presence, but not attempting to approach the Vatican. On the following
day he withdrew to the stronghold of Spoleto.

Meanwhile Rome was thrown into a panic by the young cardinal’s
action and the dread of reprisals on the part of France. The quaking
municipality sent representatives to Charles to assure him that Rome had
had nothing to do with this breach of the treaty, and to implore him not
to visit it upon the city. The king replied by a special embassy to
the Pope, and there apparently dropped the matter, for a few days later
Cesare reappeared at the Vatican.

Charles, meanwhile, despite the threats of Spain, pushed on to
accomplish his easy conquest.

King Alfonso had already fled the kingdom (January 25), abdicating in
favour of his brother Federigo. His avowed object was to withdraw to
Sicily, retire from the world, and do penance for his sins, for which no
doubt there was ample occasion. The real spur was probably--as opined
by Commines--cowardice; for, says that Frenchman, “Jamais homme cruel ne
fut hardi.”

Federigo’s defence of the realm consigned to him was not conspicuous,
for the French entered Naples almost without striking a blow within
twenty days of their departure from Rome.

Scarcely had Charles laid aside his armour when death robbed him of the
second hostage he had brought from the Vatican. On February 25, after
a week’s illness, Prince Djem died of dysentery at the Castle of Capua,
whither Charles had sent him.

Rumours that he had been poisoned by the Pope arose almost at once; but,
considering that twenty­eight days had elapsed since his parting
from Alexander, it was, with the best intentions in the world, rather
difficult to make that poisoning credible, until the bright notion was
conceived, and made public, that the poison used was a “white powder”
 of unknown components, which did its work slowly, and killed the victim
some time after it had been administered. Thus, by a bold and brazen
invention, an impossible falsehood was made to wear a possible aspect.

And in that you have most probably the origin of the famous secret
poison of the Borgias. Having been invented to fit the alleged poisoning
of Prince Djem, which it was desired to fasten upon the Pope by hook or
by crook, it was found altogether too valuable an invention not to be
used again. By means of it, it became possible to lay almost any death
in the world at the door of Alexander.

Before proceeding to inquire further into this particular case, let us
here and now say that, just as to-day there is no inorganic toxin known
to science that will either lie fallow for weeks in the human system,
suddenly to become active and slay, or yet to kill by slow degrees
involving some weeks in the process, so none was known in the Borgian or
any other era. Science indeed will tell you that the very notion of
any such poison is flagrantly absurd, and that such a toxic action is
against all the laws of nature.

But a scientific disquisition is unnecessary. For our present needs
arguments of common sense should abundantly suffice. This poison--this
white powder--was said to be a secret of the Borgias. If that is so,
by what Borgia was the secret of its existence ever divulged? Or, if it
never was divulged, how comes it to be known that a poison so secret,
and working at such distances of time, was ever wielded by them?

The very nature of its alleged action was such as utterly to conceal the
hand that had administered it; yet here, on the first recorded occasion
of its alleged use, it was more or less common knowledge if Giovio and
Guicciardini are to be believed!

Sagredo(1) says that Djem died at Terracina three days after having been
consigned to Charles VIII, of poison administered by Alexander, to whom
Bajazet had promised a large sum of money for the deed. The same is
practically Giovio’s statement, save that Giovio causes him to die at
a later date and at Gaeta; Guicciardini and Corio tell a similar story,
but inform us that he died in Naples.


  1  In Mem. Storiche dei Monarchi Ottomani.


It is entirely upon the authority of these four writers that the Pope is
charged with having poisoned Djem, and it is noteworthy that in the four
narratives we find different dates and three different places given as
the date and place of the Turk’s death, and more noteworthy still that
in not one instance of these four is date or place correctly stated.

Now the place where Djem died, and the date of his death, were public
facts about which there was no mystery; they were to be ascertained--as
they are still--by any painstaking examiner. His poisoning, on the
other hand, was admittedly a secret matter, the truth of which it was
impossible to ascertain with utter and complete finality. Yet of this
poisoning they know all the secrets, these four nimble writers who
cannot correctly tell us where or when the man died!

We will turn from the fictions they have left us--which, alas! have but
too often been preferred by subsequent writers to the true facts
which lay just as ready to their hands, but of course were less
sensational--and we will consider instead the evidence of those
contemporaries who do, at least, know the time and place of Djem’s
decease.

If any living man might have known of a secret poison of the Borgias at
this stage, that man was Burchard the Caeremoniarius, and, had he known
of it, not for a moment would he have been silent on the point. Yet
not a word of this secret poison shall you find in his diaries, and
concerning the death of Djem he records that “on February 25 died at the
Castle of Capua the said Djem, through meat or drink that disagreed with
him.”

Panvinio, who, being a Neapolitan, was not likely to be any too friendly
to the Pope--as, indeed, he proves again and again--tells us positively
that Djem died of dysentry at Capua.(1)


  1  Vitis Pontif. Rom.


Sanuto, writing to the Council of Ten, says that Djem took ill at Capua
of a catarrh, which “descended to his stomach”; and that so he died.

And now mark Sanuto’s reasoning upon his death, which is the very
reasoning we should ourselves employ finally to dispose of this chatter
of poisoning, did we not find it awaiting quotation, more authoritative
therefore than it could be from us, and utterly irrefutable and
conclusive in its logic. “This death is very harmful to the King of
France, to all Italy, and chiefly to the Pope, who is thereby deprived
of 40,000 ducats yearly, which was paid him by his [Djem’s] brother for
his custody. And the king showed himself greatly grieved by this death,
and it was suspected that the Pope had poisoned him, which, however, was
not to be believed, as it would have been to his own loss.”

Just so--to his own infinite loss, not only of the 40,000 ducats yearly,
but of the hold which the custody of Djem gave him upon the Turks.

The reason assigned by those who charged Alexander with this crime
was the bribe of 300,000 ducats offered by Bajezet in the intercepted
letter. The offer--which, incidentally, had never reached the Pope--was
instantly taken as proof of its acceptance--a singular case of making
cause follow upon effect, a method all too prevalent with the Borgian
chroniclers. Moreover, they entirely overlooked the circumstance that,
for Djem’s death in the hands of France, the Pope could make no claim
upon Bajazet.

Finally--though the danger be incurred of becoming tedious upon this
point--they also forgot that, years before, Bajazet had offered such
bribes to Charles for the life of Djem as had caused the Knights of
Rhodes to remove the Turk from French keeping. Upon that circumstance
they might, had it sorted with their inclinations, have set up a
stronger case of poisoning against Charles than against the Pope, and
they would not have been put to the necessity of inventing a toxin that
never had place in any earthly pharmacopoeia.

It is not, by this, suggested that there is any shadow of a case against
Charles. Djem died a perfectly natural death, as is established by the
only authorities competent to speak upon the matter, and his death was
against the interests of everybody save his brother Bajazet; and against
nobody’s so much as the Pope’s.




CHAPTER II. THE POPE AND THE SUPERNATURAL


By the middle of March of that year 1495 the conquest of Naples was a
thoroughly accomplished fact, and the French rested upon their victory,
took their ease, and made merry in the capital of the vanquished
kingdom.

But in the north Lodovico Sforza-now Duke of Milan de facto, as we have
seen--set about the second part of the game that was to be played. He
had a valuable ally in Venice, which looked none too favourably on the
French and was fully disposed to gather its forces against the common
foe. The Council of Ten sent their ambassador, Zorzi, to the Pope to
propose an alliance.

News reached Charles in Naples of the league that was being formed. He
laughed at it, and the matter was made the subject of ridicule in some
of the comedies that were being performed for the amusement of his
Court. Meanwhile, the intrigue against him went forward; on March 26 his
Holiness sent the Golden Rose to the Doge, and on Palm Sunday the league
was solemnly proclaimed in St. Peter’s. Its terms were vague; there
was nothing in it that was directly menacing to Charles; it was simply
declared to have been formed for the common good. But in the north the
forces were steadily gathering to cut off the retreat of the French, and
suddenly Lodovico Sforza threw aside the mask and made an attack upon
the French navy at Genoa.

At last Charles awoke to his danger and began to care for his safety.
Rapidly he organized the occupation of Naples, and, leaving Montpensier
as Viceroy and d’Aubigny as Captain-General, he set out for Rome with
his army, intent upon detaching the Pope from the league; for the Pope,
being the immediate neighbour of Naples, would be as dangerous as an
enemy as he was valuable as an ally to Charles.

He entered Rome on June 1. The Pope, however, was not there to receive
him. Alexander had left on May 28 for Orvieto, accompanied by Cesare,
the Sacred College, 200 men-at-arms, and 1,000 horse and 3,000 foot,
supplied by Venice. At Orvieto, on June 3, the Pontiff received an
ambassador from the Emperor, who had joined the league, and on the
4th he refused audience to the ambassador of France, sent to him from
Ronciglione, where the King had halted. Charles, insistent, sent again,
determined to see the Pope; but Alexander, quite as determined not to
see the king, pushed on to Perugia with his escort.

There his Holiness abode until the French and Italians had met on the
River Taro and joined battle at Fornovo, of which encounter both sides
claimed the victory. If Charles’s only object was to win through, then
the victory undoubtedly was his, for he certainly succeeded in cutting
a way through the Italians who disputed his passage. But he suffered
heavily, and left behind him most of his precious artillery, his tents
and carriages, and the immense Neapolitan booty he was taking home, with
which he had loaded (says Gregorovius) twenty thousand mules. All this
fell into the hands of the Italian allies under Gonzaga of Mantua,
whilst from Fornovo Charles’s retreat was more in the nature of
a flight. Thus he won back to France, no whit the better for his
expedition, and the only mark of his passage which he left behind him
was an obscene ailment, which, with the coming of the French into Italy,
first manifested itself in Europe, and which the Italians paid them the
questionable compliment of calling “the French disease”--morbo gallico,
or il mal francese.

During the Pope’s visit to Perugia an incident occurred which is not
without importance to students of his character, and of the character
left of him by his contemporaries and others.

There lived in Perugia at this time a young nun of the Order of St.
Dominic, who walked in the way of St. Catherine of Siena, Colomba da
Rieti by name. You will find some marvellous things about her in the
Perugian chronicles of Matarazzo, which, for that matter, abound in
marvellous things--too marvellous mostly to be true.

When he deals with events happening beyond the walls of his native town
Matarazzo, as an historian, is contemptible to a degree second only to
that of those who quote him as an authority. When he deals with matters
that, so to speak, befell under his very eyes, he is worthy, if not of
credit at least of attention, for his “atmosphere” is valuable.

Of this Sister Colomba Matarazzo tells us that she ate not nor drank,
save sometimes some jujube fruit, and even these but rarely. “On the day
of her coming to Perugia (which happened in 1488), as she was Crossing
the Bridge of St. Gianni some young men attempted to lay hands upon her,
for she was comely and beautiful; but as they did so, she showed them
the jujube fruit which she carried in a white cloth, whereupon they
instantly stood bereft of strength and wits.”

Next he tells us how she would pass from life for an hour or two, and
sometimes for half a day, and her pulse would cease to beat, and she
would, seem all dead. And then she would quiver and come to herself
again, and prophesy the future, and threaten disaster. And again:
“One morning two of her teeth were found to have fallen out, which had
happened in fighting with the devil; and, for the many intercessions
which she made, and the scandals which she repaired by her prayers, the
people came to call her saint.”

Notwithstanding all this, and the fact that she lived without
nourishment, he tells us that the brothers of St. Francis had little
faith in her. Nevertheless, the community built her a very fine
monastery, which was richly endowed, and many nuns took the habit of her
Order.

Now it happened that whilst at Perugia in his student days, Cesare had
witnessed a miracle performed by this poor ecstatic girl; or rather he
had arrived on the scene--the Church of St. Catherine of Siena--to
find her, with a little naked boy in her lap, the centre of an excited,
frenzied crowd, which was proclaiming loudly that the child had been
dead and that she had resurrected him. This was a statement which the
Prior of the Dominicans did not seem disposed unreservedly to accept,
for, when approached with a suggestion that the bells should be rung
in honour of the event, he would not admit that he saw any cause to
sanction such a course.

In the few years that were sped since then, however, sister Colomba
had acquired the great reputation of which Matarazzo tells us, so that,
throughout the plain of Tiber, the Dominicans were preaching her fame
from convent to convent. In December of 1495 Charles VIII heard of
her at Siena, and was stirred by a curiosity which he accounted
devotional--the same curiosity that caused one of his gentlemen to
entreat Savonarola to perform “just a little miracle” for the King’s
entertainment. You can picture the gloomy fanatic’s reception of that
invitation.

The Pope now took the opportunity of his sojourn in Perugia to pay
Colomba da Rieti a visit, and there can be no doubt that he did so in a
critical spirit. Accompanied by Cesare and some cardinals and gentlemen
of his following, he went to the Church of St. Dominic and was conducted
to the sister’s cell by the Prior--the same who in Cesare’s student-days
had refused to have the bells rung.

Upon seeing the magnificent figure of the Pontiff filling the doorway of
her little chamber, Sister Colomba fell at his feet, and, taking hold of
the hem of his gown, she remained prostrate and silent for some moments,
when at last she timidly arose. Alexander set her some questions
concerning the Divine Mysteries. These she answered readily at first,
but, as his questions grew, she faltered, became embarrassed, and fell
silent, standing before him white and trembling, no doubt a very piteous
figure. The Pope, not liking this, turned to the Prior to demand an
explanation, and admonished him sternly: “Caveto, Pater, quia ego Papa
sum!”

This had the effect of throwing the Prior into confusion, and he set
himself to explain that she was in reality very wonderful, that he
himself had not at first believed in her, but that he had seen so
much that he had been converted. At this stage Cesare came to his
aid, bearing witness, as he could, that he himself had seen the
Prior discredit her when others were already hailing her as a saint,
wherefore, if he now was convinced, he must have had very good evidence
to convince him. We can imagine the Prior’s gratitude to the young
cardinal for that timely word when he saw himself in danger perhaps of
being called to account for fostering and abetting an imposture.

What was Alexander’s opinion of her in the end we do not know; but we
do know that he was not readily credulous. When, for instance, he heard
that the stigmata were alleged to have appeared upon the body of Lucia
di Narni he did what might be expected of a sceptic of our own times
rather than of a churchman of his superstitious age--he sent his
physicians to examine her.

That is but one instance of his common-sense attitude towards
supernatural manifestations. His cold, calm judgement caused him to
seek, by all available and practical means, to discriminate between the
true and the spurious in an age in which men, by their credulity, were
but too ready to become the prey of any impostor. It argues a breadth of
mind altogether beyond the times in which he had his being. Witches and
warlocks, who elsewhere--and even in much later ages, and in Protestant
as well as Catholic States--were given to the fire, he contemptuously
ignored. The unfortunate Moors and Jews, who elsewhere in Europe were
being persecuted by the Holy Inquisition and burnt at the stake as an
act of faith for the good of their souls and the greater honour and
glory of God, found in Alexander a tolerant protector and in Rome a safe
shelter.

These circumstances concerning him are not sufficiently known; it is
good to know them for their own sake. But, apart from that, they have
a great historical value which it is well to consider. It is not to be
imagined that such breadth of views could be tolerated in a Pope in the
dawn of the sixteenth century. The times were not ripe for it; men
did not understand it; and what men do not understand they thirst to
explain, and have a way of explaining in their own fashion and according
to their own lights.

A Pope who did such things could not be a good Pope, since such things
must be abhorrent to God--as men conceived God then.

To understand this is to understand much of the bad feeling against
Alexander and his family, for this is the source of much of it. Because
he did not burn witches and magicians it was presently said that he
was himself a warlock, and that he practised black magic. It was not,
perhaps, wanton calumny; it was said in good faith, for it was the only
reason the times could think of that should account for his restraint.
Because he tolerated Moors and Jews it was presently said by some that
he was a Moor, by others that he was a Jew, and by others still that he
was both.

What wonder, then, if the rancorous Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere
venomously dubbed him Moor and Jew, and the rabid fanatic Savonarola
screamed that he was no Pope at all, that he was not a Christian, nor
did he believe in any God?

Misunderstood in these matters, he was believed to be an infidel, and no
crime was too impossible to be fastened upon the man who was believed to
be that in the Italy of the Cinquecento.

Alexander, however, was very far from being an infidel, very far from
not being a Christian, very far from not believing in God, as he has
left abundant evidence in the Bulls he issued during his pontificate.
It is certainly wrong to assume--and this is pointed out by
l’Espinois--that a private life which seems to ignore the commandments
of the Church must preclude the possibility of a public life devoted to
the service of the Church. This is far from being the case. Such a state
of things--such a dual personality--is by no means inconsistent with
churchmen of the fifteenth, or, for that matter, of the twentieth
century.

The whole truth of the matter is contained in a Portuguese rhyme, which
may roughly be translated:

     Soundly Father Thomas preaches.
     Don’t do as he does; do as he teaches.

A debauchee may preach virtue with salutary effect, just as a man may
preach hygiene without practising the privations which it entails, or
may save you from dyspepsia by pointing out to you what is indigestible
without himself abstaining from it.

Such was the case of Alexander VI, as we are justified in concluding
from the evidence that remains.

Let us consider the apostolic zeal revealed by his Bull granting America
to Spain. This was practically conceded--as the very terms of it will
show--on condition that Spain should employ the dominion accorded her
over the New World for the purpose of propagating the Christian
faith and the conversion and baptism of the heathen. This is strictly
enjoined, and emphasized by the command that Spain shall send out
God-fearing men who are learned in religion and capable of teaching it
to the people of the newly discovered lands.

Thus Alexander invented the missionary.

To King Manuel the Fortunate (of Portugal), who sought his authority for
the conquest of Africa, he similarly enjoined that he should contrive
that the name of the Saviour be adored there, and the Catholic faith
spread and honoured, to the end that the king “might win eternal life
and the blessing of the Holy See.”

To the soldiers going upon this expedition his Holiness granted the same
indulgences as to those who fought in the Holy Land, and he aided the
kings of Spain and Portugal in this propagation of Christianity out of
the coffers of the Church.

He sent to America a dozen of the children of St. Francis, as apostles
to preach the Faith, and he invested them with the amplest powers.

He prosecuted with stern rigour the heretics of Bohemia, who were
obscenely insulting Church and Sacraments, and he proceeded similarly
against the “Picards” and “Vaudois.” Against the Lombard demoniacs, who
had grown bold, were banding themselves together and doing great evil to
property, to life, and to religion, Alexander raised his mighty arm.

Then there is his Bull of June 1, 1501, against those who already were
turning to evil purposes the newly discovered printing-press. In this
he inveighed against the printing of matter prejudicial to healthy
doctrine, to good manners, and, above all, to the Catholic Faith or
anything that should give scandal to the faithful. He threatened the
printers of impious works with excommunication should they persist,
and enlisted secular weapons to punish them in a temporal as well as
a spiritual manner. He ordered the preparation of indexes of all
works containing anything hurtful to religion, and pronounced a ban of
excommunication against all who should peruse the books so indexed.

Thus Alexander invented the Index Expurgatorius.

There is abundant evidence that he was a fervid celebrant, and of his
extreme devotion to the Blessed Virgin--in whose honour he revived the
ringing of the Angelus Bell--shall be considered later.

Whatever his private life, it is idle to seek to show that his public
career was other than devoted to the upholding of the dignity and honour
of the Church.




CHAPTER III. THE ROMAN BARONS


Having driven Charles VIII out of Italy, it still remained for the
allies to remove all traces of his passage from Naples and to restore
the rule of the House of Aragon. In this they had the aid of Ferdinand
and Isabella, who sent an army under the command of that distinguished
soldier Gonzalo de Cordoba, known in his day as the Great Captain.

He landed in Calabria in the spring of 1496, and war broke out afresh
through that already sorely devastated land. The Spaniards were joined
by the allied forces of Venice and the Church under the condotta of the
Marquis Gonzaga of Mantua, the leader of the Italians at Fornovo.

Lodovico had detached himself from the league, and again made terms
with France for his own safety’s sake. But his cousin, Giovanni Sforza,
Tyrant of Pesaro--the husband of Lucrezia Borgia--continued in the
pontifical army at the head of a condotta of 600 lances. Another command
in the same ranks was one of 700 lances under the youthful Giuffredo
Borgia, now Prince of Squillace and the husband of Doña Sancia of
Aragon, a lady of exceedingly loose morals, who had brought to Rome the
habits acquired in the most licentious Court of that licentious age.

The French lost Naples even more easily than they had conquered it, and
by July 7 Ferdinand II was able to reenter his capital and reascend
his throne. D’Aubigny, the French general, withdrew to France, whilst
Montpensier, the Viceroy, retired to Pozzuoli, where he died in the
following year.

Nothing could better have suited the purposes of Alexander than the
state of things which now prevailed, affording him, as it did, the means
to break the power of the insolent Roman barons, who already had so
vexed and troubled him. So in the Consistory of June 1 he published
a Bull whereby Gentile Virginio Orsini, Giangiordano Orsini, and his
bastard Paolo Orsini and Bartolomeo d’Alviano, were declared outlawed
for having borne arms with France against the Church, and their
possessions were confiscated to the State. This decree was to be
enforced by the sword, and, for the purposes of the impending war, the
Duke of Gandia was recalled to Rome. He arrived early in August, having
left at Gandia his wife Maria Enriquez, a niece of the Royal House of
Spain. It was Cesare Borgia who took the initiative in the pomp with
which his brother was received in Rome, riding out at the head of the
entire Pontifical Court to meet and welcome the young duke.

In addition to being Duke of Gandia, Giovanni Borgia was already Duke
of Sessa and Prince of Teano, which further dignities had been conferred
upon him on the occasion of his brother Giuffredo’s marriage to Donna
Sancia. To these the Pope now added the governorship of Viterbo and of
the Patrimony of St. Peter, dispossessing Cardinal Farnese of the latter
office to bestow it upon this well-beloved son.

In Venice it was being related, a few months later,--in October--that
Gandia had brought a woman from Spain for his father, and that the
latter had taken her to live with him. The story is given in Sanuto,
and of course has been unearthed and served up by most historians and
essayists. It cannot positively be said that it is untrue; but it can
be said that it is unconfirmed. There is, for instance, no word of it
in Burchard’s Diarium, and when you consider how ready a chronicler
of scandalous matter was this Master of Ceremonies, you will no doubt
conclude that, if any foundation there had been for that Venetian story,
Burchard would never have been silent on the subject.

The Pope had taken into his pay that distinguished condottiero, Duke
Guidobaldo of Urbino, who later was to feel the relentless might
of Cesare. To Guidobaldo’s command was now entrusted the punitive
expedition against the Orsini, and with him was to go the Duke of
Gandia, ostensibly to share the leadership, in reality that, under so
able a master, he might serve his apprenticeship to the trade of arms.
So on October 25 Giovanni Borgia was very solemnly created Gonfalonier
of the Church and Captain-General of the pontifical troops. On the same
day the three standards were blessed in St. Peter’s--one being the Papal
Gonfalon bearing the arms of the Church and the other two the personal
banners of Guidobaldo and Gandia. The two condottieri attended the
ceremony, arrayed in full armour, and received the white truncheons that
were the emblems of their command.

On the following day the army set out, accompanied by the Cardinal de
Luna as papal legate a latere, and within a month ten Orsini strongholds
had surrendered.

So far all had been easy for the papal forces; but now the Orsini
rallied in the last three fortresses that remained them--Bracciano,
Trevignano, and Anguillara, and their resistance suddenly acquired a
stubborn character, particularly that of Bracciano, which was captained
by Bartolomeo d’Alviano, a clever, resourceful young soldier who was
destined to go far. Thus the campaign, so easily conducted at the
outset, received a check which caused it to drag on into the winter. And
now the barons received further reinforcements. Vitellozzo Vitelli, the
Tyrant of Città di Castello, came to the aid of the Orsini, as did also
the turbulent Baglioni of Perugia, the della Rovere in Rome, and all
those who were inimical to Alexander VI. On the other hand, however, the
barons Colonna and Savelli ranged themselves on the side of the Pope.

Already Trevignano had fallen, and the attack of the pontifical army
was concentrated upon Bracciano. Hard pressed, and with all supplies
cut off, Bartolomeo d’Alviano was driven to the very verge of surrender,
when over the hills came Carlo Orsini, with the men of Vitellozzo
Vitelli, to take the papal forces by surprise and put them to utter
rout. Guidobaldo was made prisoner, whilst the Duke of Gandia, Fabrizio
Colonna, and the papal legate narrowly escaped, and took shelter in
Ronciglione, the Pope’s son being slightly wounded in the face.

It was a severe and sudden conclusion to a war that had begun under
such excellent auspices for the Pontificals. Yet, notwithstanding that
defeat, which had left guns and baggage in the hands of the enemy, the
Pope was the gainer by the campaign, having won eleven strongholds from
the Orsini in exchange for one battle lost.

The barons now prepared to push home their advantage and complete
the victory; but the Pope checkmated them by an appeal to Gonzalo de
Cordoba, who promptly responded and came with Prospero Colonna to the
aid of the Church. He laid siege to Ostia, which was being held for the
Cardinal della Rovere, and compelled it to a speedy surrender, thereby
bringing the Orsini resistance practically to an end. For the present
the might of the barons was broken, and they were forced to pay
Alexander the sum of 50,000 ducats to redeem their captured fortresses.

Gonzalo de Cordoba made a triumphal entry into Rome, bringing with him
Monaldo da Guerra, the unfortunate defender of Ostia, in chains. He was
received with great honour by the Duke of Gandia, accompanied by his
brother-in-law, Giovanni Sforza, and they escorted him to the Vatican,
where the Pope awaited him.

This was but one of the many occasions just then on which Giovanni
Sforza was conspicuous in public in close association with his
father-in-law, the Pope. Burchard mentions his presence at the blessing
of the candles on the Feast of the Purification, and shows him to us as
a candle-bearer standing on the Pope’s right hand. Again we see him
on Palm Sunday in attendance upon Alexander, he and Gandia standing
together on the steps of the pontifical throne in the Sixtine Chapel
during the Blessing of the Palms. There and elsewhere Lucrezia’s husband
is prominently in the public eye during those months of February and
March of 1497, and we generally see him sharing, with the Duke of
Gandia, the honour of close attendance upon the Pontiff, all of which
but serves to render the more marked his sudden disappearance from that
scene.

The matter of his abrupt and precipitate flight from Rome is one
concerning which it is unlikely that the true and complete facts will
ever be revealed. It was public gossip at this time that his marriage
with Lucrezia was not a happy one, and that discord marred their life
together. Lucrezia’s reported grievance upon this subject reads a
little vaguely to us now, whatever it may have conveyed at the time. She
complained that Giovanni “did not fittingly keep her company,”(1) which
may be taken to mean that a good harmony did not prevail between them,
or, almost equally well, that there were the canonical grounds for
complaint against him as a husband which were afterwards formally
preferred and made the grounds for the divorce. It is also possible that
Alexander’s ambition may have urged him to dissolve the marriage to
the end that she might be free to be used again as a pawn in his
far-reaching game.


  1  “Che non gli faceva buona compagnia.”


All that we do know positively is that, one evening in Holy Week, Sforza
mounted a Turkish horse, and, on the pretext of going as far as the
Church of Sant’ Onofrio to take the air, he slipped out of Rome, and so
desperately did he ride that, twenty-four hours later, he was home in
Pesaro, his horse dropping dead as he reached the town.

Certainly some terrible panic must have urged him, and this rather lends
colour to the story told by Almerici in the Memorie di Pesaro. According
to this, the Lord of Pesaro’s chamberlain, Giacomino, was in Lucrezia’s
apartments one evening when Cesare was announced, whereupon, by
Lucrezia’s orders, Giacomino concealed himself behind a screen. The
Cardinal of Valencia entered and talked freely with his sister, the
essence of his conversation being that the order had been issued for her
husband’s death.

The inference to be drawn from this is that Giovanni had been given to
choose in the matter of a divorce, and that he had refused to be a party
to it, whence it was resolved to remove him in a still more effective
manner.

Be that as it may, the chroniclers of Pesaro proceed to relate that,
after Cesare had left her, Lucrezia asked Giacomino if he had heard what
had been said, and, upon being answered in the affirmative, urged him
to go at once and warn Giovanni. It was as a consequence of this alleged
warning that Giovanni made his precipitate departure.

A little while later, at the beginning of June, Lucrezia left the
Vatican and withdrew to the Convent of San Sisto, in the Appian Way, a
step which immediately gave rise to speculation and to unbridled gossip,
all of which, however, is too vague to be worthy of the least attention.
Aretino’s advices to the Cardinal Ippolito d’Este suggest that she did
not leave the Vatican on good terms with her family, and it is very
possible, if what the Pesaro chroniclers state is true, that her
withdrawal arose out of her having warned Giovanni of his danger and
enabled him to escape.

At about the same time that Lucrezia withdrew to her convent her brother
Gandia was the recipient of further honours at the hands of his fond
father. The Pope had raised the fief of Benevento to a dukedom, and as
a dukedom conferred it upon his son, to him and to his legitimate heirs
for ever. To this he added the valuable lordships of Terracina and
Pontecorvo.

Cesare, meanwhile, had by no means been forgotten, and already this
young cardinal was--with perhaps the sole exception of the Cardinal
d’Estouteville--the richest churchman in Christendom. To his many other
offices and benefices it was being proposed to add that of Chamberlain
of the Holy See, Cardinal Riario, who held the office, being grievously
ill and his recovery despaired of. Together with that office it was the
Pope’s avowed intention to bestow upon Cesare the palace of the late
Cardinal of Mantua, and with it, no doubt, he would receive a proportion
of the dead cardinal’s benefices.

Cesare was twenty-two years of age at the time; tall, of an athletic
slenderness, and exceedingly graceful in his movements, he was
acknowledged to be the handsomest man of his age. His face was long and
pale, his brow lofty, his nose delicately aquiline. He had long
auburn hair, and his hazel eyes, large, quick in their movements, and
singularly searching in their glance, were alive with the genius of the
soul behind them. He inherited from his father the stupendous health
and vigour for which Alexander had been remarkable in his youth, and
was remarkable still in his old age. The chase had ever been Cesare’s
favourite pastime, and the wild boar his predilect quarry; and in
the pursuit of it he had made good use of his exceptional physical
endowments, cultivating them until--like his father before him--he was
equal to the endurance of almost any degree of fatigue.

In the Consistory of June 8 he was appointed legate a latere to go to
Naples to crown King Federigo of Aragon--for in the meanwhile another
change had taken place on the Neapolitan throne by the death of young
Ferdinand II, who had been succeeded by his uncle, Federigo, Prince of
Altamura.

Cesare made ready for his departure upon this important mission, upon
which he was to be accompanied by his brother Giovanni, Duke of Gandia.
They were both to be back in Rome by September, when Gandia was to
return to Spain, taking with him his sister Lucrezia.

Thus had the Pope disposed; but the Borgia family stood on the eve of
the darkest tragedy associated with its name, a tragedy which was to
alter all these plans.




CHAPTER IV. THE MURDER OF THE DUKE OF GANDIA


On June 14, 1497, the eve of Cesare and Giovanni Borgia’s departure
for Naples, their mother Vannozza gave them a farewell supper in her
beautiful vineyard in Trastevere. In addition to the two guests of
honour several other kinsmen and friends were present, among whom were
the Cardinal of Monreale and young Giuffredo Borgia. They remained at
supper until an advanced hour of the night, when Cesare and Giovanni
took their departure, attended only by a few servants and a mysterious
man in a mask, who had come to Giovanni whilst he was at table, and who
almost every day for about a month had been in the habit of visiting him
at the Vatican.

The brothers and these attendants rode together into Rome and as far as
the Vice-Chancellor Ascanio Sforza’s palace in the Ponte Quarter. Here
Giovanni drew rein, and informed Cesare that he would not be returning
to the Vatican just yet, as he was first “going elsewhere to amuse
himself.” With that he took his leave of Cesare, and, with one single
exception--in addition to the man in the mask--dismissed his servants.
The latter continued their homeward way with the cardinal, whilst the
Duke, taking the man in the mask upon the crupper of his horse and
followed his single attendant, turned and made off in the direction of
the Jewish quarter.

In the morning it was found that Giovanni had not yet returned, and
his uneasy servants informed the Pope of his absence and of the
circumstances of it. The Pope, however, was not at all alarmed.
Explaining his son’s absence in the manner so obviously suggested by
Giovanni’s parting words to Cesare on the previous night, he assumed
that the gay young Duke was on a visit to some complacent lady and that
presently he would return.

Later in the day, however, news was brought that his horse had been
found loose in the streets, in the neighbourhood of the Cardinal of
Parma’s palace, with only one stirrup-leather, the other having clearly
been cut from the saddle, and, at the same time, it was related that the
servant who had accompanied him after he had separated from the rest
had been found at dawn in the Piazza della Giudecca mortally wounded and
beyond speech, expiring soon after his removal to a neighbouring house.

Alarm spread through the Vatican, and the anxious Pope ordered inquiries
to be made in every quarter where it was possible that anything might
be learned. It was in answer to these inquiries that a boatman of the
Schiavoni--one Giorgio by name--came forward with the story of what he
had seen on the night of Wednesday. He had passed the night on board his
boat, on guard over the timber with which she was laden. She was moored
along the bank that runs from the Bridge of Sant’ Angelo to the Church
of Santa Maria Nuova.

He related that at about the fifth hour of the night, just before
daybreak, he had seen two men emerge from the narrow street alongside
the Hospital of San Girolamo, and stand on the river’s brink at the spot
where it was usual for the scavengers to discharge their refuse carts
into the water. These men had looked carefully about, as if to make
sure that they were not being observed. Seeing no one astir, they made a
sign, whereupon a man well mounted on a handsome white horse, his heels
armed with golden spurs, rode out of that same narrow street. Behind
him, on the crupper of his horse, Giorgio beheld the body of a man, the
head hanging in one direction and the legs in the other. This body was
supported there by two other men on foot, who walked on either side of
the horseman.

Arrived at the water’s edge, they turned the horse’s hind-quarters to
the river; then, taking the body between them, two of them swung it well
out into the stream. After the splash, Giorgio had heard the horseman
inquire whether they had thrown well into the middle, and had heard
him receive the affirmative answer--“Signor, Si.” The horseman then sat
scanning the surface a while, and presently pointed out a dark object
floating, which proved to be their victim’s cloak. The men threw stones
at it, and so sank it, whereupon they turned, and all five departed as
they had come.

Such is the boatman’s story, as related in the Diarium of Burchard. When
the Pope had heard it, he asked the fellow why he had not immediately
gone to give notice of what he had witnessed, to which this Giorgio
replied that, in his time, he had seen over a hundred bodies thrown into
the Tiber without ever anybody troubling to know anything about them.

This story and Gandia’s continued absence threw the Pope into a frenzy
of apprehension. He ordered the bed of the river to be searched foot by
foot. Some hundreds of boatmen and fishermen got to work, and on that
same afternoon the body of the ill-fated Duke of Gandia was brought up
in one of the nets. He was not only completely dressed--as was to
have been expected from Giorgio’s story--but his gloves and his purse
containing thirty ducats were still at his belt, as was his dagger, the
only weapon he had carried; the jewels upon his person, too, were all
intact, which made it abundantly clear that his assassination was not
the work of thieves.

His hands were still tied, and there were from ten to fourteen wounds on
his body, in addition to which his throat had been cut.

The corpse was taken in a boat to the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, where it
was stripped, washed, and arrayed in the garments of the Captain-General
of the Church. That same night, on a bier, the body covered with a
mantle of brocade, the face “looking more beautiful than in life,” he
was carried by torchlight from Sant’ Angelo to Santa Maria del Popolo
for burial, quietly and with little pomp.

The Pope’s distress was terrible. As the procession was crossing the
Bridge of Sant’ Angelo, those who stood there heard his awful cries of
anguish, as is related in the dispatches of an eye-witness quoted by
Sanuto. Alexander shut himself up in his apartments with his passionate
sorrow, refusing to see anybody; and it was only by insistence that the
Cardinal of Segovia and some of the Pope’s familiars contrived to gain
admission to his presence; but even then, not for three days could they
induce him to taste food, nor did he sleep.

At last he roused himself, partly in response to the instances of the
Cardinal of Segovia, partly spurred by the desire to avenge the death of
his child, and he ordered Rome to be ransacked for the assassins;
but, although the search was pursued for two months, it proved utterly
fruitless.

That is the oft-told story of the death of the Duke of Gandia. Those are
all the facts concerning it that are known or that ever will be known.
The rest is speculation, and this speculation follows the trend of
malice rather than of evidence.

Suspicion fell at first upon Giovanni Sforza, who was supposed to have
avenged himself thus upon the Pope for the treatment he had received.
There certainly existed that reasonable motive to actuate him, but not a
particle of evidence against him.

Next rumour had it that Cardinal Ascanio Sforza’s was the hand that had
done this work, and with this rumour Rome was busy for months. It was
known that he had quarrelled violently with Gandia, who had been grossly
insulted by a chamberlain of Ascanio’s, and who had wiped out the insult
by having the man seized and hanged.

Sanuto quotes a letter from Rome on July 21, which states that “it is
certain that Ascanio murdered the Duke of Gandia.” Cardinal Ascanio’s
numerous enemies took care to keep the accusation alive at the
Vatican, and Ascanio, in fear for his life, had left Rome and fled to
Grottaferrata. When summoned to Rome, he had refused to come save under
safe­conduct. His fears, however, appear to have been groundless, for
the Pope attached no importance to the accusation against him, convinced
of his innocence, as he informed him.

Thereupon public opinion looked about for some other likely person
upon whom to fasten its indictment, and lighted upon Giuffredo Borgia,
Gandia’s youngest brother. Here, again, a motive was not wanting.
Already has mention been made of the wanton ways of Giuffredo’s
Neapolitan wife, Doña Sancia. That she was prodigal of her favours there
is no lack of evidence, and it appears that, amongst those she admitted
to them, was the dead duke. Jealousy, then, it was alleged, was the spur
that had driven Giuffredo to the deed; and that the rumour of this must
have been insistent is clear when we find the Pope publicly exonerating
his youngest son.

Thus matters stood, and thus had public opinion spoken, when in the
month of August the Pope ordered the search for the murderer to cease.
Bracci, the Florentine ambassador, explains this action of Alexander’s.
He writes that his Holiness knew who were the murderers, and that he was
taking no further steps in the matter in the hope that thus, conceiving
themselves to be secure, they might more completely discover themselves.

Bracci’s next letter bears out the supposition that he writes from
inference, and not from knowledge. He repeats that the investigations
have been suspended, and that to account for this some say what already
he has written, whilst others deny it; but that the truth of the matter
is known to none.

Later in the year we find the popular voice denouncing Bartolomeo
d’Alviano and the Orsini. Already in August the Ferrarese ambassador,
Manfredi, had written that the death of the Duke of Gandia was being
imputed to Bartolomeo d’Alviano, and in December we see in Sanuto a
letter from Rome which announces that it is positively stated that the
Orsini had caused the death of Giovanni Borgia.

These various rumours were hardly worth mentioning for their own values,
but they are important as showing how public opinion fastened the crime
in turn upon everybody it could think of as at all likely to have had
cause to commit it, and more important still for the purpose of refuting
what has since been written concerning the immediate connection of
Cesare Borgia with the crime in the popular mind.

Not until February of the following year was the name of Cesare ever
mentioned in connection with the deed. The first rumour of his
guilt synchronized with that of his approaching renunciation of his
ecclesiastical career, and there can be little doubt that the former
sprang from the latter. The world conceived that it had discovered on
Cesare’s part a motive for the murder of his brother. That motive--of
which so very much has been made--shall presently be examined.
Meanwhile, to deal with the actual rumour, and its crystallization into
history. The Ferrarese ambassador heard it in Venice on February 12,
1498. Capello seized upon it, and repeated it two and a half years
later, stating on September 28, 1500: “etiam amazó il fratello.”

And there you have the whole source of all the unbridled accusations
subsequently launched against Cesare, all of which find a prominent
place in Gregorovius’s Geschichte der Stadt Rom, whilst the rumours
accusing others, which we have mentioned here, are there slurred over.

One hesitates to attack the arguments and conclusions of the very
eminent author of that mighty History of Rome in the Middle Ages, but
conscience and justice demand that his chapter upon this subject be
dealt with as it deserves.

The striking talents of Gregorovius are occasionally marred by the
egotism and pedantry sometimes characteristic of the scholars of his
nation. He is too positive; he seldom opines; he asserts with finality
the things that only God can know; occasionally his knowledge,
transcending the possible, quits the realm of the historian for that
of the romancer, as for instance--to cite one amid a thousand--when he
actually tells us what passes in Cesare Borgia’s mind at the coronation
of the King of Naples. In the matter of authorities, he follows a
dangerous and insidious eclecticism, preferring those who support the
point of view which he has chosen, without a proper regard for their
intrinsic values.

He tells us definitely that, if Alexander had not positive knowledge, he
had at least moral conviction that it was Cesare who had killed the
Duke of Gandia. In that, again, you see the God-like knowledge which
he usurps; you see him clairvoyant rather than historical. Starting out
with the positive assertion that Cesare Borgia was the murderer, he sets
himself to prove it by piling up a mass of worthless evidence, whose
worthlessness it is unthinkable he should not have realized.

“According to the general opinion of the day, which in all probability
was correct, Cesare was the murderer of his brother.”

Thus Gregorovius in his Lucrezia Borgia. A deliberate misstatement! For,
as we have been at pains to show, not until the crime had been fastened
upon everybody whom public opinion could conceive to be a possible
assassin, not until nearly a year after Gandia’s death did rumour for
the first time connect Cesare with the deed. Until then the ambassadors’
letters from Rome in dealing with the murder and reporting speculation
upon possible murderers never make a single allusion to Cesare as the
guilty person.

Later, when once it had been bruited, it found its way into the writings
of every defamer of the Borgias, and from several of these it is taken
by Gregorovius to help him uphold that theory.

Two motives were urged for the crime. One was Cesare’s envy of his
brother, whom he desired to supplant as a secular prince, fretting
in the cassock imposed upon himself which restrained his unbounded
ambition. The other--and no epoch but this one under consideration,
in its reaction from the age of chivalry, could have dared to level it
without a careful examination of its sources--was Cesare’s jealousy,
springing from the incestuous love for their sister Lucrezia, which he
is alleged to have disputed with his brother. Thus, as l’Espinois has
pointed out, to convict Cesare Borgia of a crime which cannot absolutely
be proved against him, all that is necessary is that he should be
charged with another crime still more horrible of which even less proof
exists.

This latter motive, it is true, is rejected by Gregorovius. “Our sense
of honesty,” he writes, “repels us from attaching faith to the belief
spread in that most corrupt age.” Yet the authorities urging one motive
are commonly those urging the other, and Gregorovius quotes those that
suit him, without considering that, if he is convinced they lie in one
connection, he has not the right to assume them truthful in another.

The contemporary, or quasi-contemporary writers upon whose “authority”
 it is usual to show that Cesare Borgia was guilty of both those
revolting crimes are: Sanazzaro, Capello, Macchiavelli, Matarazzo,
Sanuto, Pietro Martire d’Anghiera, Guicciardini, and Panvinio.

A formidable array! But consider them, one by one, at close quarters,
and take a critical look at what they actually wrote:

SANAZZARO was a Neapolitan poet and epigrammatist, who could not--his
times being what they were--be expected to overlook the fact that
in these slanderous rumours of incest was excellent matter for
epigrammatical verse. Therefore, he crystallized them into lines which,
whilst doing credit to his wit, reveal his brutal cruelty. No one will
seriously suppose that such a man would be concerned with the veracity
of the matter of his verses--even leaving out of the question his enmity
towards the House of Borgia, which will transpire later. For him a ben
trovato was as good matter as a truth, or better. He measured its value
by its piquancy, by its adaptability to epigrammatic rhymes.

Conceive the heartlessness of the man who, at the moment of Alexander’s
awful grief at the murder of his son--a grief which so moved even
his enemies that the bitter Savonarola, and the scarcely less bitter
Cardinal della Rovere, wrote to condole with him--could pen that
terrible epigram:

     Piscatorem hominum ne te non, Sexte, putemus,
     Piscaris notum retibus ecce tuum.

Consider the ribaldry of that, and ask yourselves whether this is a man
who would immolate the chance of a witticism upon the altar of Truth.

It is significant that Sanazzaro, for what he may be worth, confines
himself to the gossip of incest. Nowhere does he mention that Cesare was
the murderer, and we think that his silence upon the matter, if it shows
anything, shows that Cesare’s guilt was not so very much the “general
opinion of the day,” as Gregorovius asks us to believe.

CAPPELLO was not in Rome at the time of the murder, nor until three
years later, when he merely repeated the rumour that had first sprung up
some eight months after the crime.

The precise value of his famous “relation” (in which this matter is
recorded, and to which we shall return in its proper place) and the
spirit that actuated him is revealed in another accusation of murder
which he levels at Cesare, an accusation which, of course, has also been
widely disseminated upon no better authority than his own. It is Capello
who tells us that Cesare stabbed the chamberlain Perrotto in the Pope’s
very arms; he adds the details that the man had fled thither for shelter
from Cesare’s fury, and that the blood of him, when he was stabbed,
spurted up into the very face of the Pope. Where he got the story is
not readily surmised--unless it be assumed that he evolved it out of his
feelings for the Borgias. The only contemporary accounts of the death of
this Perrotto--or Pedro Caldes, as was his real name--state that he fell
by accident into the Tiber and was drowned.

Burchard, who could not have failed to know if the stabbing story had
been true, and would not have failed to report it, chronicles the
fact that Perrotto was fished out of Tiber, having fallen in six days
earlier--“non libenter.” This statement, coming from the pen of the
Master of Ceremonies at the Vatican, requires no further corroboration.
Yet corroboration there actually is in a letter from Rome of February
20, 1498, quoted by Marino Sanuto in his Diarii. This states that
Perrotto had been missing for some days, no one knowing what had become
of him, and that now “he has been found drowned in the Tiber.”

We mention this, in passing, with the twofold object of slaying another
calumny, and revealing the true value of Capello, who happens to be the
chief “witness for the prosecution” put forward by Gregorovius. “Is it
not of great significance,” inquires the German historian, “that
the fact should have been related so positively by an ambassador who
obtained his knowledge from the best sources?”

The question is frivolous, for the whole trouble in this matter is that
there were no sources at all, in the proper sense of the word--good or
bad. There was simply gossip, which had been busy with a dozen names
already.

MACCHIAVELLI includes a note in his Extracts from Letters to the Ten, in
which he mentions the death of Gandia, adding that “at first nothing was
known, and then men said it was done by the Cardinal of Valencia.”

There is nothing very conclusive in that. Besides, incidentally it
may be mentioned, that it is not clear when or how these extracts were
compiled by Macchiavelli (in his capacity of Secretary to the Signory
of Florence) from the dispatches of her ambassadors. But it has been
shown--though we are hardly concerned with that at the moment--that
these extracts are confused by comments of his own, either for his own
future use or for that of another.

MATARAZZO is the Perugian chronicler of whom we have already expressed
the only tenable opinion. The task he set himself was to record
the contemporary events of his native town--the stronghold of the
blood-dripping Baglioni. He enlivened it by every scrap of scandalous
gossip that reached him, however alien to his avowed task. The
authenticity of this scandalmongering chronicle has been questioned;
but, even assuming it to be authentic, it is so wildly inaccurate when
dealing with matters happening beyond the walls of Perugia as to be
utterly worthless.

Matarazzo relates the story of the incestuous relations prevailing in
the Borgia family, and with an unsparing wealth of detail not to be
found elsewhere; but on the subject of the murder he has a tale to tell
entirely different from any other that has been left us. For, whilst he
urges the incest as the motive of the crime, the murderer, he tells us,
was Giovanni Sforza, the outraged husband; and he gives us the fullest
details of that murder, time and place and exactly how committed, and
all the other matters which have never been brought to light.

It is all a worthless, garbled piece of fiction, most obviously; as such
it has ever been treated; but it is as plausible as it is untrue, and,
at least, as authoritative as any available evidence assigning the guilt
to Cesare.

SANUTO we accept as a more or less careful and painstaking chronicler,
whose writings are valuable; and Sanuto on the matter of the murder
confines himself to quoting the letter of February 1498, in which the
accusation against Cesare is first mentioned, after having given other
earlier letters which accuse first Ascanio and then Orsini far more
positively than does the latter letter accuse Cesare.

On the matter of the incest there is no word in Sanuto; but there is
mention of Doña Sancia’s indiscretions, and the suggestion that, through
jealousy on her account, it was rumoured that the murder had been
committed--another proof of how vague and ill-defined the rumours were.

PIETRO MARTIRE D’ANGHIERA writes from Burgos, in Spain, that he
is convinced of the fratricide. It is interesting to know of that
conviction of his; but difficult to conceive how it is to be accepted as
evidence.

If more needs to be said of him, let it be mentioned that the letter
in which he expresses that conviction is dated April 1497--two months
before the murder took place! So that even Gregorovius is forced to
doubt the authenticity of that document.

GUICCIARDINI is not a contemporary chronicler of events as they
happened, but an historian writing some thirty years later. He merely
repeats what Capello and others have said before him. It is for him
to quote authorities for what he writes, and not to be set up as an
authority. He is not reliable, and he is a notorious defamer of the
Papacy, sparing nothing that will serve his ends. He dilates with gusto
upon the accusation of incest.

Lastly, PANVINTO is in the same category as Guicciardini. He was not
born until some thirty years after these events, and his History of the
Popes was not written until some sixty years after the murder of the
Duke of Gandia. This history bristles with inaccuracies; he never
troubles to verify his facts, and as an authority he is entirely
negligible.

In the valuable Diarium of Burchard there is unfortunately a lacuna at
this juncture, from the day after the murder (of which he gives the full
particulars to which we have gone for our narrative of that event) until
the month of August following. And now we may see Gregorovius actually
using silence as evidence. He seizes upon that lacuna, and goes so far
as to set up the tentative explanation that Burchard “perhaps purposely
interrupted his Diary that he might avoid mentioning the fratricide.”

If such were the case, it would be a strange departure from Burchard’s
invariable rule, which is one of cold, relentless, uncritical
chronicling of events, no matter what their nature. Besides, any
significance with which that lacuna might be invested is discounted by
the fact that such gaps are of fairly common occurrence in the course
of Burchard’s record. Finally it remains to be shown that the lacuna
in question exists in the original diaries, which have yet to be
discovered.

So much for the valuable authorities, out of which--and by means of a
selection which is not quite clearly defined--Gregorovius claims to have
proved that the murderer of the Duke of Gandia was his brother Cesare
Borgia, Cardinal of Valencia.(1)


  1  It is rather odd that, in the course of casting about for a possible
murderer of Gandia, public opinion should never have fastened upon
Cardinal Alessandro Farnese. He had lately been stripped of the
Patrimony of St. Peter that the governorship of this might be bestowed
upon Gandia; his resentment had been provoked by that action of the
Pope’s, and the relations between himself and the Borgias were strained
in consequence. Possibly there was clear proof that he could have had no
connection with the crime.


Now to examine more closely the actual motives given by those
authorities and by later, critical writers, for attributing the guilt to
Cesare.

In September of the year 1497, the Pope had dissolved the marriage
of his daughter Lucrezia and Giovanni Sforza, and the grounds for
the dissolution were that the husband was impotens et frigidus
natura--admitted by himself.(2)


  2  “El S. de Pesaro ha scripto qua de sua mano non haverla mai
cognosciuta et esser impotente, alias la sententia non se potea dare. El
prefato S. dice pero haver scripto cosi per obedire el Duca de Milano et
Aschanio” (Collenuccio’s letter from Rome to the Duke of Ferrara, Dec.
25, 1497).


If you know anything of the Italy of to-day, you will be able to
conceive for yourself how the Italy of the fifteenth century must have
held her sides and pealed her laughter at the contemptible spectacle of
an unfortunate who afforded such reason to be bundled out of a nuptial
bed. The echo of that mighty burst of laughter must have rung from
Calabria to the Alps, and well may it have filled the handsome weakling
who was the object of its cruel ridicule with a talion fury. The
weapons he took up wherewith to defend himself were a little obvious. He
answered the odious reflections upon his virility by a wholesale charge
of incest against the Borgia family; he screamed that what had been said
of him was a lie invented by the Borgias to serve their own unutterable
ends.(1) Such was the accusation with which the squirming Lord of Pesaro
retaliated, and, however obvious, yet it was not an accusation that
the world of his day would lightly cast aside, for all that the
perspicacious may have rated it at its proper value.


  1 “Et mancho se e curato de fare prova de qua con Done per poterne
chiarire el Rev. Legato che era qua, sebbene sua Excellentia tastandolo
sopra cio gli ne abbia facto offerta.” And further: “Anzi haverla
conosciuta infinite volte, ma chel Papa non geiha tolta per altro se
non per usare con lei” (Costabili’s letter from Milan to the Duke of
Ferrara, June 23, 1497).


What is of great importance to students of the history of the Borgias is
that this was the first occasion on which the accusation of incest was
raised. Of course it persisted; such a charge could not do otherwise.
But now that we see in what soil it had its roots we shall know what
importance to attach to it.

Not only did it persist, but it developed, as was but natural. Cesare
and the dead Gandia were included in it, and presently it suggested
a motive--not dreamed of until then--why Cesare might have been his
brother’s murderer.

Then, early in 1498, came the rumour that Cesare was intending to
abandon the purple, and later Writers, from Capello down to our own
times, have chosen to see in Cesare’s supposed contemplation of that
step a motive so strong for the crime as to prove it in the most
absolutely conclusive manner. In no case could it be such proof, even
if it were admitted as a motive. But is it really so to be admitted? Did
such a motive exist at all? Does it really follow--as has been taken
for granted--that Cesare must have remained an ecclesiastic had Gandia
lived? We cannot see that it does. Indeed, such evidence as there is,
when properly considered, points in the opposite direction, even if no
account is taken of the fact that this was not the first occasion on
which it was proposed that Cesare should abandon the ecclesiastical
career, as is shown by the Ferrarese ambassador’s dispatches of March
1493.

It is contended that Gandia was a stumbling-block to Cesare, and that
Gandia held the secular possessions which Cesare coveted; but if that
were really the case why, when eventually (some fourteen months after
Gandia’s death) Cesare doffed the purple to replace it by a soldier’s
harness, did he not assume the secular possessions that had been his
brother’s?

His dead brother’s lands and titles went to his dead brother’s son,
whilst Cesare’s career was totally different, as his aims were totally
different, from any that had been Gandia’s, or that might have been
Gandia’s had the latter lived. True, Cesare became Captain-General of
the Church in his dead brother’s place; but for that his brother’s death
was not necessary. Gandia had neither the will nor the intellect
to undertake the things that awaited Cesare. He was a soft-natured,
pleasure-loving youth, whose way of life was already mapped out for him.
His place was at Gandia, in Spain, and, whilst he might have continued
lord of all the possessions that were his, it would have been Cesare’s
to become Duke of Valentinois, and to have made himself master of
Romagna, precisely as he did.

In conclusion, Gandia’s death no more advanced, than his life could have
impeded, the career which Cesare afterwards made his own, and to say
that Cesare murdered him to supplant him is to set up a theory which the
subsequent facts of Cesare’s life will nowise justify.

It is idle of Gregorovius to say that the logic of the crime is
inexorable--in its assigning the guilt to Cesare--fatuous of him to
suppose that, as he claims, he has definitely proved Cesare to be his
brother’s murderer.

There is much against Cesare Borgia, but it never has been proved, and
never will be proved, that he was a fratricide. Indeed the few really
known facts of the murder all point to a very different conclusion--a
conclusion more or less obvious, which has been discarded, presumably
for no better reason than because it was obvious.

Where was all this need to go so far afield in quest of a probable
murderer imbued with political motives? Where the need to accuse in turn
every enemy that Gandia could possibly possess before finally fastening
upon his own brother?

Certain evidence is afforded by the known facts of the case, scant as
they are. It may not amount to much, but at least it is sufficient
to warrant a plausible conclusion, and there is no justification
for discarding it in favour of something for which not a particle of
evidence is forthcoming.

There is, first of all, the man in the mask to be accounted for. That
he is connected with the crime is eminently probable, if not absolutely
certain.

It is to be remembered that for a month--according to Burchard--he
had been in the habit of visiting Gandia almost daily. He comes to
Vannozza’s villa on the night of the murder. Is it too much to suppose
that he brought a message from some one from whom he was in the habit of
bringing messages?

He was seen last on the crupper of Gandia’s horse as the latter rode
away towards the Jewish quarter.(1) Gandia himself announced that he was
bound on pleasure--going to amuse himself. Even without the knowledge
which we possess of his licentious habits, no doubt could arise as to
the nature of the amusement upon which he was thus bound at dead of
night; and there are the conclusions formed in the morning by his
father, when it was found that Gandia had not returned.


  1  The Ghetto was not yet in existence.  It was not built until 1556,
under Paul IV.


Is it so very difficult to conceive that Gandia, in the course of the
assignation to which he went, should have fallen into the hands of
an irate father, husband, or brother? Is it not really the obvious
inference to draw from the few facts that we possess? That it was the
inference drawn by the Pope and clung to even some time after the
crime and while rumours of a different sort were rife, is shown by the
perquisition made in the house of Antonio Pico della Mirandola, who had
a daughter whom it was conceived might have been the object of the young
duke’s nocturnal visit, and whose house was near the place where Gandia
was flung into the Tiber.

We could hazard speculations that would account for the man in the mask,
but it is not our business to speculate save where the indications are
fairly clear.

Let us consider the significance of Gandia’s tied hands and the wounds
upon his body in addition to the mortal gash across his throat. To what
does this condition point? Surely not to a murder of expediency so much
as to a fierce, lustful butchery of vengeance. Surely it suggests that
Gandia may have been tortured before his throat was cut. Why else were
his wrists pinioned? Had he been swiftly done to death there would have
been no need for that. Had hired assassins done the work they would not
have stayed to pinion him, nor do we think they would have troubled to
fling him into the river; they would have slain and left him where he
fell.

The whole aspect of the case suggests the presence of the master, of the
personal enemy himself. We can conceive Gandia’s wrists being tied, to
the end that this personal enemy might do his will upon the wretched
young man, dealing him one by one the ten or fourteen wounds in the body
before making an end of him by cutting his throat. We cannot explain
the pinioned wrists in any other way. Then the man on the handsome white
horse, the man whom the four others addressed as men address their lord.
Remember his gold spurs--a trifle, perhaps; but hired assassins do not
wear gold spurs, even though their bestriding handsome white horses may
be explainable.

Surely that was the master, the personal enemy himself--and it was not
Cesare, for Cesare at the time was at the Vatican.

There we must leave the mystery of the murder of the Duke of Gandia; but
we leave it convinced that, such scant evidence as there is, points to
an affair of sordid gallantry, and nowise implicates his brother Cesare.




CHAPTER V. THE RENUNCIATION OF THE PURPLE


At the Consistory of June 19, 1497 the Sacred College beheld a
broken-hearted old man who declared that he had done with the world, and
that henceforth life could offer him nothing that should endear it to
him.

“A greater sorrow than this could not be ours, for we loved him
exceedingly, and now we can hold neither the Papacy nor any other thing
as of concern. Had we seven Papacies, we would give them all to restore
the duke to life.” So ran his bitter lament.

He denounced his course of life as not having been all that it should
have been, and appeared to see in the murder of his son a punishment
for the evil of his ways. Much has been made of this, and quite
unnecessarily. It has been taken eagerly as an admission of his
unparalleled guilt. An admission of guilt it undoubtedly was; but what
man is not guilty? and how many men--ay, and saints even--in the hour of
tribulation have cried out that they were being made to feel the wrath
of God for the sins that no man is without?

If humanity contains a type that would not have seen in such a cause for
sorrow a visitation of God, it is the type of inhuman monster to
which we are asked to believe that Alexander VI belonged. A sinner
unquestionably he was, and a great one; but a human sinner, and not an
incarnate devil, else there could have been no such outcry from him in
such an hour as this.

He announced that henceforth the spiritual needs of the Church should be
his only care. He inveighed against the corruption of the ecclesiastical
estate, confessing himself aware of how far it had strayed from the
ancient discipline and from the laws that had been framed to bridle
licence and cupidity, which were now rampant and unchecked; and he
proclaimed his intention to reform the Curia and the Church of Rome. To
this end he appointed a commission consisting of the Cardinal-Bishops
Oliviero Caraffa and Giorgio Costa, the Cardinal-Priests Antonietto
Pallavicino and Gianantonio Sangiorgio, and the Cardinal-Deacons
Francesco Piccolomini and Raffaele Riario.

There was even a suggestion that he was proposing to abdicate, but that
he was prevailed upon to do nothing until his grief should have abated
and his judgement be restored to its habitual calm. This suggestion,
however, rests upon no sound authority.

Letters of condolence reached him on every hand. Even his arch-enemy,
Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere, put aside his rancour in the face of the
Pope’s overwhelming grief--and also because it happened to consort with
his own interests, as will presently transpire. He wrote to Alexander
from France that he was truly pained to the very soul of him in his
concern for the Pope’s Holiness--a letter which, no doubt, laid the
foundations to the reconciliation that was toward between them.

Still more remarkable was it that the thaumaturgical Savonarola should
have paused in the atrabilious invective with which he was inflaming
Florence against the Pope, should have paused to send him a letter of
condolence in which he prayed that the Lord of all mercy might comfort
his Holiness in his tribulation.

That letter is a singular document; singularly human, yielding a
singular degree of insight into the nature of the man who penned it.
A whole chapter of intelligent speculation upon the character of
Savonarola, based upon a study of externals, could not reveal as much of
the mentality of that fanatical demagogue as the consideration of just
this letter.

The sympathy by which we cannot doubt it to have been primarily inspired
is here overspread by the man’s rampant fanaticism, there diluted by the
prophecies from which he cannot even now refrain; and, throughout, the
manner is that of the pulpit-thumping orator. The first half of his
letter is a prelude in the form of a sermon upon Faith, all very trite
and obvious; and the notion of this excommunicated friar holding forth
to the Pope’s Holiness in polemical platitudes delivered with all the
authority of inspired discoveries of his own is one more proof that at
the root of fanaticism in all ages and upon all questions, lies an utter
lack of a sense of fitness and proportion. Having said that “the just
man liveth in the Lord by faith,” and that “the Lord in His mercy
passeth over all our sins,” he proclaims that he announces things
of which he is assured, and for which he is ready to suffer all
persecutions, and begs his Holiness to turn a favourable eye upon the
work of faith in which he is labouring, and to give heed no more to the
impious, promising the Holy Father that thus shall the Lord bestow upon
him the essence of joy instead of the spirit of grief. Having begun, as
we have seen, with an assurance that “the Lord in His mercy passeth over
all our sins,” he concludes by prophesying, with questionable logic,
that “the thunders of His wrath will ere long be heard.” Nor does he
omit to mention--with an apparent arrogance that again betrays that same
want of a sense of proportion--that all his predictions are true.

His letter, however, and that of Cardinal della Rovere, among so
many others, show us how touched was the world by the Pope’s loss and
overwhelming grief, how shocked at the manner in which this had been
brought about.

The commission which Alexander had appointed for the work of reform had
meanwhile got to work, and the Cardinal of Naples edited the articles of
a constitution which was undoubtedly the object of prolonged study and
consideration, as is revealed by the numerous erasures and emendations
which it bears. Unfortunately--for reasons which are not apparent--it
was never published by Alexander. Possibly by the time that it was
concluded the aggrandizement of the temporal power was claiming his
entire attention to the neglect of the spiritual needs of the Holy See.
It is also possible--as has been abundantly suggested--that the stern
mood of penitence had softened with his sorrow, and was now overpast.

Nevertheless, it may have been some lingering remnant of this fervour of
reform that dictated the severe punishment which fell that year upon the
flagitious Bishop of Cosenza. A fine trade was being driven in Rome by
the sale of forged briefs of indulgence. Raynaldus cites a Bull on that
score addressed by Alexander, in the first year of his pontificate, to
the bishops of Spain, enjoining them to visit with punishment all who
in that kingdom should be discovered to be pursuing such a traffic. On
September 4, 1497, Burchard tells us, three servants of the Pontifical
Secretary, the Archbishop of Cosenza (Bartolomeo Florido) were arrested
in consequence of the discovery of twenty forged briefs issued by them.
In their examination they incriminated their master the archbishop, who
was consequently put upon his trial and found guilty. Alexander deposed,
degraded, and imprisoned him in Sant’ Angelo in a dark room, where
he was supplied with oil for his lamp and bread and water for his
nourishment until he died. His underlings were burnt in the Campo di
Fiori in the following month.

The Duke of Gandia left a widow and two children--Giovanni, a boy of
three years of age, and Isabella, a girl of two. In the interests of
her son, the widowed duchess applied to the Governor of Valencia in
the following September for the boy’s investiture in the rights of his
deceased father. This was readily granted upon authority from Rome, and
so the boy Giovanni was recognized as third Duke of Gandia, Prince
of Sessa and Teano, and Lord of Cerignola and Montefoscolo, and the
administration of his estates during his minority was entrusted to his
uncle, Cesare Borgia.

The Lordship of Benevento--the last grant made to Giovanni Borgia--was
not mentioned; nor was it then nor ever subsequently claimed by the
widow. It is the one possession of Gandia’s that went to Cesare, who was
confirmed in it by the King of Naples.

The Gandia branch of the Borgia family remained in Spain, prospered and
grew in importance, and, incidentally, produced St. Francis de Borgia.
This Duke of Gandia was Master of the Household to Charles V, and thus
a man of great worldly consequence; but it happened that he was so moved
by the sight of the disfigured body of his master’s beautiful queen
that he renounced the world and entered the Society of Jesus, eventually
becoming its General. He died in 1562, and in the fulness of time was
canonized.

Cesare’s departure for Naples as legate a latere to anoint and crown
Federigo of Aragon was naturally delayed by the tragedy that had
assailed his house, and not until July 22 did he take his leave of the
Pope and set out with an escort of two hundred horse.

Naples was still in a state of ferment, split into two parties, one of
which favoured France and the other Aragon, so that disturbances were
continual. Alexander expressed the hope that Cesare might appear in that
distracted kingdom in the guise of an “angel of peace,” and that by his
coronation of King Federigo he should set a term to the strife that was
toward.

The city of Naples itself was now being ravaged by fever, and in
consequence of this it was determined that Cesare should repair instead
to Capua, where Federigo would await him. Arrived there, however, Cesare
fell ill, and the coronation ceremony again suffered a postponement
until August 10. Cesare remained a fortnight in the kingdom, and on
August 22 set out to return to Rome, and his departure appears to have
been a matter of relief to Federigo, for so impoverished did the King
of Naples find himself that the entertainment of the legate and his
numerous escort had proved a heavy tax upon his flabby purse.

On the morning of September 6 all the cardinals in Rome received a
summons to attend at the Monastery of Santa Maria Nuova to welcome the
returned Cardinal of Valencia. In addition to the Sacred College all the
ambassadors of the Powers were present, and, after the celebration of
the Mass, the entire assembly proceeded to the Vatican, where the
Pope was waiting to receive his son. When the young cardinal presented
himself at the foot of the papal throne Alexander opened his arms to
him, embraced, and kissed him, speaking no word.

This rests upon the evidence of two eye-witnesses,(1) and the
circumstance has been urged and propounded into the one conclusive piece
of evidence that Cesare had murdered his brother, and that the Pope knew
it. In this you have some more of what Gregorovius terms “inexorable
logic.” He kissed him, but he spake no word to him; therefore, they
reason, Cesare murdered Gandia. Can absurdity be more absurd, fatuity
more fatuous? Lucus a non lucendo! To square the circle should surely
present no difficulty to these subtle logicians.


  1  “Non dixit verbum Pape Valentinus, nec Papa sibi, sed eo deosculato,
descendit de solio” (Burchard’s Diarium, and “Solo lo bació,” in letter
from Rome in Sanuto’s Diarii)


It was, as we have seen, in February of 1498 that it was first rumoured
that Cesare intended to put off the purple; and that the rumour had
ample foundation was plain from the circumstance that the Pope was
already laying plans whose fulfilment must be dependent upon that step,
and seeking to arrange a marriage for Cesare with Carlotta of Aragon,
King Federigo of Naples’s daughter, stipulating that her dowry should
be such that Cesare, in taking her to wife, should become Prince of
Altamura and Tarentum.

But Federigo showed himself unwilling, possibly in consideration of
the heavy dowry demanded and of the heavy draft already made by the
Borgias--through Giuffredo Borgia, Prince of Squillace--upon this Naples
which the French invasion had so impoverished. He gave out that he would
not have his daughter wedded to a priest who was the son of a priest and
that he would not give his daughter unless the Pope could contrive that
a cardinal might marry and yet retain his hat.

It all sounded as if he were actuated by nice scruples and high
principles; but the opinion is unfortunately not encouraged when we
find him, nevertheless, giving his consent to the marriage of his nephew
Alfonso to Lucrezia Borgia upon the pronouncement of her divorce from
Giovanni Sforza. The marriage, let us say in passing, was celebrated
at the Vatican on June 20, 1498, Lucrezia receiving a dowry of 40,000
ducats. But the astute Alexander saw to it that his family should
acquire more than it gave, and contrived that Alfonso should receive the
Neapolitan cities of Biselli and Quadrata, being raised to the title of
Prince of Biselli.

Nevertheless, there was a vast difference between giving in marriage a
daughter who must take a weighty dowry out of the kingdom and receiving
a daughter who would bring a handsome dowry with her. And the facts
suggest that such was the full measure of Federigo’s scruples.

Meanwhile, to dissemble his reluctance to let Cesare have his daughter
to wife, Federigo urged that he must first take the feeling of Ferdinand
and Isabella in this matter.

While affairs stood thus, Charles VIII died suddenly at Amboise in April
of that year 1498. Some work was being carried out there by artists whom
he had brought from Naples for the purpose, and, in going to visit this,
the king happened to enter a dark gallery, and struck his forehead so
violently against the edge of a door that he expired the same day--at
the age of twenty-eight. He was a poor, malformed fellow, as we have
seen, and “of little understanding,” Commines tells us, “but so good
that it would have been impossible to have found a kinder creature.”

With him the Valois dynasty came to an end. He was succeeded by his
cousin, the Duke of Orleans, who, upon his coronation at Rheims, assumed
the title of King of France and the Two Sicilies and Duke of Milan--a
matter which considerably perturbed Federigo of Aragon and Lodovico
Sforza. Each of these rulers saw in that assumption of his own title by
Louis XII a declaration of enmity, the prelude to a declaration of open
war; wherefore, deeming it idle to send their ambassadors to represent
them at the Court of France, they refrained from doing so.

Louis XII’s claim upon the Duchy of Milan was based upon his being the
grandson of Valentina Visconti, and, considering himself a Visconti, he
naturally looked upon the Sforza dominion as no better than a usurpation
which too long had been left undisturbed. To disturb it now was the
first aim of his kingship. And to this end, as well as in another
matter, the friendship of the Pope was very desirable to Louis.

The other matter concerned his matrimonial affairs. No sooner did he
find himself King of France than he applied to Rome for the dissolution
of his marriage with Jeanne de Valois, the daughter of Louis XI. The
grounds he urged were threefold: Firstly, between himself and Jeanne
there existed a relationship of the fourth degree and a spiritual
affinity, resulting from the fact that her father, Louis XI, had
held him at the baptismal font--which before the Council of Trent
did constitute an impediment to marriage. Secondly, he had not been a
willing party to the union, but had entered into it as a consequence of
intimidation from the terrible Louis XI, who had threatened his life
and possessions if not obeyed in this. Thirdly, Jeanne laboured under
physical difficulties which rendered her incapable of maternity.

Of such a nature was the appeal he made to Alexander, and Alexander
responded by appointing a commission presided over by the Cardinal of
Luxembourg, and composed of that same cardinal and the Bishops of Albi
and Ceuta, assisted by five other bishops as assessors, to investigate
the king’s grievance. There appears to be no good reason for assuming
that the inquiry was not conducted fairly and honourably or that the
finding of the bishops and ultimate annulment of the marriage was not in
accordance with their consciences. We are encouraged to assume that all
this was indeed so, when we consider that Jeanne de Valois submitted
without protest to the divorce, and that neither then nor subsequently
at any time did she prefer any complaint, accepting the judgement, it is
presumable, as a just and fitting measure.

She applied to the Pope for permission to found a religious order, whose
special aim should be the adoration and the emulation of the perfections
of the Blessed Virgin, a permission which Alexander very readily
accorded her. He was, himself, imbued with a very special devotion for
the Mother of the Saviour. We see the spur of this special devotion of
his in the votive offering of a silver effigy to her famous altar of the
Santissima Nunziata in Florence, which he had promised in the event of
Rome being freed from Charles VIII. Again, after the accident of the
collapse of a roof in the Vatican, in which he narrowly escaped death,
it is to Santa Maria Nuova that we see him going in procession to hold
a solemn thanksgiving service to Our Lady. In a dozen different ways
did that devotion find expression during his pontificate; and be it
remembered that Catholics owe it to Alexander VI that the Angelus-bell
is rung thrice daily in honour of the Blessed Virgin.

To us this devotion to the Mother of Chastity on the part of a churchman
openly unchaste in flagrant subversion of his vows is a strange and
incongruous spectacle. But the incongruity of it is illumining. It
reveals Alexander’s simple attitude towards the sins of the flesh,
and shows how, in common with most churchmen of his day, he found no
conscientious difficulty in combining fervid devotion with perfervid
licence. Whatever it may seem by ours, by his lights--by the light of
the examples about him from his youth, by the light of the precedents
afforded him by his predecessors in St. Peter’s Chair--his conduct was
a normal enough affair, which can have afforded him little with which to
reproach himself.

In the matter of the annulment of the marriage of Louis XII it is to
be conceded that Alexander made the most of the opportunity it afforded
him. He perceived that the moment was propitious for enlisting the
services of the King of France to the achievement of his own ends, more
particularly to further the matter of the marriage of Cesare Borgia
with Carlotta of Aragon, who was being reared at the Court of France.
Accordingly Alexander desired the Bishop of Ceuta to lay his wishes in
the matter before the Christian King, and, to the end that Cesare might
find a fitting secular estate awaiting him when eventually he emerged
from the clergy, the Pope further suggested to Louis, through the
bishop’s agency, that Cesare should receive the investiture of the
counties of Valentinois and Dyois in Dauphiny. On the face of it this
wears the look of inviting bribery. In reality it scarcely amounted
to so much, although the opportunism that prompted the request is
undeniable. Yet it is worthy of consideration that in what concerned the
counties of Valentinois and Dyois, the Pope’s suggestion constituted
a wise political step. These territories had been in dispute between
France and the Holy See for a matter of some two hundred years, during
which the Popes had been claiming dominion over them. The claims had
been admitted by Louis XI, who had relinquished the counties to the
Church; but shortly after his death the Parliament of Dauphiny had
restored them to the crown of France. Charles VIII and Innocent VIII had
wrangled over them, and an arbitration was finally projected, but never
held.

Alexander now perceived a way to solve the difficulty by a compromise
which should enrich his son and give the latter a title to replace that
of cardinal which he was to relinquish. So his proposal to Louis XII was
that the Church should abandon its claim upon the territories, whilst
the king, raising Valentinois to the dignity of a duchy, should so
confer it upon Cesare Borgia.

Although the proposal was politically sound, it constituted at the same
time an act of flagrant nepotism. But let us bear in mind that Alexander
did not lack a precedent for this particular act. When Louis XI had
surrendered Valentinois to Sixtus IV, this Pope had bestowed it upon
his nephew Girolamo, thereby vitiating any claim that the Holy See
might subsequently have upon the territory. We judge it--under the
circumstances that Louis XI had surrendered it to the Church--to be a
far more flagrant piece of nepotism than was Alexander’s now.

Louis XII, nothing behind the Pope in opportunism, saw in the concession
asked of him the chance of acquiring Alexander’s good-will. He
consented, accompanying his consent by a request for a cardinal’s hat
for Georges d’Amboise, Bishop of Rouen, who had been his devoted friend
in less prosperous times, and the sharer of his misfortunes under
the previous reign, and was now his chief counsellor and minister. In
addition he besought--dependent, of course, upon the granting of
the solicited divorce--a dispensation to marry Anne of Brittany, the
beautiful widow of Charles VIII. This was Louis’s way of raising the
price, as it were, of the concession and services asked of him; yet,
that there might be no semblance of bargaining, his consent to Cesare’s
being created Duke of Valentinois was simultaneous with his request for
further favours.

With the Royal Patents conferring that duchy upon the Pope’s son, Louis
de Villeneuve reached Rome on August 7, 1498. On the same day the young
cardinal came before the Sacred College, assembled in Consistory, to
crave permission to doff the purple.

After the act of adoration of the Pope’s Holiness, he humbly submitted
to his brother cardinals that his inclinations had ever been in
opposition to his embracing the ecclesiastical dignity, and that, if he
had entered upon it at all, this had been solely at the instances of his
Holiness, just as he had persevered in it to gratify him; but that, his
inclinations and desires for the secular estate persisting, he implored
the Holy Father, of his clemency, to permit him to put off his habit and
ecclesiastical rank, to restore his hat and benefices to the Church, and
to grant him dispensation to return to the world and be free to contract
marriage. And he prayed the very reverend cardinals to use their good
offices on his behalf, adding to his own their intercessions to the
Pope’s Holiness to accord him the grace he sought.

The cardinals relegated the decision of the matter to the Pope. Cardinal
Ximenes alone--as the representative of Spain--stood out against the
granting of the solicited dispensation, and threw obstacles in the way
of it. In this, no doubt, he obeyed his instructions from Ferdinand and
Isabella, who saw to the bottom of the intrigue with France that was
toward, and of the alliance that impended between Louis XII and the Holy
See--an alliance not at all to the interests of Spain.

The Pope made a speedy rout of the cardinal’s objections with the most
apostolic and irresistible of all weapons. He pointed out that it was
not for him to hinder the Cardinal of Valencia’s renunciation of the
purple, since that renunciation was clearly become necessary for the
salvation of his soul--“Pro salutae animae suae”--to which, of course,
Ximenes had no answer.

But, with the object of conciliating Spain, this ever-politic Pope
indicated that, if Cesare was about to become a prince of France, his
many ecclesiastical benefices, yielding some 35,000 gold florins yearly,
being mostly in Spain, would be bestowed upon Spanish churchmen, and he
further begged Ximenes to remember that he already had a “nephew” at the
Court of Spain in the person of the heir of Gandia, whom he particularly
commended to the favour of Ferdinand and Isabella.

Thus was Cesare Borgia’s petition granted, and his return to the world
accomplished. And, by a strange chance of homonymy, his title remained
unchanged despite his change of estate. The Cardinal of Valencia, in
Spain, became the Duke of Valence--or Valentinois--in France and in
Italy Valentino remained Valentino.





BOOK III. THE BULL RAMPANT

“Cum numine Caesaris omen.”

(motto on Cesare Borgia’s sword.)





CHAPTER I. THE DUCHESS OF VALENTINOIS


King Louis XII dispatched the Sieur de Sarenon by sea, with a fleet of
three ships and five galleys, to the end that he should conduct the
new duke to France, which fleet was delayed so that it did not drop its
anchors at Ostia until the end of September.

Meanwhile, Cesare’s preparations for departure had been going forward,
and were the occasion of a colossal expenditure on the part of his sire.
For the Pope desired that his son, in going to France to assume his
estate, and for the further purposes of marrying a wife, of conveying
to Louis the dispensation permitting his marriage with Anne of Brittany,
and of bearing the red hat to Amboise, should display the extraordinary
magnificence for which the princes of cultured and luxurious Italy were
at the time renowned.

His suite consisted of fully a hundred attendants, what with
esquires, pages, lacqueys and grooms, whilst twelve chariots and fifty
sumpter-mules were laden with his baggage. The horses of his followers
were all sumptuously caparisoned with bridles and stirrups of solid
silver; and, for the rest, the splendour of the liveries, the weapons
and the jewels, and the richness of the gifts he bore with him were the
amazement even of that age of dazzling displays.

In Cesare’s train went Ramiro de Lorqua, the Master of his Household;
Agabito Gherardi, his secretary; and his Spanish physician, Gaspare
Torella--the only medical man of his age who had succeeded in
discovering a treatment for the pudendagra which the French had left in
Italy, and who had dedicated to Cesare his learned treatise upon that
disease.

As a body-guard, or escort of honour, Cesare took with him thirty
gentlemen, mostly Romans, among whom were Giangiordano Orsini, Pietro
Santa Croce, Mario di Mariano, Domenico Sanguigna, Giulio Alberini,
Bartolomeo Capranica, and Gianbattista Mancini--all young, and all
members of those patrician families which Alexander VI had skilfully
attached to his own interest.

The latest of these was the Orsini family, with which an alliance was
established by the marriage celebrated at the Vatican on September 28 of
that same year between Fabio Orsini and Girolama Borgia, a niece of the
Pope’s.

Cesare’s departure took place on October 1, in the early morning, when
he rode out with his princely retinue, and followed the Tiber along
Trastevere, without crossing the city. He was mounted on a handsome
charger, caparisoned in red silk and gold brocade--the colours of
France, in which he had also dressed his lacqueys. He wore a doublet
of white damask laced with gold, and carried a mantle of black velvet
swinging from his shoulders. Of black velvet, too, was the cap on his
auburn head, its sable colour an effective background for the ruddy
effulgence of the great rubies--“as large as beans”--with which it was
adorned.

Of the gentlemen who followed him, the Romans were dressed in the French
mode, like himself, whilst the Spaniards adhered to the fashions of
their native Spain.

He was escorted as far as the end of the Banchi by four cardinals, and
from a window of the Vatican the Pope watched the imposing cavalcade
and followed it with his eyes until it was lost to view, weeping, we
are told, for very joy at the contemplation of the splendour and
magnificence which it had been his to bestow upon his beloved son--“the
very heart of him,” as he wrote to the King of France in that letter of
which Cesare was the bearer.

On October 12 the Duke of Valentinois landed at Marseilles, where he was
received by the Bishop of Dijon, whom the king had sent to meet him, and
who now accompanied the illustrious visitor to Avignon. There Cesare
was awaited by the Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere. This prelate was now
anxious to make his peace with Alexander--and presently we shall look
into the motives that probably inspired him, a matter which has so far,
we fancy, escaped criticism for reasons that we shall also strive to
make apparent. To the beginnings of a reconciliation with the Pontiff
afforded by his touching letter of condolence on the death of the Duke
of Gandia, he now added a very cordial reception and entertainment of
Cesare; and throughout his sojourn in France the latter received at
the hands of della Rovere the very friendliest treatment, the cardinal
missing no opportunity of working in the duke’s interests and for the
advancement of his ends.

The Pope wrote to the cardinal commending Cesare to his good graces, and
the cardinal replied with protestations which he certainly proceeded to
make good.

Della Rovere was to escort Cesare to the king, who was with his Court
then at Chinon, awaiting the completion of the work that was being
carried out at his Castle of Blois, which presently became his chief
residence. But Cesare appears to have tarried in Avignon, for he was
still there at the end of October, nor did he reach Chinon until the
middle of December. The pomp of his entrance was a thing stupendous. We
find a detailed relation of it in Brantôme, translated into prose
form some old verses which, he tells us, that he found in the family
treasury. He complains of their coarseness, and those who are acquainted
with the delightful old Frenchman’s own frankness of expression may
well raise their brows at that criticism of his. Whatever the coarse
liberties taken with the subject--of which we are not allowed more than
an occasional glimpse--and despite the fact that the relation was
in verse, which ordinarily makes for the indulgence of the rhymer’s
fancy--the description appears to be fairly accurate, for it corresponds
more or less with the particulars given in Sanuto.

At the head of the cavalcade went twenty-four sumpter-mules, laden with
coffers and other baggage under draperies embroidered with Cesare’s
arms--prominent among which would be the red bull, the emblem of his
house, and the three-pointed flame, his own particular device. Behind
these came another twenty-four mules, caparisoned in the king’s colours
of scarlet and gold, to be followed in their turn by sixteen beautiful
chargers led by hand, similarly caparisoned, and their bridles and
stirrups of solid silver. Next came eighteen pages on horseback, sixteen
of whom were in scarlet and yellow, whilst the remaining two were in
cloth of gold. These were followed by a posse of lacqueys in the same
liveries and two mules laden with coffers draped with cloth of gold,
which contained the gifts of which Cesare was the bearer. Behind these
rode the duke’s thirty gentlemen, in cloth of gold and silver, and
amongst them came the duke himself.

Cesare was mounted on a superb war-horse that was all empanoplied in a
cuirass of gold leaves of exquisite workmanship, its head surmounted
by a golden artichoke, its tail confined in a net of gold abundantly
studded with pearls. The duke was in black velvet, through the slashings
of which appeared the gold brocade of the undergarment. Suspended from
a chain said by Brantôme’s poet to be worth thirty thousand ducats, a
medallion of diamonds blazed upon his breast, and in his black velvet
cap glowed those same wonderful rubies that we saw on the occasion of
his departure from Rome. His boots were of black velvet, laced with gold
thread that was studded with gems.

The rear of the cavalcade was brought up by more mules and the chariots
bearing his plate and tents and all the other equipage with which a
prince was wont to travel.

It is said by some that his horse was shod with solid gold, and there is
also a story--pretty, but probably untrue--that some of his mules were
shod in the same metal, and that, either because the shoes were loosely
attached of intent, or because the metal, being soft, parted readily
from the hoofs, these golden shoes were freely cast and left as largesse
for those who might care to take them.

The Bishop of Rouen--that same Georges d’Amboise for whom he was
bringing the red hat--the Seneschal of Toulouse and several gentlemen
of the Court went to meet him on the bridge, and escorted him up through
the town to the castle, where the king awaited him. Louis XII gave him
a warm and cordial welcome, showing him then and thereafter the
friendliest consideration. Not so, however, the lady he was come to woo.
It was said in Venice that she was in love with a young Breton gentleman
in the following of Queen Anne. Whether this was true, and Carlotta
acted in the matter in obedience to her own feelings, or whether she
was merely pursuing the instructions she had received from Naples, she
obstinately and absolutely refused to entertain or admit the suit of
Cesare.

Della Rovere, on January 18, wrote to the Pope from Nantes, whither the
Court had moved, a letter in which he sang the praises of the young Duke
of Valentinois.

“By his modesty his readiness, his prudence, and his other virtues he
has known how to earn the affections of every one.” Unfortunately, there
was one important exception, as the cardinal was forced to add: “The
damsel, either out of her own contrariness, or because so induced by
others, which is easier to believe, constantly refuses to hear of the
wedding.”

Della Rovere was quite justified in finding it easier to believe that
Carlotta was acting upon instructions from others, for, when hard
pressed to consent to the alliance, she demanded that the Neapolitan
ambassador should himself say that her father desired her to do so--a
statement which, it seems, the ambassador could not bring himself to
make.

Baffled by the persistence of that refusal, Cesare all but returned a
bachelor to Italy. So far, indeed, was his departure a settled matter
that in February of 1489, at the Castle of Loches, he received the
king’s messages for the Pope. Yet Louis hesitated to let him go without
having bound his Holiness to his own interests by stronger bonds.

In the task of tracing the annals of the Borgias, the honest seeker
after truth is compelled to proceed axe in hand that he may hack himself
a way through the tangle of irresponsible or malicious statements that
have grown up about this subject, driving their roots deep into the
soil of history. Not a single chance does malignity, free or chartered,
appear to have missed for the invention of flagitious falsehoods
concerning this family, or for the no less flagitious misinterpretation
of known facts.

Amid a mass of written nonsense dealing with Cesare’s sojourn in France
is the oft-repeated, totally unproven statement that he withheld from
Louis the dispensation enabling the latter to marry Anne of Brittany,
until such time as he should have obtained from Louis all that he
desired of him--in short, that he sold him the dispensation for the
highest price he could extract. The only motive served by this statement
is once more to show Alexander and his son in the perpetration of
simoniacal practices, and the statement springs, beyond doubt, from a
passage in Macchiavelli’s Extracts from Dispatches to the Ten. Elsewhere
has been mentioned the confusion prevailing in those extracts, and their
unreliability as historical evidences. That circumstance can be now
established. The passage in question runs as follows:

“This dispensation was given to Valentinois when he went to France
without any one being aware of its existence, with orders to sell it
dearly to the king, and not until satisfied of the wife and his other
desires. And, whilst these things were toward, the king learnt from the
Bishop of Ceuta that the dispensation already existed, and so, without
having received or even seen it the marriage was celebrated, and
for revealing this the Bishop of Ceuta was put to death by order of
Valentinois.”

Now, to begin with, Macchiavelli admits that what passed between Pope
and duke was secret. How, then, does he pretend to possess these
details of it? But, leaving that out of the question, his statement--so
abundantly repeated by later writers--is traversed by every one of the
actual facts of the case.

That there can have been no secret at all about the dispensation is made
plain by the fact that Manfredi, the Ferrarese ambassador, writes of it
to Duke Ercole on October 2--the day after Cesare’s departure from Rome.
And as for the death of Fernando d’Almeida Bishop of Ceuta, this did not
take place then, nor until two years later (on January 7, 1499) at the
siege of Forli, whither he had gone in Cesare’s train--as is related in
Bernardi’s Chronicles and Bonoli’s history of that town.

To return to the matter of Cesare’s imminent departure unwed from
France, Louis XII was not the only monarch to whom this was a source
of anxiety. Keener far was the anxiety experienced on that score by the
King of Naples, who feared that its immediate consequence would be to
drive the Holy Father into alliance with Venice, which was paying its
court to him at the time and with that end in view. Eager to conciliate
Alexander in this hour of peril, Federigo approached him with
alternative proposals, and offered to invest Cesare in the
principalities of Salerno and Sanseverino, which had been taken from the
rebel barons. To this the Pope might have consented, but that, in the
moment of considering it, letters reached him from Cesare which made him
pause.

Louis XII had also discovered an alternative to the marriage of Cesare
with Carlotta, and one that should more surely draw the Pope into the
alliance with Venice and himself.

Among the ladies of the Court of Queen Anne--Louis had now been wedded
a month--there were, besides Carlotta, two other ladies either of whom
might make Cesare a suitable duchess. One of these was a niece of the
king’s, the daughter of the Comte de Foix; the other was Charlotte
d’Albret, a daughter of Alain d’Albret, Duc de Guyenne, and sister to
the King of Navarre. Between these two Cesare was now given to choose by
Louis, and his choice fell upon Charlotte.

She was seventeen years of age and said to be the most beautiful maid
in France, and she had been reared at the honourable and pious Court of
Jeanne de Valois, whence she had passed into that of Anne of Brittany,
which latter, says Hilarion de Coste,(1) was “a school of virtue, an
academy of honour.”


  1  Éloges et vies des Reynes, Princesses, etc.


Negotiations for her hand were opened with Alain, who, it is said, was
at first unwilling, but in the end won over to consent. Navarre had need
of the friendship of the King of France, that it might withstand the
predatory humours of Castille; and so, for his son’s sake, Alain could
not long oppose the wishes of Louis. Considering closely the pecuniary
difficulties under which this Alain d’Albret was labouring and his
notorious avarice, one is tempted to conclude that such difficulties
as he may have made were dictated by his reduced circumstances, his
impossibility, or unwillingness, to supply his daughter with a dowry
fitting her rank, and an unworthy desire to drive in the matter the best
bargain possible. And this is abundantly confirmed by the obvious care
and hard-headed cunning with which the Sieur d’Albret investigated
Cesare’s circumstances and sources of revenue to verify their values to
be what was alleged.

Eventually he consented to endow her with 30,000 livres Tournois (90,000
francs) to be paid as follows: 6,000 livres on the celebration of the
marriage, and the balance by annual instalments of 1,500 livres until
cleared off. This sum, as a matter of fact, represented her portion of
the inheritance from her deceased mother, Françoise de Bretagne, and it
was tendered subject to her renouncing all rights and succession in any
property of her father’s or her said deceased mother’s.

Thus is it set forth in the contract drawn up by Alain at Castel-Jaloux
on March 23, 1499, which contract empowers his son Gabriel and one
Regnault de St. Chamans to treat and conclude the marriage urged by the
king between the Duke of Valentinois and Alain’s daughter, Charlotte
d’Albret. But that was by no means all. Among other conditions imposed
by Alain, he stipulated that the Pope should endow his daughter with
100,000 livres Tournois, and that for his son, Amanieu d’Albret,
there should be a cardinal’s hat--for the fulfilment of both of which
conditions Cesare took it upon himself to engage his father.

On April 15 the treaty between France and Venice was signed at Blois.
It was a defensive and offensive alliance directed against all, with the
sole exception of the reigning Pontiff, who should have the faculty to
enter into it if he so elected. This was the first decisive step against
the House of Sforza, and so secretly were the negotiations conducted
that Lodovico Sforza’s first intimation of them resulted from the
capture in Milanese territory of a courier from the Pope with letters to
Cesare in France. From these he learnt, to his dismay, not only of the
existence of the league, but that the Pope had joined it. The immediate
consequence of this positive assurance that Alexander had gone over to
Sforza’s enemies was Ascanio Sforza’s hurried departure from Rome on
July 13.

In the meantime Cesare’s marriage had followed almost immediately upon
the conclusion of the treaty. The nuptials were celebrated on May 12,
and on the 19th he received at the hands of the King of France the
knightly Order of St. Michael, which was then the highest honour
that France could confer. When the news of this reached the Pope he
celebrated the event in Rome with public festivities and illuminations.

Of Cesare’s courtship we have no information. The fact that the marriage
was purely one of political expediency would tend to make us conceive it
as invested with that sordid lovelessness which must so often attend the
marriages of princes. But there exists a little data from which we may
draw certain permissible inferences. This damsel of seventeen was said
to be the loveliest in France, and there is more than a suggestion in
Le Feron’s De Gestis Regnum Gallorum, that Cesare was by no means
indifferent to her charms. He tells us that the Duke of Valentinois
entered into the marriage very heartily, not only for the sake of its
expediency, but for “the beauty of the lady, which was equalled by her
virtues and the sweetness of her nature.”

Cesare, we have it on more than one authority, was the handsomest man
of his day. The gallantry of his bearing merited the approval of so
fastidious a critic in such matters as Baldassare Castiglione, who
mentions it in his Il Cortigiano. Of his personal charm there is also no
lack of commendation from those who had his acquaintance at this time.
Added to this, his Italian splendour and flamboyance may well have
dazzled a maid who had been reared amid the grey and something stern
tones of the Court of Jeanne de Valois.

And so it may well be that they loved, and that they were blessed in
their love for the little space allotted them in each other’s company.
The sequel justifies in a measure the assumption. Just one little summer
out of the span of their lives--brief though those lives were--did they
spend together, and it is good to find some little evidence that, during
that brief season at least, they inhabited life’s rose-garden.

In September--just four short months after the wedding-bells had pealed
above them--the trumpets of war blared out their call to arms. Louis’s
preparations for the invasion of Milan were complete and he poured his
troops through Piedmont under the command of Giangiacomo Trivulzio.

Cesare was to accompany Louis into Italy. He appointed his
seventeen-year-old duchess governor and administrator of his lands and
lordships in France and Dauphiny under a deed dated September 8, and
he made her heiress to all his moveable possessions in the event of his
death. Surely this bears some witness, not only to the prevailing of
a good understanding between them, but to his esteem of her and the
confidence he reposed in her mental qualities. The rest her later
mourning of him shows.

Thus did Cesare take leave of the young wife whom he was never to see
again. Their child--born in the following spring--he was never to see at
all. The pity of it! Ambition-driven, to fulfil the destiny expected of
him, he turned his back upon that pleasant land of Dauphiny where the
one calm little season of his manhood had been spent, where happiness
and peace might have been his lifelong portion had he remained. He set
his face towards Italy and the storm and stress before him, and in the
train of King Louis he set out upon the turbulent meteoric course that
was to sear so deep and indelible a brand across the scroll of history.




CHAPTER II. THE KNELL OF THE TYRANTS


In the hour of his need Lodovico Sforza found himself without friends
or credit, and he had to pay the price of the sly, faithless egotistical
policy he had so long pursued with profit.

His far-reaching schemes were flung into confusion because a French king
had knocked his brow against a door, and had been succeeded by one who
conceived that he had a legal right to the throne of Milan, and the
intent and might to enforce it, be the right legal or not. It was in
vain now that Lodovico turned to the powers of Italy for assistance,
in vain that his cunning set fresh intrigues afoot. His neighbours had
found him out long since; he had played fast and loose with them too
often, and there was none would trust him now.

Thus he found himself isolated, and in no case to withstand the French
avalanche which rolled down upon his duchy. The fall of Milan was a
matter of days; of resistance there was practically none. Town after
town threw up its gates to the invaders, and Lodovico, seeing himself
abandoned on all sides, sought in flight the safety of his own person.

Cesare took no part in the war, which, after all, was no war--no more
than an armed progress. He was at Lyons with the King, and he did not
move into Italy until Louis went to take possession of his new duchy.

Amid the acclamations of the ever-fickle mob, hailing him as its
deliverer, Louis XII rode triumphantly into Milan on October 6, attended
by a little host of princes, including the Prince of Savoy, the Dukes
of Montferrat and Ferrara, and the Marquis of Mantua. But the place of
honour went to Cesare Borgia, who rode at the king’s side, a brilliant
and arresting figure. This was the occasion on which Baldassare
Castiglione--who was in the Marquis of Mantua’s suite--was moved to such
praise of the appearance and gallant bearing of the duke, and of the
splendid equipment of his suite, which outshone those of all that little
host of attendant princes.

From this time onward Cesare signs himself “Cesare Borgia of France,”
 and quarters on his shield the golden lilies of France with the red bull
of the House of Borgia.

The conditions on which Alexander VI joined the league of France and
Venice became apparent at about this time. They were to be gathered from
the embassy of his nephew, the Cardinal Giovanni Borgia, to Venice in
the middle of September. There the latter announced to the Council of
Ten that the Pope’s Holiness aimed at the recovery to the Church of
those Romagna tyrannies which originally were fiefs of the Holy See
and held by her vicars, who, however, had long since repudiated the
Pontifical authority, refused the payment of their tributes, and in some
instances had even gone so far as to bear arms against the Church.

With one or two exceptions the violent and evil misgovernment of these
turbulent princelings was a scandal to all Italy. They ruled by rapine
and murder, and rendered Romagna little better than a nest of brigands.
Their state of secession from the Holy See arose largely out of the
nepotism practised by the last Popes--a nepotism writers are too prone
to overlook when charging Alexander with the same abuse. Such Popes as
Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII had broken up the States of the Church that
they might endow their children and their nephews. The nepotism of such
as these never had any result but to impoverish the Holy See; whilst, on
the other hand, the nepotism of Alexander--this Pope who is held up
to obloquy as the archetype of the nepotist--had a tendency rather to
enrich it. It was not to the States of the Church, not by easy ways
of plundering the territories of the Holy See, that he turned to found
dominions and dynasties for his children. He went beyond and outside of
them, employing princely alliances as the means to his ends. Gandia
was a duke in Spain; Giuffredo a prince in Naples, and Cesare a duke
in France. For none of these could it be said that territories had
been filched from Rome, whilst the alliances made for them were such
as tended to strengthen the power of the Pope, and, therefore, of the
Church.

The reconsolidation of the States of the Church, the recovery of
her full temporal power, which his predecessors had so grievously
dissipated, had ever been Alexander’s aim; Louis XII afforded him, at
last, his opportunity, since with French aid the thing now might be
attempted.

His son Cesare was the Hercules to whom was to be given the labour of
cleaning out the Augean stable of the Romagna.

That Alexander may have been single-minded in his purpose has never
been supposed. It might, indeed, be to suppose too much; and the general
assumption that, from the outset, his chief aim was to found a powerful
State for his son may be accepted. But let us at least remember that
such had been the aims of several Popes before him. Sixtus IV and
Innocent VIII had similarly aimed at founding dynasties in Romagna for
their families, but, lacking the talents and political acuteness of
Alexander and a son of the mettle and capacity of Cesare Borgia, the
feeble trail of their ambition is apt to escape attention. It is also to
be remembered that, whatever Alexander’s ulterior motive, the immediate
results of the campaign with which he inspired his son were to reunite
to the Church the States which had fallen away from her, and to
re-establish her temporal sway in the full plenitude of its dominion.
However much he may have been imbued with the desire to exalt and
aggrandize his children politically, he did nothing that did not at the
same time make for the greater power and glory of the Church.

His formidable Bull published in October set forth how, after trial, it
had been found that the Lords or Vicars of Rimini, Pesaro, Imola, Forli,
Camerino and Faenza, with other feudatories of the Holy See (including
the duchy of Urbino) had never paid the yearly tribute due to the
Church, wherefore he, by virtue of his apostolic authority, deprived
them of all their rights, and did declare them so deprived.

It has been said again and again that this Bull amounting to a
declaration of war, was no more than a pretext to indulge his rapacity;
but surely it bears the impress of a real grievance, and, however
blameable the results that followed out of it, for the measure itself
there were just and ample grounds.

The effect of that Bull, issued at a moment when Cesare stood at arms
with the might of France at his back, ready to enforce it, was naturally
to throw into a state of wild dismay these Romagna tyrants whose
acquaintance we shall make at closer quarters presently in the course of
following Cesare’s campaign. Cesare Borgia may have been something of a
wolf; but you are not to suppose that the Romagna was a fold of lambs.

Giovanni Sforza--Cesare’s sometime brother-in­law, and Lord of
Pesaro--flies in hot haste to Venice for protection. There are no
lengths to which he will not go to thwart the Borgias in their purpose,
to save his tyranny from falling into the power of this family which he
hates most rabidly, and of which he says that, having robbed him of his
honour, it would now deprive him of his possessions. He even offers to
make a gift of his dominions to the Republic.

There was much traders’ blood in Venice, and, trader-like, she was avid
of possessions. You can surmise how she must have watered at the mouth
to see so fine a morsel cast thus into her lap, and yet to know that
the consumption of it might beget a woeful indigestion. Venice shook her
head regretfully. She could not afford to quarrel with her ally, King
Louis, and so she made answer--a thought contemptuously, it seems--that
Giovanni should have made his offer while he was free to do so.

The Florentines exerted themselves to save Forli from the fate that
threatened it. They urged a league of Bologna, Ferrara, Forli, Piombino,
and Siena for their common safety--a proposal which came to nothing,
probably because Ferrara and Siena, not being threatened by the Bull,
saw no reason why, for the sake of others, they should call down upon
themselves the wrath of the Borgias and their mighty allies.

Venice desired to save Faenza, whose tyrant, Manfredi, was also
attainted for non-payment of his tributes, and to this end the Republic
sent an embassy to Rome with the moneys due. But the Holy Father refused
the gold, declaring that it was too late for payment.

Forli’s attempt to avert the danger was of a different sort, and not
exerted until this danger--in the shape of Cesare himself--stood in
arms beneath her walls. Two men, both named Tommaso--though it does not
transpire that they were related--one a chamberlain of the Palace
of Forli, the other a musician, were so devoted to the Countess
Sforza-Riario, the grim termagant who ruled the fiefs of her murdered
husband, Girolamo Riario, as to have undertaken an enterprise from which
they cannot have hoped to emerge with their lives. It imported no less
than the murder of the Pope. They were arrested on November 21, and
in the possession of one of them was found a hollow cane containing
a letter “so impregnated with poison that even to unfold it would be
dangerous.” This letter was destined for the Holy Father.

The story reads like a gross exaggeration emanating from men who, on the
subject of poisoning, display the credulity of the fifteenth century, so
ignorant in these matters and so prone to the fantastic. And our minds
receive a shock upon learning that, when put to the question,
these messengers actually made a confession--upon which the story
rests--admitting that they had been sent by the countess to slay the
Pope, in the hope that thus Forli might be saved to the Riarii. At first
we conclude that those wretched men, examined to the accompaniment
of torture, confessed whatever was required of them, as so frequently
happened in such cases. Such, indeed, is the very explanation advanced
by more than one writer, coupled with the suggestion, in some instances,
that the whole affair was trumped up by the Pope to serve his own ends.

They will believe the wildest and silliest of poisoning stories (such as
those of Djem and Cardinal Giovanni Borgia) which reveal the Borgias
as the poisoners; but, let another be accused and the Borgias be the
intended victims, and at once they grow rational, and point out to you
the wildness of the statement, the impossibility of its being true. Yet
it is a singular fact that a thorough investigation of this case of the
Countess Sforza-Riario’s poisoned letter reveals it to be neither wild
nor impossible but simply diabolical. The explanation of the matter
is to be found in Andrea Bernardi’s Chronicles of Forli. He tells us
exactly how the thing was contrived, with a precision of detail which we
could wish to see emulated by other contemporaries of his who so lightly
throw out accusations of poisoning. He informs us that a deadly and
infectious disease was rampant in Forli in that year 1499, and that,
before dispatching her letter to the Pope, the Countess caused it to be
placed upon the body of one who was sick of this infection--thus hoping
to convey it to his Holiness.(1)


  1  “Dite litre lei le aveva fate tocare et tenere adose ad uno nostro
infetado.”--Andrea Bernardi (Cronache di Forli).


Alexander held a thanksgiving service for his escape at Santa Maria
della Pace, and Cardinal Raffaele Riario fled precipitately from Rome,
justly fearful of being involved in the papal anger that must fall upon
his house.

By that time, however, Cesare had already taken the field. The support
of Louis, conqueror of Milan, had been obtained, and in this Cardinal
Giuliano della Rovere had once more been helpful to the Borgias.

His reconciliation with the Pope, long since deserved by the services he
had rendered the House of Borgia in forwarding Cesare’s aims, as we
have seen, was completed now by an alliance which bound the two families
together. His nephew, Francesco della Rovere, had married Alexander’s
niece, Angela Borgia.

There is a letter from Giuliano to the Pope, dated October 12, 1499, in
which he expresses his deep gratitude in the matter of this marriage,
which naturally redounded to the advantage of his house, and pledges
himself to exert all the influence which he commands with Louis XII for
the purpose of furthering the Duke of Valentinois’ wishes. So well does
he keep this promise that we see him utterly abandoning his cousins
the Riarii, who were likely to be crushed under the hoofs of the now
charging bull, and devoting himself strenuously to equip Cesare for
that same charge. So far does he go in this matter that he is one of the
sureties--the other being the Cardinal Giovanni Borgia--for the loan
of 45,000 ducats raised by Cesare in Milan towards the cost of his
campaign.

This is the moment in which to pause and consider this man, who, because
he was a bitter enemy of Alexander’s, and who, because earlier he had
covered the Pope with obloquy and insult and is to do so again later, is
hailed as a fine, upright, lofty, independent, noble soul.

Not so fine, upright, or noble but that he can put aside his rancour
when he finds that there is more profit in fawning than in snarling; not
so independent but that he can become a sycophant who writes panegyrics
of Cesare and letters breathing devotion to the Pope, once he has
realized that thus his interests will be better served. This is the
man, remember, who dubbed Alexander a Jew and a Moor; this the man who
agitated at the Courts of France and Spain for Alexander’s deposition
from the Pontificate on the score of the simony of his election; this
the man whose vituperations of the Holy Father are so often quoted,
since--coming from lips so honest--they must, from the very moment that
he utters them, be merited. If only the historian would turn the medal
about a little, and allow us a glimpse of the reverse as well as of the
obverse, what a world of trouble and misconceptions should we not be
spared!

Della Rovere had discovered vain his work of defamation, vain his
attempts to induce the Kings of France and Spain to summon a General
Council and depose the man whose seat he coveted, so he had sought to
make his peace with the Holy See. The death of Charles VIII, and the
succession of a king who had need of the Pope’s friendship and who found
a friend in Alexander, rendered it all the more necessary that della
Rovere should set himself to reconquer, by every means in his power, the
favour of Alexander.

And so you see this honourable, upright man sacrificing his very
family to gain that personal end. Where now is that stubbornly honest
conscience of his which made him denounce Alexander as no Christian and
no Pope? Stifled by self-interest. It is as well that this should be
understood, for this way lies the understanding of many things.

The funds for the campaign being found, Cesare received from Louis
three hundred lances captained by Yves d’Allègre and four thousand
foot, composed of Swiss and Gascons, led by the Bailie of Dijon. Further
troops were being assembled for him at Cesena--the one fief of Romagna
that remained faithful to the Church--by Achille Tiberti and Ercole
Bentivogli, and to these were to be added the Pontifical troops that
would be sent to him; so that Cesare found himself ultimately at the
head of a considerable army, some ten thousand strong, well-equipped and
supported by good artillery.

Louis XII left Milan on November 7--one month after his triumphal
entrance--and set out to return to France, leaving Trivulzio to
represent him as ruler of the Milanese. Two days later Cesare’s army
took the road, and he himself went with his horse by way of Piacenza,
whilst the foot, under the Bailie of Dijon, having obtained leave of
passage through the territories of Ferrara and Cremona, followed the Po
down to Argenta.

Thus did Cesare Borgia--personally attended by a caesarian guard,
wearing his livery--set out upon the conquest of the Romagna. Perhaps
at no period of his career is he more remarkable than at this moment. To
all trades men serve apprenticeships, and to none is the apprenticeship
more gradual and arduous than to the trade of arms. Yet Cesare
Borgia served none. Like Minerva, springing full-grown and armed into
existence, so Cesare sprang to generalship in the hour that saw him made
a soldier. This was the first army in which he had ever marched, yet he
marched at the head of it. In his twenty-four years of life he had never
so much as witnessed a battle pitched; yet here was he riding to
direct battles and to wrest victories. Boundless audacity and swiftest
intelligence welded into an amazing whole!




CHAPTER III. IMOLA AND FORLI


Between his departure from Milan and his arrival before Imola, where his
campaign was to be inaugurated, Cesare paid a flying visit to Rome and
his father, whom he had not seen for a full year. He remained three days
at the Vatican, mostly closeted with the Pope’s Holiness. At the end of
that time he went north again to rejoin his army, which by now had been
swelled by the forces that had joined it from Cesena, some Pontifical
troops, and a condotta under Vitellozzo Vitelli.

The latter, who was Lord of Castello, had gone to Milan to seek justice
at the hands of Louis XII against the Florentines, who had beheaded his
brother Paolo--deservedly, for treason in the conduct of the war against
Pisa. This Vitellozzo was a valuable and experienced captain. He took
service with Cesare, spurred by the hope of ultimately finding a way
to avenge himself upon the Florentines, and in Cesare’s train he now
advanced upon Imola and Forli.

The warlike Countess Caterina Sforza-Riario had earlier been granted
by her children full administration of their patrimony during their
minority. To the defence of this she now addressed herself with all the
resolution of her stern nature. Her life had been unfortunate, and of
horrors she had touched a surfeit. Her father, Galeazzo Sforza, was
murdered in Milan Cathedral by a little band of patriots; her brother
Giangaleazzo had died, of want or poison, in the Castle of Pavia, the
victim of her ambitious uncle, Lodovico; her husband, Girolamo Riario,
she had seen butchered and flung naked from a window of the very castle
which she now defended; Giacomo Feo, whom she had secretly married in
second nuptials, was done to death in Forli, under her very eyes, by a
party of insurrectionaries. Him she had terribly avenged. Getting her
men-at-arms together, she had ridden at their head into the quarter
inhabited by the murderers, and there ordered--as Macchiavelli tells
us--the massacre of every human being that dwelt in it, women and
children included, whilst she remained at hand to see it done.
Thereafter she took a third husband, in Giovanni di Pierfrancesco
de’Medici, who died in 1498. By him this lusty woman had a son whose
name was to ring through Italy as that of one of the most illustrious
captains of his day--Giovanni delle Bande Nere.

Such was the woman whom Sanuto has called “great-souled, but a most
cruel virago,” who now shut herself into her castle to defy the Borgia.

She had begun by answering the Pope’s Bull of attainder with the
statement that, far from owing the Holy See the tribute which it
claimed, the Holy See was actually in her debt, her husband, Count
Girolamo Riario, having been a creditor of the Church for the provisions
made by him in his office of Captain-General of the Pontifical forces.
This subterfuge, however, had not weighed with Alexander, whereupon,
having also been frustrated in her attempt upon the life of the Pope’s
Holiness, she had proceeded to measures of martial resistance. Her
children and her treasures she had dispatched to Florence that they
might be out of danger, retaining of the former only her son Ottaviano,
a young man of some twenty years; but, for all that she kept him near
her, it is plain that she did not account him worthy of being entrusted
with the defence of his tyranny, for it was she, herself, the daughter
of the bellicose race of Sforza, who set about the organizing of this.

Disposing of forces that were entirely inadequate to take the field
against the invader, she entrenched herself in her fortress of Forli,
provisioning it to withstand a protracted siege and proceeding to
fortify it by throwing up outworks and causing all the gates but one to
be built up.

Whilst herself engaged upon military measures she sent her son Ottaviano
to Imola to exhort the Council to loyalty and the defence of the city.
But his mission met with no success. Labouring against him was a mighty
factor which in other future cases was to facilitate Cesare’s subjection
of the Romagna. The Riarii--in common with so many other of the Romagna
tyrants--had so abused their rule, so ground the people with taxation,
so offended them by violence, and provoked such deep and bitter enmity
that in this hour of their need they found themselves deservedly
abandoned by their subjects. The latter were become eager to try a
change of rulers, in the hope of finding thus an improved condition of
things; a worse, they were convinced, would be impossible.

So detested were the Riarii and so abhorred the memory they left behind
them in Imola that for years afterwards the name of Cesare Borgia was
blessed there as that of a minister of divine justice (“tanquam minister
divina justitiae”) who had lifted from them the harsh yoke by which they
had been oppressed.

And so it came to pass that, before ever Cesare had come in sight of
Imola, he was met by several of its gentlemen who came to offer him
the town, and he received a letter from the pedagogue Flaminio
with assurances that, if it should be at all possible to them, the
inhabitants would throw open the gates to him on his approach. And
Flaminio proceeded to implore the duke that should he, nevertheless, be
constrained to have recourse to arms to win admittance, he should not
blame the citizens nor do violence to the city by putting it to pillage,
assuring him that he would never have a more faithful, loving city than
Imola once this should be in his power.

The duke immediately sent forward Achille Tiberti with a squadron
of horse to demand the surrender of the town. And the captain of the
garrison of Imola replied that he was ready to capitulate, since that
was the will of the people. Three days later--on November 27--Cesare
rode in as conqueror.

The example of the town, however, was not followed by the citadel. Under
the command of Dionigio di Naldo the latter held out, and, as the
duke’s army made its entrance into Imola, the castellan signified
his resentment by turning his cannon upon the town itself, with such
resolute purpose that many houses were set on fire and demolished. This
Naldo was one of the best reputed captains of foot of his day, and he
had seen much service under the Sforza; but his experience could avail
him little here.

On the 28th Cesare opened the attack, training his guns upon the
citadel; but it was not until a week later that, having found a weak
spot in the walls on the side commanding the town, he opened a breach
through which his men were able to force a passage, and so possess
themselves of a half-moon. Seeing the enemy practically within his
outworks, and being himself severely wounded in the head, Naldo
accounted it time to parley. He begged a three-days’ armistice, pledging
himself to surrender at the end of that time should he not receive
reinforcements in the meanwhile; and to this arrangement the duke
consented.

The good faith of Naldo has been questioned, and it has been suggested
that his asking for three days’ grace was no better than a cloak to
cover his treacherous sale of the fortress to the besieger. It seems,
however, to be no more than one of those lightly-uttered, irresponsible
utterances with which the chronicles of the time abound, for Naldo had
left his wife and children at Forli in the hands of the Countess, as
hostages for his good faith, and this renders improbable the unsupported
story of his baseness.

On December 7, no reinforcements having reached him, Naldo made formal
surrender of the citadel, safe-conduct having been granted to his
garrison.

A week later there arrived at Imola Cesare’s cousin, the Cardinal
Giovanni Borgia, whom the Pope had constituted legate in Bologna and the
Romagna in place of the Cardinal Ascanio Sforza, and whom he had sent
to support Cesare’s operations with ecclesiastical authority. Cardinal
Giovanni, as the Pope’s representative, received in the Church of
San Domenico the oath of fealty of the city to the Holy See. This was
pledged by four representative members of the Council of Thirty; and
by that act the conquest and subjection of the town became a fully
accomplished fact.

The lesser strongholds of the territory threw up their gates one by
one before the advancing enemy, until only Forli remained to be taken.
Cesare pushed forward to reduce it.

On his way he passed through Faenza, whose tyrant, Manfredi, deeming
himself secure in the protection of Venice and in view of the
circumstance that the republic had sent to Rome the arrears of tribute
due from his fief, and anxious to conciliate the Pope, received and
entertained Cesare very cordially.

At Forli the case of Imola was practically repeated. Notwithstanding
that the inhabitants were under the immediate eye of the formidable
countess, and although she sent her brother, Alessandro Sforza, to
exhort the people and the Council to stand by her, the latter, weary
as the rest of the oppressive tyranny of her family, dispatched their
representatives to Cesare to offer him the town.

The Countess’s valour was of the sort that waxes as the straits become
more desperate. Since the town abandoned and betrayed her, she would
depend upon her citadel, and by a stubborn resistance make Cesare pay as
dearly as possible for the place. To the danger which she seems almost
eager to incur for her own part, this strong-minded, comely matron will
not subject the son she has kept beside her until now; and so she packs
Ottaviano off to Florence and safety. That done, she gives her mutinous
subjects a taste of her anger by attempting to seize half a dozen of the
principal citizens of Forli. As it happened, not only did this intent
miscarry, but it went near being the means of involving her in battle
even before the duke’s arrival; for the people, getting wind of the
affair, took up arms to defend their threatened fellow-citizens.

She consoled herself, however, by seizing the persons of Nicolo
Tornielli and Lodovico Ercolani, whom the Council had sent to inform
her that their representatives had gone to Cesare with the offer of the
town. Further, to vent her rage and signify her humour, she turned her
cannon upon the Communal Palace and shattered the tower of it.

Meanwhile Cesare advanced. It was again Tiberti who now rode forward
with his horse to demand the surrender of Forli. This was accorded as
readily as had been that of Imola, whereupon Cesare came up to take
possession in person; but, despite the cordial invitation of the
councillors, he refused to enter the gates until he had signed the
articles of capitulation.

On December 19, under a deluge of rain, Cesare, in full armour, the
banner of the Church borne ahead of him, rode into Forli with his
troops. He was housed in the palace of Count Luffo Nomaglie (one of
the gentlemen whom Caterina had hoped to capture), and his men were
quartered through the town. These foreign soldiers of his seem to have
got a little out of hand here at Forli, and they committed a good many
abuses, to the dismay and discomfort of the Citizens.

Sanuto comments upon this with satisfaction, accounting the city well
served for having yielded herself up like a strumpet. It is a comment
more picturesque than just, for obviously Forli did not surrender
through pusillanimity, but to the end that it might be delivered from
the detestable rule of the Riarii.

The city occupied, it now remained to reduce the fortress and bring its
warrior-mistress to terms. Cesare set about this at once, nor allowed
the Christmas festivities to interfere with his labours, but kept his
men at work to bring the siege-guns into position. On Christmas Day the
countess belatedly attempted a feeble ruse in the hope of intimidating
them. She flew from her battlements a banner, bearing the device of the
lion of St. Mark, thinking to trick Cesare into the belief that she had
obtained the protection of Venice, or, perhaps, signifying thus that
she threw herself into the arms of the republic, making surrender of her
fiefs to the Venetians to the end that she might spite a force which she
could not long withstand--as Giovanni Sforza had sought to do.

But Cesare, nowise disturbed by that banner, pursued his preparations,
which included the mounting of seven cannons and ten falconets in the
square before the Church of St. John the Baptist. When all was ready
for the bombardment, he made an effort to cause her to realize the
hopelessness of her resistance and the vain sacrifice of life it must
entail. He may have been moved to this by the valour she displayed, or
it may have been that he obeyed the instincts of generalship which made
him ever miserly in the matter of the lives of his soldiers. Be that as
it may, with intent to bring her to a reasonable view of the situation,
he rode twice to the very edge of the ditch to parley with her; but
all that came of his endeavours was that on the occasion of his second
appeal to her, he had a narrow escape of falling a victim to her
treachery, and so losing his life.

She came down from the ramparts, and, ordering the lowering of the
bridge, invited him to meet her upon it that there they might confer
more at their ease, having, meanwhile, instructed her castellan to
raise the bridge again the moment the duke should set foot upon it. The
castellan took her instructions too literally, for even as the duke did
set one foot upon it there was a grind and clank of machinery, and the
great structure swung up and clattered into place. The duke remained
outside, saved by a too great eagerness on the part of those who worked
the winches, for had they waited but a second longer they must have
trapped him.

Cesare returned angry to Forli, and set a price upon Caterina’s
head--20,000 ducats if taken alive, 10,000 if dead; and on the morrow he
opened fire. For a fortnight this was continued without visible result,
and daily the countess was to be seen upon the walls with her castellan,
directing the defences. But on January 12, Cesare’s cannon having been
concentrated upon one point, a breach was opened at last. Instantly the
waiting citizens, who had been recruited for the purpose, made forward
with their faggots, heaping them up in the moat until a passage was
practicable. Over this went Cesare’s soldiers to force an entrance.

A stubborn fight ensued within the ravelin, where the duke’s men were
held in check by the defenders, and not until some four hundred corpses
choked that narrow space did the besieged give ground before them.

Like most of the Italian fortresses of the period, the castle of Forli
consisted of a citadel within a citadel. In the heart of the main
fabric--but cut off from it again by its own moat--arose the great tower
known as the Maschio. This was ever the last retreat of the besieged
when the fortress itself had been carried by assault, and, in the case
of the Maschio of the Citadel of Forli, so stout was its construction
that it was held to be practically invulnerable.

Had the countess’s soldiers made their retreat in good order to this
tower, where all the munitions and provisions were stored, Cesare would
have found the siege but in the beginning; but in the confusion of that
grim hour, besieged and besiegers, Borgian and Riarian, swept forward
interlocked, a writhing, hacking, bleeding mob of men-at-arms. Thus
they flung themselves in a body across the bridge that spanned the inner
moat, and so into the Maschio, whilst the stream of Cesare’s soldiers
that poured uninterruptedly across in the immediate wake of that
battling mass rendered it impossible for the defenders to take up the
bridge.

Within the tower the carnage went on, and the duke’s men hacked
their way through what remained of the Forlivese until they had made
themselves masters of that inner stronghold whither Caterina had sought
her last refuge.

A Burgundian serving under the Bailie of Dijon was the first to come
upon her in the room to which she had fled with a few attendants and a
handful of men, amongst whom were Alessandro Sforza, Paolo Riario, and
Scipione Riario--this last an illegitimate son of her first husband’s,
whom she had adopted. The Burgundian declared her his prisoner, and held
her for the price that had been set upon her head until the arrival of
Cesare, who entered the citadel with his officers a little while after
the final assault had been delivered.

Cesare received and treated her with the greatest courtesy, and, seeing
her for the moment destitute, he presented her with a purse containing
two hundred ducats for her immediate needs. Under his escort she left
the castle, and was conducted, with her few remaining servants, to the
Nomaglie Palace to remain in the Duke’s care, his prisoner. Her brother
and the other members of her family found with her were similarly made
prisoners.

After her departure the citadel was given over to pillage, and all
hell must have raged in it if we may judge from an incident related
by Bernardi in his chronicles. A young clerk, named Evangelista da
Monsignane, being seized by a Burgundian soldier who asked him if he had
any money, produced and surrendered a purse containing thirteen ducats,
and so got out of the mercenaries’ clutches, but only to fall into the
hands of others, one of whom again declared him a prisoner. The poor
youth, terrified at the violence about him, and eager to be gone from
that shambles, cried out that, if they would let him go, he would pay
them a ransom of a hundred ducats.

Thereupon “Surrender to me!” cried one of the soldiers, and, as the
clerk was about to do so, another, equally greedy for the ransom, thrust
himself forward. “No. Surrender to me, rather,” demanded this one.

The first insisted that the youth was his prisoner, whereupon the second
brandished his sword, threatening to kill Evangelista. The clerk, in a
panic, flung himself into the arms of a monk who was with him, crying
out for mercy, and there in the monk’s arms he was brutally slain, “to
put an end,” said his murderer, “to the dispute.”

Forlimpopoli surrendered a few days later to Yves d’Allègre, whom
Cesare had sent thither, whilst in Forli, as soon as he had reduced the
citadel, and before even attempting to repair the damage done, the
duke set about establishing order and providing for the dispensation of
justice, exerting to that end the rare administrative ability which not
even his bitterest detractors have denied him.

He sent a castellan to Forlimpopoli and fetched from Imola a Podestà for
Forli.(1) He confirmed the Council of Forty that ruled Forli--being
ten for each quarter of the city--and generally made sound and wise
provision for the town’s well-being, which we shall presently see
bearing fruit.


  1  It was customary throughout Italy that the Podestà, or chief
magistrate, should never be a native of the town--rarely of the
State--in which he held his office. Thus, having no local interests or
relationships, he was the likelier to dispense justice with desirable
single-mindedness.


Next the repairing of the fortress claimed his attention, and he
disposed for this, entrusting the execution of his instructions to
Ramiro de Lorqua, whom he left behind as governor. In the place where
the breach was opened by his cannon he ordered the placing of a marble
panel bearing his arms; and there it is to be seen to this day: Dexter,
the sable bars of the House of Lenzol; Sinister, the Borgia bull in
chief, and the lilies of France; and, superimposed, an inescutcheon
bearing the Pontifical arms.

All measures being taken so far as Forli was concerned, Cesare turned
his attention to Pesaro, and prepared to invade it. Before leaving,
however, he awaited the return of his absent cousin, the Cardinal
Giovanni Borgia, who, as papal legate, was to receive the oath of fealty
of the town; but, instead of the cardinal whom he was expecting, came a
messenger with news of his death of fever at Fossombrone.

Giovanni Borgia had left Forli on December 28 to go to Cesena, with
intent, it was said, to recruit to his cousin’s army those men of
Rimini, who, exiled and in rebellion against their tyrant Malatesta,
had sought shelter in that Pontifical fief. Thence he had moved on
to Urbino, where--in the ducal palace--he awaited news of the fall of
Forli, and where, whilst waiting, he fell ill. Nevertheless, when the
tidings of Cesare’s victory reached him, he insisted upon getting to
horse, to repair to Forli; but, discovering himself too ill to keep the
saddle, he was forced to abandon the journey at Fossombrone, whilst the
outcome of the attempt was an aggravation of the fever resulting in the
cardinal’s death.

Cesare appears to have been deeply grieved by the loss of Giovanni,
and there is every cause to suppose that a sincere attachment prevailed
between the cousins. Yet Cesare has been charged with his death, and
accused of having poisoned him, and, amidst the host of silly, baseless
accusations levelled against Cesare, you shall find none more silly or
baseless than this. In other instances of unproven crimes with which he
has been charged there may be some vestiges of matter that may do duty
for evidence or be construed into motives; here there is none that
will serve one purpose or the other, and the appalling and rabid
unscrupulousness, the relentless malice of Borgian chroniclers is in
nothing so completely apparent as in this accusation.

Sanuto mentions the advices received, and the rumours which say that
Cesare murdered him through jealousy, knowing him beloved by the Pope,
seeing him a legate, and fearing that he might come to be given the
governorship of some Romagna fief.

When Gandia died and Cesare was accused of having murdered him, the
motive advanced was that Cesare, a papal legate, resented a brother who
was a duke. Now, Cesare, being a duke, resents a cousin’s being a papal
legate. You will observe that, if this method of discovering motives is
pursued a little further, there is no man who died in Cesare’s life-time
whom Cesare could not be shown to have had motives for murdering.

Sillier even than Sanuto’s is the motive with which Giovio attempts to
bolster up the accusation which he reports: “He [Cesare] poisoned him
because he [Giovanni] favoured the Duke of Gandia.”

That, apparently, was the best that Giovio could think of. It is hardly
intelligible--which is perhaps inevitable, for it is not easy to be
intelligible when you don’t quite know, yourself, what you mean, which
must have been Giovio’s case.

The whole charge is so utterly foolish, stupid, and malicious that it
would scarcely be worth mentioning, were it not that so many modern
writers have included this among the Borgia crimes. As a matter of
fact--and as a comparison of the above-cited dates will show--eighteen
days had elapsed between Giovanni Borgia’s leaving Cesare at Forli and
his succumbing at Urbino--which in itself disposes of the matter. It
may be mentioned that this is a circumstance which those foolish or
deliberately malicious calumniators either did not trouble to ascertain
or else thought it wiser to slur over. Although, had they been pressed,
there was always the death of Djem to be cited and the fiction of the
slow-working poison specially invented to meet and explain his case.

The preparations for the invasion of Pesaro were complete, and it was
determined that on January 22 the army should march out of Forli; but on
the night of the 21st a disturbance occurred. The Swiss under the
Bailie of Dijon became mutinous--they appear throughout to have been an
ill-conditioned lot--and they clamoured now for higher pay if they were
to go on to Pesaro, urging that already they had served the Duke of
Valentinois as far as they had pledged themselves to the King of France.

Towards the third hour of the night the Bailie himself, with these
mutineers at his heels, presented himself at the Nomaglie Palace to
demand that the Countess Sforza-Riario should be delivered into his
hands. His claim was that she was his prisoner, since she had been
arrested by a soldier of his own, and that her surrender was to France,
to which he added--a thought inconsequently, it seems--that the French
law forbade that women should be made prisoners. Valentinois, taken
utterly by surprise, and without the force at hand to resist the Bailie
and his Swiss, was compelled to submit and to allow the latter to carry
the countess off to his own lodging; but he dispatched a messenger to
Forlimpopoli with orders for the immediate return of Allègre and his
horse, and in the morning, after Mass, he had the army drawn up in the
market-place; and so, backed by his Spanish, French, and Italian troops,
he faced the threatening Swiss.

The citizens were in a panic, expecting to see battle blaze out at any
moment, and apprehensive of the consequences that might ensue for the
town.

The Swiss had grown more mutinous than ever overnight, and they now
refused to march until they were paid. It was Cesare’s to quell and
restore them to obedience. He informed them that they should be paid
when they reached Cesena, and that, if they were retained thereafter
in his employ, their pay should be on the improved scale which they
demanded. Beyond that he made no concessions. The remainder of his
harangue was matter to cow them into submission, for he threatened to
order the ringing of the alarm-bells, and to have them cut to pieces by
the people of Forli whom their gross and predatory habits had already
deeply offended.

Order was at last restored, and the Bailie of Dijon was compelled to
surrender back the countess to Cesare. But their departure was postponed
until the morrow. On that day, January 23, after receiving the oath
of fealty from the Anziani in the Church of San Mercuriale, the duke
marched his army out of Forli and took the road to Pesaro.

Caterina Sforza Riario went with him. Dressed in black and mounted upon
a white horse, the handsome amazon rode between Cesare Borgia and Yves
d’Allègre.

At Cesena the duke made a halt, and there he left the countess in the
charge of d’Allègre whilst he himself rode forward to overtake the main
body of his army, which was already as far south as Cattolica. As for
Giovanni Sforza, despite the fact that the Duke of Urbino had sent some
foot to support him, he was far more likely to run than to fight, and
in fact he had already taken the precaution of placing his money and
valuables in safety and was disposing, himself, to follow them. But
it happened that there was not yet the need. Fate--in the shape of his
cousin Lodovico of Milan--postponed the occasion.

On the 26th Cesare lay at Montefiori, and there he was reached by
couriers sent at all speed from Milan by Trivulzio. Lodovico Sforza
had raised an army of Swiss and German mercenaries to reconquer his
dominions, and the Milanese were opening their arms to receive him back,
having already discovered that, in exchanging his rule for that of the
French, they had but exchanged King Log for King Stork. Trivulzio begged
for the instant return of the French troops serving under Cesare,
and Cesare, naturally compelled to accede, was forced to postpone the
continuance of his campaign, a matter which must have been not a little
vexatious at such a moment.

He returned to Cesena, where, on the 27th, he dismissed Yves d’Allègre
and his men, who made all haste back to Milan, so that Cesare was left
with a force of not more than a thousand foot and five hundred horse.
These, no doubt, would have sufficed him for the conquest of Pesaro, but
Giovanni Sforza, encouraged by his cousin’s return, and hopeful now of
assistance, would certainly entrench himself and submit to a siege which
must of necessity be long-drawn, since the departure of the French had
deprived Cesare of his artillery.

Therefore the duke disposed matters for his return to Rome instead,
and, leaving Ercole Bentivogli with five hundred horse and Gonsalvo de
Mirafuente with three hundred foot to garrison Forli, he left Cesena
with the remainder of his forces, including Vitelli’s horse, on January
30. With him went Caterina Sforza-Riario, and of course there were not
wanting those who alleged that, during the few days at Cesena he
had carried his conquest of her further than the matter of her
territories(1)--a rumour whose parent was, no doubt, the ribald jest
made in Milan by Trivulzio when he heard of her capture.


  1  “Teneva detta Madona (la qual é belissima dona, fiola del Ducha
Galeazo di Milan) di zorno e di note in la sna camera, con la
quale--judicio omnium--si deva piacer” (Sanuto’s Diarii).


He conducted her to Rome--in golden chains, “like another Palmyra,” it
is said--and there she was given the beautiful Belvedere for her prison
until she attempted an escape in the following June; whereupon, for
greater safety, she was transferred to the Castle of Sant’ Angelo. There
she remained until May of 1501, when, by the intervention of the King of
France, she was set at liberty and permitted to withdraw to Florence
to rejoin her children. In the city of the lilies she abode, devoting
herself to good works until she ended her turbulent, unhappy life in
1509.

The circumstance that she was not made to pay with her life for her
attempt to poison the Pope is surely something in favour of the Borgias,
and it goes some way towards refuting the endless statements of their
fierce and vindictive cruelty. Of course, it has been urged that they
spared her from fear of France; but, if that is admitted, what then
becomes of the theory of that secret poison which might so well have
been employed in such a case as this?




CHAPTER IV. GONFALONIER OF THE CHURCH


Although Cesare Borgia’s conquest of Imola and Forli cannot seriously be
accounted extraordinary military achievements--save by consideration of
the act that this was the first campaign he had conducted--yet in Rome
the excitement caused by his victory was enormous. Possibly this is to
be assigned to the compelling quality of the man’s personality, which
was beginning to manifest and assert itself and to issue from the shadow
into which it had been cast hitherto by that of his stupendous father.

The enthusiasm mounted higher and higher whilst preparations were being
made for his reception, and reached its climax on February 26, when,
with overpowering pomp, he made an entrance into Rome that was a
veritable triumph.

Sanuto tells us that, as news came of his approach, the Pope, in
his joyous impatience and excitement, became unable to discharge the
business of his office, and no longer would give audience to any one.
Alexander had ever shown himself the fondest of fathers to his children,
and now he overflowed with pride in this son who already gave such
excellent signs of his capacity as a condottiero, and justified his
having put off the cassock to strap a soldier’s harness to his lithe and
comely body.

Cardinals Farnese and Borgia, with an imposing suite, rode out some way
beyond the gates of Santa Maria del Popolo to meet the duke. At the gate
itself a magnificent reception had been prepared him, and the entire
Pontifical Court, prelates, priests, ambassadors of the Powers, and
officials of the city and curia down to the apostolic abbreviators and
secretaries, waited to receive him.

It was towards evening--between the twenty-second and the twenty-third
hours--when he made his entrance. In the van went the baggage-carts, and
behind these marched a thousand foot in full campaign apparel, headed
by two heralds in the duke’s livery and one in the livery of the King
of France. Next came Vitellozzo’s horse followed by fifty mounted
gentlemen-at-arms--the duke’s Caesarean guard--immediately preceding
Cesare himself.

The handsome young duke--“bello e biondo”--was splendidly mounted, but
very plainly dressed in black velvet with a simple gold chain for only
ornament, and he had about him a hundred guards on foot, also in black
velvet, halbert on shoulder, and a posse of trumpeters in a livery
that displayed his arms. In immediate attendance upon him came several
cardinals on their mules, and behind these followed the ambassadors of
the Powers, Cesare’s brother Giuffredo Borgia, and Alfonso of Aragon,
Duke of Biselli and Prince of Salerno--Lucrezia’s husband and the father
of her boy Roderigo, born some three months earlier. Conspicuous,
too, in Cesare’s train would be the imposing figure of the formidable
Countess Sforza-Riario, in black upon her white horse, riding in her
golden shackles between her two attendant women.

As the procession reached the Bridge of Sant’ Angelo a salute was
thundered forth by the guns from the castle, where floated the banners
of Cesare and of the Church. The press of people from the Porta del
Popolo all the way to the Vatican was enormous. It was the year of
the Papal Jubilee, and the city was thronged, with pilgrims from
all quarters of Europe who had flocked to Rome to obtain the plenary
indulgence offered by the Pope. So great was the concourse on this
occasion that the procession had the greatest difficulty in moving
forward, and the progress through the streets, packed with shouting
multitudes, was of necessity slow. At last, however, the Bridge of Sant’
Angelo being crossed, the procession pushed on to the Vatican along
the new road inaugurated for the Jubilee by Alexander in the previous
December.

From the loggia above the portals of the Vatican the Pope watched his
son’s imposing approach, and when the latter dismounted at the steps his
Holiness, with his five attendant cardinals, descended to the Chamber
of the Papagallo--the papal audience­chamber, contiguous to the Borgia
apartments--to receive the duke. Thither sped Cesare with his multitude
of attendants, and at sight of him now the Pope’s eyes were filled with
tears of joy. The duke advanced gravely to the foot of the throne, where
he fell upon his knees, and was overheard by Burchard to express to
his father, in their native Spanish, all that he owed to the Pope’s
Holiness, to which Alexander replied in the same tongue. Then Cesare
stooped and kissed the Pope’s feet and then his hand, whereupon
Alexander, conquered no doubt by the paternal instincts of affection
that were so strong in him, raised his son and took him fondly in his
arms.

The festivities in honour of Cesare’s return were renewed in Rome upon
the morrow, and to this the circumstance that the season was that of
carnival undoubtedly contributed and lent the displays a threatrical
character which might otherwise have been absent. In these the duke’s
victories were made the subject of illustration. There was a procession
of great chariots in Piazza Navona, with groups symbolizing the triumphs
of the ancient Caesar, in the arrangement of which, no doubt, the
assistance had been enlisted of that posse of valiant artists who were
then flocking to Rome and the pontifical Court.

Yriarte, mixing his facts throughout with a liberal leaven of fiction,
tells us that “this is the precise moment in which Cesare Borgia, fixing
his eyes upon the Roman Caesar, takes him definitely for his model and
adopts the device ‘Aut Caesar, aut nihil.’”

Cesare Borgia never adopted that device, and never displayed it. In
connection with him it is only to be found upon the sword of honour
made for him when, while still a cardinal, he went to crown the King
of Naples. It is not at all unlikely that the inscription of the device
upon that sword--which throughout is engraved with illustrations of the
career of Julius Caesar--may have been the conceit of the sword-maker
as a rather obvious play upon Cesare’s name.(1) Undoubtedly, were the
device of Cesare’s own adoption we should find it elsewhere, and nowhere
else is it to be found.


  1  The scabbard of this sword is to be seen in the South Kensington
Museum; the sword itself is in the possession of the Caetani family.


Shortly after Cesare’s return to Rome, Imola and Forli sent their
ambassadors to the Vatican to beseech his Holiness to sign the articles
which those cities had drawn up and by virtue of which they created
Cesare their lord in the place of the deposed Riarii.

It is quite true that Alexander had announced that, in promoting the
Romagna campaign, he had for object to restore to the Church the States
which had rebelliously seceded from her. Yet there is not sufficient
reason to suppose that he was flagrantly breaking his word in acceding
to the request of which those ambassadors were the bearers and in
creating his son Count of Imola and Forli. Admitted that this was to
Cesare’s benefit and advancement, it is still to be remembered that
those fiefs must be governed for the Church by a Vicar, as had ever been
the case.

That being so, who could have been preferred to Cesare for the dignity,
seeing that not only was the expulsion of the tyrants his work, but that
the inhabitants themselves desired him for their lord? For the rest,
granted his exceptional qualifications, it is to be remembered that the
Pope was his father, and--setting aside the guilt and scandal of that
paternity--it is hardly reasonable to expect a father to prefer some
other to his son for a stewardship for which none is so well equipped
as that same son. That Imola and Forli were not free gifts to Cesare,
detached, for the purpose of so making them, from the Holy See, is clear
from the title of Vicar with which Cesare assumed control of them, as
set forth in the Bull of investiture.

In addition to his receiving the rank of Vicar and Count of Imola and
Forli, it was in this same month of March at last--and after Cesare may
be said to have earned it--that he received the Gonfalon of the
Church. With the unanimous concurrence of the Sacred College, the Pope
officially appointed him Captain-General of the Pontifical forces--the
coveting of which position was urged, it will be remembered, as one of
his motives for his alleged murder of the Duke of Gandia three years
earlier.

On March 29 Cesare comes to St. Peter’s to receive his new dignity and
the further honour of the Golden Rose which the Pope is to bestow upon
him--the symbol of the Church Militant and the Church Triumphant.

Having blessed the Rose, the Pope is borne solemnly into St. Peter’s,
preceded by the College of Cardinals. Arrived before the High Altar,
he puts off his tiara--the conical, richly jewelled cap, woven from the
plumage of white peacocks--and bareheaded kneels to pray; whereafter he
confesses himself to the Cardinal of Benevento, who was the celebrant
on this occasion. That done, he ascends and takes his seat upon the
Pontifical Throne, whither come the cardinals to adore him, while the
organ peals forth and the choir gives voice. Last of all comes Cesare,
dressed in cloth of gold with ermine border, to kneel upon the
topmost step of the throne, whereupon the Pope, removing his tiara and
delivering it to the attendant Cardinal of San Clemente, pronounces the
beautiful prayer of the investiture. That ended, the Pope receives
from the hands of the Cardinal of San Clemente the splendid mantle of
gonfalonier, and sets it about the duke’s shoulders with the prescribed
words: “May the Lord array thee in the garment of salvation and surround
thee with the cloak of happiness.” Next he takes from the hands of the
Master of the Ceremonies--that same Burchard whose diary supplies us
with these details--the gonfalonier’s cap of scarlet and ermine richly
decked with pearls and surmounted by a dove--the emblem of the Holy
Spirit--likewise wrought in pearls. This he places upon Cesare’s
auburn head; whereafter, once more putting off his tiara, he utters the
prescribed prayer over the kneeling duke.

That done, and the Holy Father resuming his seat and his tiara, Cesare
stoops to kiss the Pope’s feet, then rising, goes in his gonfalonier
apparel, the cap upon his head, to take his place among the cardinals.
The organ crashes forth again; the choir intones the “Introito ad altare
Deum”; the celebrant ascends the altar, and, having offered incense,
descends again and the Mass begins.

The Mass being over, and the celebrant having doffed his sacred
vestments and rejoined his brother cardinals, the Cardinal of San
Clemente repairs once more to the Papal Throne, preceded by two
chamberlains who carry two folded banners, one bearing the Pope’s
personal arms, the other the arms of Holy Church. Behind the cardinal
follows an acolyte with the censer and incense-boat and another with the
holy water and the aspersorio, and behind these again two prelates with
a Missal and a candle. The Pope rises, blesses the folded banners and
incenses them, having received the censer from the hands of a priest who
has prepared it. Then, as he resumes his seat, Cesare steps forward once
more, and, kneeling, places both hands upon the Missal and pronounces in
a loud, clear voice the words of the oath of fealty to St. Peter and the
Pope, swearing ever to protect the latter and his successors from harm
to life, limb, or possessions. Thereafter the Pope takes the blessed
banners and gives the charge of them to Cesare, delivering into his
hands the white truncheon symbolic of his office, whilst the Master of
Ceremonies hands the actual banners to the two deputies, who in full
armour have followed to receive them, and who attach them to the lances
provided for the purpose.

The investiture is followed by the bestowal of the Golden Rose,
whereafter Cesare, having again kissed the Pope’s feet and the Ring of
the Fisherman on his finger, has the cap of office replaced upon his
head by Burchard himself, and so the ceremonial ends.

The Bishop of Isernia was going to Cesena to assume the governorship of
that Pontifical fief, and, profiting by this, Cesare appointed him
his lieutenant-general in Romagna, with authority over all his other
officers there and full judicial powers. Further, he desired him to act
as his deputy and receive the oath of fealty of the duke’s new subjects.

Meanwhile, Cesare abode in Rome, no doubt impatient of the interruption
which his campaign had suffered, and which it seemed must continue yet
awhile. Lodovico Sforza had succeeded in driving the French out of his
dominions as easily as he, himself, had been driven out by them a
few months earlier. But Louis XII sent down a fresh army under La
Trémouille, and Lodovico, basely betrayed by his Swiss mercenaries at
Novara in April, was taken prisoner.

That was the definite end of the Sforza rule in Milan. For ten years the
crafty, scheming Lodovico was left to languish a prisoner in the Castle
of Loches, at the end of which time he miserably died.

Immediately upon the return of the French to Milan, the Pope asked for
troops that Cesare might resume his enterprise not only against Pesaro,
Faenza, and Rimini, but also against Bologna, where Giovanni Bentivogli
had failed to support--as in duty bound--the King of France against
Lodovico Sforza. But Bentivogli repurchased the forfeited French
protection at the price of 40,000 ducats, and so escaped the impending
danger; whilst Venice, it happened, was growing concerned to see no
profit accruing to herself out of this league with France and Rome; and
that was a matter which her trader spirit could not brook. Therefore,
Venice intervened in the matter of Rimini and Faenza, which she
protected in somewhat the same spirit as the dog protected the straw in
the manger. Next, when, having conquered the Milanese, Louis XII turned
his thoughts to the conquest of Naples, and called upon Venice to march
with him as became a good ally, the Republic made it quite clear that
she was not disposed to move unless there was to be some profit to
herself. She pointed out that Mantua and Ferrara were in the same case
as Bologna, for having failed to lend assistance to the French in the
hour of need, and proposed to Louis XII the conquest and division of
those territories.

Thus matters stood, and Cesare had perforce to await the conclusion
of the Pisan War in which the French were engaged, confident, however,
that, once that was at an end, Louis, in his anxiety to maintain
friendly relations with the Pope, would be able to induce Venice to
withdraw her protection from Rimini and Faenza. So much accomplished for
him, he was now in a position to do the rest without the aid of French
troops if necessary. The Jubilee--protracted for a further year, so vast
and continuous was the concourse of the faithful, 200,000 of whom knelt
in the square before St. Peter’s on Easter Day to receive the Pope’s
blessing--was pouring vast sums of money into the pontifical coffers,
and for money men were to be had in plenty by a young condottiero whose
fame had been spreading ever since his return from the Romagna. He was
now the hope of the soldiers of fortune who abounded in Italy, attracted
thither from all quarters by the continual opportunities for employment
which that tumultuous land afforded.

It is in speaking of him at about this time, and again praising his
personal beauty and fine appearance, that Capello says of him that, if
he lives, he will be one of Italy’s greatest captains.

Such glimpses as in the pages of contemporary records we are allowed
of Cesare during that crowded time of the Papal Jubilee are slight and
fleeting. On April 13 we see him on horseback accompanying the Pope
through Rome in the cavalcade that visited the four Basilicas to win the
indulgence offered, and, as usual, he is attended by his hundred armed
grooms in black.

On another occasion we behold him very differently engaged--giving an
exhibition of his superb physical gifts, his strength, his courage, and
his matchless address. On June 24, at a bull-fight held in Rome--Spanish
tauromachia having been introduced from Naples, where it flourished
under the Aragon dominion--he went down into the arena, and on
horseback, armed only with a light lance, he killed five wild bulls.
But the master-stroke he reserved for the end. Dismounting, and taking
a double­handed sword to the sixth bull that was loosed against him, he
beheaded the great beast at one single stroke, “a feat which all Rome
considered great.”

Thus sped the time of waiting, and meanwhile he gathered about him a
Court not only of captains of fortune, but of men of art and letters,
whom he patronized with a liberality--indeed, a prodigality--so
great that it presently became proverbial, and, incidentally, by its
proportions provoked his father’s disapproval. In the brilliant group of
men of letters who enjoyed his patronage were such writers as Justolo,
Sperulo, and that unfortunate poet Serafino Cimino da Aquila, known to
fame and posterity as the great Aquilano. And it would be, no doubt,
during these months that Pier di Lorenzo painted that portrait of Cesare
which Vasari afterwards saw in Florence, but which, unfortunately, is
not now known to exist. Bramante, too, was of his Court at this time, as
was Michelangelo Buonarroti, whose superb group of “Mercy,” painted for
Cardinal de Villiers, had just amazed all Rome. With Pinturicchio, and
Leonardi da Vinci--whom we shall see later beside Cesare--Michelangelo
was ever held in the highest esteem by the duke.

The story of that young sculptor’s leap into fame may not be so widely
known but that its repetition may be tolerated here, particularly since,
remotely at least, it touches Cesare Borgia.

When, in 1496, young Buonarroti, at the age of twenty-three, came from
Florence to Rome to seek his fortune at the opulent Pontifical Court, he
brought a letter of recommendation to Cardinal Sforza-Riario. This was
the time of the great excavations about Rome; treasures of ancient art
were daily being rescued from the soil, and Cardinal Sforza-Riario was a
great dilletante and collector of the antique. With pride of possession,
he conducted the young sculptor through his gallery, and, displaying his
statuary to him, inquired could he do anything that might compare with
it. If the cardinal meant to use the young Florentine cavalierly, his
punishment was immediate and poetic, for amid the antiques Michelangelo
beheld a sleeping Cupid which he instantly claimed as his own work.
Riario was angry; no doubt suspicious, too, of fraud. This Cupid
was--as its appearance showed--a genuine antique, which the cardinal had
purchased from a Milanese dealer for two hundred ducats. Michelangelo,
in a passion, named the dealer--one Baldassare--to whom he had sent
the statue after treating it, with the questionable morality of the
cinquecentist, so as to give it the appearance of having lain in the
ground, to the end that Baldassare might dispose of it as an antique.

His present fury arose from his learning the price paid by the cardinal
to Baldassare, from whom Michelangelo had received only thirty ducats.
In his wrath he demanded--very arbitrarily it seems--the return of his
statue. But to this the cardinal would not consent until Baldassare had
been arrested and made to disgorge the money paid him. Then, at last,
Sforza-Riario complied with Michelangelo’s demands and delivered him his
Cupid--a piece of work whose possession had probably ceased to give any
pleasure to that collector of the antique.

But the story was bruited abroad, and cultured Rome was agog to see the
statue which had duped so astute a judge as Sforza-Riario. The fame of
the young sculptor spread like a ripple over water, and it was Cesare
Borgia--at that time still Cardinal of Valencia who bought the Cupid.
Years later he sent it to Isabella d’Este, assuring her that it had not
its equal among contemporary works of art.




CHAPTER V. THE MURDER OF ALFONSO OF ARAGON


We come now to the consideration of an event which, despite the light
that so many, and with such assurance, have shed upon it, remains
wrapped in uncertainty, and presents a mystery second only to that of
the murder of the Duke of Gandia.

It was, you will remember, in July of 1498 that Lucrezia took a second
husband in Alfonso of Aragon, the natural son of Alfonso II of Naples
and nephew of Federigo, the reigning king. He was a handsome boy
of seventeen at the time of his marriage--one year younger than
Lucrezia--and, in honour of the event and in compliance with the Pope’s
insistence, he was created by his uncle Duke of Biselli and Prince of
Salerno. On every hand the marriage was said to be a love-match, and of
it had been born, in November of 1499, the boy Roderigo.

On July 15, 1500, at about the third hour of the night, Alfonso was
assaulted and grievously wounded--mortally, it was said at first--on the
steps of St. Peter’s.

Burchard’s account of the affair is that the young prince was assailed
by several assassins, who wounded him in the head, right arm, and knee.
Leaving him, no doubt, for dead, they fled down the steps, at the foot
of which some forty horsemen awaited them, who escorted them out of the
city by the Pertusa Gate. The prince was residing in the palace of the
Cardinal of Santa Maria in Portico, but so desperate was his condition
that those who found him upon the steps of the Basilica bore him into
the Vatican, where he was taken to a chamber of the Borgia Tower, whilst
the Cardinal of Capua at once gave him absolution in articulo mortis.

The deed made a great stir in Rome, and was, of course, the subject
of immediate gossip, and three days later Cesare issued an edict
forbidding, under pain of death, any man from going armed between Sant’
Angelo and the Vatican.

News of the event was carried immediately to Naples, and King Federigo
sent his own physician, Galieno, to treat and tend his nephew. In the
care of that doctor and a hunchback assistant, Alfonso lay ill of his
wounds until August 17, when suddenly be died, to the great astonishment
of Rome, which for some time had believed him out of danger. In
recording his actual death, Burchard is at once explicit and reticent to
an extraordinary degree. “Not dying,” he writes, “from the wound he had
taken, he was yesterday strangled in his bed at the nineteenth hour.”

Between the chronicling of his having been wounded on the steps of St.
Peter’s and that of his death, thirty-three days later, there is no
entry in Burchard’s diary relating to the prince, nor anything that can
in any way help the inquirer to a conclusion; whilst, on the subject of
the strangling, not another word does the Master of Ceremonies add
to what has above been quoted. That he should so coldly--almost
cynically--state that Alfonso was strangled, without so much as
suggesting by whom, is singular in one who, however grimly laconic, is
seldom reticent--notwithstanding that he may have been so accounted by
those who despaired of finding in his diary the confirmation of such
points of view as they happen to have chosen and of such matters as it
pleased them to believe and propagate.

That same evening Alfonso’s body was borne, without pomp, to St.
Peter’s, and placed in the Chapel of Santa Maria delle Febbre. It was
accompanied by Francesco Borgia, Archbishop of Cosenza.

The doctor who had been in attendance upon the deceased and the
hunchback were seized, taken to Sant’ Angelo and examined, but shortly
thereafter set at liberty.

So far we are upon what we may consider safe ground. Beyond that we
cannot go, save by treading the uncertain ways of speculation, and by
following the accounts of the various rumours circulated at the time.
Formal and absolutely positive evidence of the author of Alfonso’s
murder there is none.

The Venetian ambassador, the ineffable, gossip­mongering Paolo Capello,
whom we have seen possessed of the fullest details concerning the Duke
of Gandia’s death--although he did not come to Rome until two and a half
years after the crime--is again as circumstantial in this instance. You
see in this Capello the forerunner of the modern journalist of the baser
sort, the creature who prowls in quest of scraps of gossip and items of
scandal, and who, having found them, does not concern himself greatly
in the matter of their absolute truth so that they provide him with
sensational “copy.” It is this same Capello, bear in mind, who gives
us the story of Cesare’s murdering in the Pope’s very arms that Pedro
Caldes who is elsewhere shown to have fallen into Tiber and been
drowned, down to the lurid details of the blood’s spurting into the
Pope’s face.

His famous Relazione to the Senate in September of 1500 is little better
than an epitome of all the scandal current in Rome during his sojourn
there as ambassador, and his resurrection of the old affair of the
murder of Gandia goes some way towards showing the spirit by which he
was actuated and his love of sensational matter. It has pleased most
writers who have dealt with the matter of the murder of Alfonso of
Aragon to follow Capello’s statements; consequently these must be
examined.

He writes from Rome--as recorded by Sanuto--that on July 16 Alfonso of
Biselli was assaulted on the steps of St. Peter’s, and received four
wounds, “one in the head, one in the arm, one in the shoulder, and one
in the back.” That was all that was known to Capello at the time he
wrote that letter, and you will observe already the discrepancy between
his statement, penned upon hearsay, and Burchard’s account--which,
considering the latter’s position at the Vatican, must always be
preferred. According to Burchard the wounds were three, and they were in
the head, right arm, and knee.

On the 19th Capello writes again, and, having stated that Lucrezia--who
was really prostrate with grief at her husband’s death--was stricken
with fever, adds that “it is not known who has wounded the Duke of
Biselli, but it is said that it was the same who killed and threw into
Tiber the Duke of Gandia. My Lord of Valentinois has issued an edict
that no one shall henceforth bear arms between Sant’ Angelo and the
Vatican.”

On the face of it, that edict of Valentinois’ seems to argue vexation at
what had happened, and the desire to provide against its repetition--a
provision hardly likely to be made by the man who had organized the
assault, unless he sought, by this edict, to throw dust into the eyes
of the world; and one cannot associate after the event and the fear of
criticism with such a nature as Cesare’s or with such a character as
is given him by those who are satisfied that it was he who murdered
Biselli.

The rumour that Alfonso had been assailed by the murderer of Gandia is a
reasonable enough rumour, so long as the latter remains unnamed, for
it would simply point to some enemy of the House of Borgia who, having
slain one of its members, now attempts to slay another. Whether Capello
actually meant Cesare when he penned those words on July 19, is not as
obvious as may be assumed, for it is to be borne in mind that, at this
date, Capello had not yet compiled the “relation” in which he deals with
Gandia’s murder.

On July 23 he wrote that the duke was very ill, indeed, from the wound
in his head, and on the 28th that he was in danger owing to the same
wound although the fever had abated.

On August 18 he announces Alfonso’s death in the following terms: “The
Duke of Biselli, Madonna Lucrezia’s husband, died to-day because he
was planning the death of the Duke [of Valentinois] by means of an
arbalest-bolt when he walked in the garden; and the duke has had him cut
to pieces in his room by his archers.”

This “cutting-to-pieces” form of death is one very dear to
the imagination of Capello, and bears some witness to his
sensation-mongering proclivities.

Coming to matters more public, and upon which his evidence is more
acceptable, he writes on the 20th that some servants of the prince’s
have been arrested, and that, upon being put to the question, they
confessed to the prince’s intent to kill the Duke of Valentinois,
adding that a servant of the duke’s was implicated. On the 23rd Capello
circumstantially confirms this matter of Alfonso’s attempt upon Cesare’s
life, and states that this has been confessed by the master of Alfonso’s
household, “the brother of his mother, Madonna Drusa.”

That is the sum of Capello’s reports to the Senate, as recorded by
Sanuto. The rest, the full, lurid, richly-coloured, sensational
story, is contained in his “relation” of September 20. He prefaces the
narrative by informing the Senate that the Pope is on very bad terms
with Naples, and proceeds to relate the case of Alfonso of Aragon as
follows:

“He was wounded at the third hour of night near the palace of the Duke
of Valentinois, his brother­in-law, and the prince ran to the Pope,
saying that he had been wounded and that he knew by whom; and his wife
Lucrezia, the Pope’s daughter, who was in the room, fell into anguish.
He was ill for thirty-three days, and his wife and sister, who is the
wife of the Prince of Squillace, another son of the Pope’s, were with
him and cooked for him in a saucepan for fear of his being poisoned, as
the Duke of Valentinois so hated him. And the Pope had him guarded by
sixteen men for fear that the duke should kill him. And when the
Pope went to visit him Valentinois did not accompany him, save on one
occasion, when he said that what had not been done at breakfast might be
done at supper.... On August 17 he [Valentinois] entered the room where
the prince was already risen from his bed, and, driving out the wife and
sister, called in his man, named Michieli, and had the prince strangled;
and that night he was buried.”

Now the following points must arise to shake the student’s confidence
in this narrative, and in Capello as an authority upon any of the other
matters that he relates:

  (i)  “He was wounded near the palace of the Duke of Valentinois.”  This
looks exceedingly like an attempt to pile up evidence against Cesare,
and shows a disposition to resort to the invention of it. Whatever may
not have been known about Alfonso’s death, it was known by everybody
that he was wounded on the steps of St. Peter’s, and Capello himself,
in his dispatches, had said so at the time. A suspicion that Capello’s
whole relation is to serve the purpose of heaping odium upon Cesare at
once arises and receives confirmation when we consider that, as we have
already said, it is in this same relation that the fiction about Pedro
Caldes finds place and that the guilt of the murder of the Duke of
Gandia is definitely fixed upon Cesare.

  (ii)  “He ran to the Pope ['Corse dal Papa'] saying that he had been
wounded, and that he knew by whom.” A man with a wound in his head
which endangered his life for over a week would hardly be conscious on
receiving it, nor is it to be supposed that, had he been conscious, his
assailants would have departed. It cannot be doubted that they left him
for dead. He was carried into the palace, and we know, from Burchard,
that the Cardinal of Capua gave him absolution in articulo mortis, which
abundantly shows his condition. It is unthinkable that he should have
been able to “run to the Pope,” doubtful that he should have been able
to speak; and, if he did, who was it reported his words to the Venetian
ambassador? Capello wisely refrains from saying.

  (iii)  Lucrezia and Sancia attempt to protect him from poison by
cooking his food in his room. This is quite incredible. Even admitting
the readiness to do so on the part of these princesses, where was the
need, considering the presence of the doctor--admitted by Capello--sent
from Naples and his hunchback assistant?

  (iv)  “The Pope had him guarded by sixteen men for fear the duke should
kill him.” Yet when, according to Capello, the duke comes on his
murderous errand, attended only by Michieli (who has been generally
assumed by writers to have been Don Michele da Corella, one of Cesare’s
captains), where were these sixteen guards? Capello mentions the
dismissal only of Lucrezia and Sancia.

  (v)  “Valentinois...said that what had not been done at breakfast might
be done at supper.” It will be observed that Capello never once
considers it necessary to give his authorities for anything that he
states. It becomes, perhaps, more particularly noteworthy than usual in
the case of this reported speech of Cesare’s. He omits to say to whom
Cesare addressed those sinister words, and who reported them to him.
The statement is hardly one to be accepted without that very necessary
mention of authorities, nor can we conceive Capello omitting them had he
possessed them.

It will be seen that it is scarcely necessary to go outside of Capello’s
own relation for the purpose of traversing the statements contained in
it, so far as the death of Alfonso of Aragon is concerned.

It is, however, still to be considered that, if Alfonso knew who had
attempted his life--as Capello states that he told the Pope--and knew
that he was in hourly danger of death from Valentinois, it may surely
be taken for granted that he would have imparted the information to
the Neapolitan doctor sent him by his uncle, who must have had his
confidence.

We know that, after the prince’s death, the physician and his hunchback
assistant were arrested, but subsequently released. They returned
to Naples, and in Naples, if not elsewhere, the truth must have been
known--definite and authentic facts from the lips of eye-witnesses, not
mere matters of rumour, as was the case in Rome. It is to Neapolitan
writings, then, that we must turn for the truth of this affair; and
yet from Naples all that we find is a rumour--the echo of the Roman
rumour--“They say,” writes the Venetian ambassador at the Court of King
Federigo, “that he was killed by the Pope’s son.”

A more mischievous document than Capello’s Relazione can seldom have
found its way into the pages of history; it is the prime source of
several of the unsubstantiated accusations against Cesare Borgia upon
which subsequent writers have drawn--accepting without criticism--and
from which they have formed their conclusions as to the duke’s
character. Even in our own times we find the learned Gregorovius
following Capello’s relation step by step, and dealing out this matter
of the murder of the Duke of Biselli in his own paraphrases, as so much
substantiated, unquestionable fact. We find in his Lucrezia Borgia the
following statement: “The affair was no longer a mystery. Cesare himself
publicly declared that he had killed the duke because his life had been
attempted by the latter.”

To say that Cesare “publicly declared that he had killed the duke” is to
say a very daring thing, and is dangerously to improve upon Capello. If
it is true that Cesare made this public declaration how does it happen
that no one but Capello heard him? for in all other documents there is
no more than offered us a rumour of how Alfonso died. Surely it is to
be supposed that, had Cesare made any such declaration, the letters from
the ambassadors would have rung with it. Yet they will offer you nothing
but statements of what is being rumoured!

Nor does Gregorovius confine himself to that in his sedulous following
of Capello’s Relation. He serves up out of Capello the lying story of
the murder of Pedro Caldes. “What,” he says of Cesare, to support his
view that Cesare murdered Alfonso of Aragon, “could be beyond this
terrible man who had poignarded the Spaniard Pedro Caldes...under the
Pope’s very cloak, so that his blood spurted up into the Pope’s face?”
 This in his History of Rome. In his Lucrezia Borgia he almost improves
upon it when he says that “The Venetian ambassador, Paolo Capello,
reports how Cesare Borgia stabbed the chamberlain Perotto, etc., but
Burchard makes no mention of the fact.” Of the fact of the stabbing,
Burchard certainly makes no mention; but he does mention that the man
was accidentally drowned, as has been considered. It is again--and more
flagrantly than ever--a case of proving Cesare guilty of a crime of
which there is no conclusive evidence by charging him with another,
which--in this instance--there is actually evidence that he did not
commit.

But this is by the way.

Burchard’s entries in his diary relating to the assault upon Alfonso
of Aragon can no more escape the criticism of the thoughtful than can
Capello’s relation. His forty horsemen, for instance, need explaining.
Apart from the fact that this employment of forty horsemen would be
an altogether amazing and incredible way to set about the murder of a
single man, it is to be considered that such a troop, drawn up in
the square before St. Peter’s, must of necessity have attracted some
attention. It was the first hour of the night, remember--according to
Burchard--that is to say, at dusk. Presumably, too, those horsemen
were waiting when the prince arrived. How then, did he--and why was
he allowed--to pass them, only to be assailed in ascending the steps?
Burchard, presumably, did not himself see these horsemen; certainly
he cannot have seen them escorting the murderers to the Pertusa Gate.
Therefore he must have had the matter reported to him. Naturally enough,
had the horsemen existed, they must have been seen. How, then, does it
happen that Capello did not hear of them? nor the Florentine ambassador,
who says that the murderers were four, nor any one else apparently?

To turn for a moment to the Florentine ambassador’s letters upon the
subject, we find in this other Capello--Francesco Capello was his
name--accounts which differ alike from Paolo Capello’s and from
Burchard’ stories.  But he is careful to say that he is simply repeating
the rumours that are abroad, and cites several different versions that
are current, adding that the truth of the affair is not known to
anybody. His conclusions, however, particularly those given in cipher,
point to Cesare Borgia as the perpetrator of the deed, and hint at some
such motive of retaliation for an attempt upon his own life as that
which is given by the ambassador of Venice.

There is much mystery in the matter, despite Gregorovius’s assertion
to the contrary--mystery which mere assertion will not dissipate. This
conclusion, however, it is fair to draw: if, on Capello’s evidence,
we are to accept it that Cesare Borgia is responsible for the death of
Alfonso of Aragon, then, on the same evidence, we must accept the motive
as well as the deed. We must accept as equally exact his thrice-repeated
statement in letters to the Senate that the prince had planned Cesare’s
death by posting crossbow-men to shoot him.(1)


  1  It is extremely significant that Capello’s Relazione contains no
mention of Alfonso’s plot against Cesare’s life, a matter which, as we
have seen, had figured so repeatedly in that ambassador’s dispatches
from Rome at the time of the event. This omission is yet another proof
of the malicious spirit by which the “relation” was inspired. The
suppression of anything that might justify a deed attributed to Cesare
reveals how much defamation and detraction were the aims of this
Venetian.


Either we must accept all, or we must reject all, that Capello tells us.
If we reject all, then we are left utterly without information as to how
Alfonso of Aragon died. If we accept all, then we find that it was as
a measure of retaliation that Cesare compassed the death of
his brother-in-law, which made it not a murder, but a private
execution--justifiable under the circumstances of the provocation
received and as the adjustment of these affairs was understood in the
Cinquecento.




CHAPTER VI. RIMINI AND PESARO


In the autumn of 1500, fretting to take the field again, Cesare was
occupied in raising and equipping an army--an occupation which received
an added stimulus when, towards the end of August, Louis de Villeneuve,
the French ambassador, arrived in Rome with the articles of agreement
setting forth the terms upon which Louis XII was prepared further
to assist Cesare in the resumption of his campaign. In these it was
stipulated that, in return for such assistance, Cesare should engage
himself, on his side, to aid the King of France in the conquest of
Naples when the time for that expedition should be ripe. Further, Loius
XII was induced to make representations to Venice to the end that the
Republic should remove her protection from the Manfredi of Faenza and
the Malatesta of Rimini.

Venice being at the time in trouble with the Turk, and more anxious than
ever to conciliate France and the Pope, was compelled to swallow her
reluctance and submit with the best grace she could assume. Accordingly
she dispatched her ambassadors to Rome to convey her obedience to the
Pope’s Holiness, and formally to communicate the news that she withdrew
her protection from the proscribed fiefs.

Later in the year--in the month of October--the Senate was to confer
upon Cesare Borgia the highest honour in her gift, the honour of which
the Venetians were jealous above all else--the honour of Venetian
citizenship, inscribing his name in the Golden Book, bestowing upon him
a palace in Venice and conferring the other marks of distinction usual
to the occasion. One is tempted to ask, Was it in consequence of
Paolo Capello’s lurid Relation that the proud Republic considered him
qualified for such an honour?

To return, however, to the matter of the Republic’s removal of her
shield from Rimini and Faenza, Alexander received the news of this with
open joy and celebrated it with festivities in the Vatican, whilst from
being angry with Venice and from declaring that the Republic need never
again look to him for favour, he now veered round completely and assured
the Venetian envoys, in a burst of gratitude, that he esteemed no Power
in the world so highly. Cesare joined in his father’s expressions
of gratitude and appreciation, and promised that Alexander should be
succeeded in St. Peter’s Chair by such a Pope as should be pleasing to
Venice, and that, if the cardinals but remained united, the Pontificate
should go to none but a Venetian.

Thus did Cesare, sincerely or otherwise, attempt to lessen the
Republic’s chagrin to see him ride lance-on-thigh as conqueror into the
dominions which she so long had coveted.

France once more placed Yves d’Allègre at Cesare’s disposal, and with
him went six hundred lances and six hundred Swiss foot. These swelled
the forces which already Cesare had assembled into an army some ten
thousand strong. The artillery was under the command of Vitellozzo
Vitelli, whilst Bartolomeo da Capranica was appointed camp-master.
Cesare’s banner was joined by a condotta under Paolo Orsini--besides
whom there were several Roman gentlemen in the duke’s following,
including most of those who had formed his guard of honour on the
occasion of his visit to France, and who had since then continued to
follow his fortunes. Achille Tiberti came to Rome with a condotta which
he had levied in the Romagna of young men who had been moved by Cesare’s
spreading fame to place their swords at his disposal. A member of the
exiled Malvezzi family of Bologna headed a little troop of fellow-exiles
which came to take service with the duke, whilst at Perugia a strong
body of foot awaited him under Gianpaolo Baglioni.

In addition to these condotte, numerous were the adventurers who came
to offer Cesare their swords; indeed he must have possessed much of that
personal magnetism which is the prime equipment of every born leader,
for he stirred men to the point of wild enthusiasm in those days,
and inspired other than warriors to bear arms for him. We see men of
letters, such as Justolo, Calmeta, Sperulo, and others throwing
down their quills to snatch up swords and follow him. Painters, and
sculptors, too, are to be seen abandoning the ideals of art to pursue
the ugly realities of war in this young condottiero’s train. Among these
artists, bulks the great Pietro Torrigiani. The astounding pen of his
brother-sculptor, Benvenuto Cellini, has left us a sharp portrait of
this man, in which he speaks of his personal beauty and tells us that
he had more the air of a great soldier than a sculptor (which must have
been, we fancy, Cellini’s own case). Torrigiani lives in history chiefly
for two pieces of work widely dissimilar in character--the erection
of the tomb of Henry VII of England, and the breaking of the nose of
Michelangelo Buonarroti in the course of a quarrel which he had with him
in Florence when they were fellow-students under Masaccio. Of nothing
that he ever did in life was he so proud--as we may gather from
Cellini--as of having disfigured Michelangelo, and in that sentiment the
naïve spirit of his age again peeps forth.

We shall also see Leonardo da Vinci joining the duke’s army as
engineer--but that not until some months later.

Meanwhile his forces grew daily in Rome, and his time was consumed in
organizing, equipping, and drilling these, to bring about that perfect
unity for which his army was to be conspicuous in spite of the variety
of French, Italian, Spanish, and Swiss elements of which it was
composed. So effectively were his troops armed and so excellent was the
discipline prevailing among them, that their like had probably never
before been seen in the peninsula, and they were to excite--as much
else of Cesare’s work--the wonder and admiration of that great critic
Macchiavelli.

So much, however, was not to be achieved without money, and still more
would be needed for the campaign ahead. For this the Church provided.
Never had the coffers of the Holy See been fuller than at this moment.
Additional funds accrued from what is almost universally spoken of as
“the sale of twelve cardinals’ hats.”

In that year--in September--twelve new cardinals were appointed, and
upon each of those was levied, as a tax, a tithe of the first year’s
revenues of the benefices upon which they entered. The only justifiable
exception that can be taken to this lies in the number of cardinals
elected at one time, which lends colour to the assumption that the
sole aim of that election was to raise additional funds for Cesare’s
campaign. Probably it was also Alexander’s aim further to strengthen his
power with the Sacred College, so that he could depend upon a majority
to ensure his will in all matters. But we are at the moment concerned
with the matter of the levied tax.

It has been dubbed “an atrocious act of simony;” but the reasoning that
so construes it is none so clear. The cardinals’ hats carried with them
vast benefices. These benefices were the property of the Church; they
were in the gift and bestowal of the Pope, and in the bestowing of them
the Pope levied a proportionate tax. Setting aside the argument that
this tax was not an invention of Alexander’s, does such a proceeding
really amount to a “sale” of benefices? A sale presupposes bargaining, a
making of terms between two parties, an adjusting of a price to be paid.
There is evidence of no such marketing of these benefices; indeed one
cardinal, vowed to poverty, received his hat without the imposition of a
tax, another was Cesare’s brother-in-law, Amanieu d’Albret, who had been
promised the hat a year ago. It is further to be borne in mind that,
four months earlier, the Pope had levied a similar decima, or tax, upon
the entire College of Cardinals and every official in the service of the
Holy See, for the purposes of the expedition against the Muslim, who was
in arms against Christianity. Naturally that tax was not popular with
luxurious, self-seeking, cinquecento prelates, who in the main
cared entirely for their own prosperity and not at all for that of
Christianity, and you may realize how, by levying it, Alexander laid
himself open to harsh criticism.

The only impugnable matter in the deed lies, as has been said, in the
number of cardinals so created at a batch. But the ends to be served
may be held to justify, if not altogether, at least in some measure,
the means adopted. The Romagna war for which the funds were needed was
primarily for the advancement of the Church, to expunge those faithless
vicars who, appointed by the Holy See and holding their fiefs in trust
for her, refused payment of just tribute and otherwise so acted as to
alienate from the Church the States which she claimed for her own. Their
restoration to the Church--however much it might be a means of founding
a Borgia dynasty in the Romagna--made for the greater power and glory of
the Holy See. Let us remember this, and that such was the end which
that tax, levied upon those newly elected cardinals, went to serve. The
aggrandizement of the House of Borgia was certainly one of the results
to be expected from the Romagna campaign, but we are not justified in
accounting it the sole aim and end of that campaign.

Alexander had this advantage over either Sixtus IV or Innocent VIII--not
to go beyond those Popes whom he had served as Vice-Chancellor, for
instances of flagrant nepotism--that he at least served two purposes
at once, and that, in aggrandizing his own family, he strengthened the
temporal power of the Church, whereas those others had done nothing but
undermine it that they might enrich their progeny.

And whilst on this subject of the “sale” of cardinals’ hats, it may not
be amiss to say a word concerning the “sale” of indulgences with which
Alexander has been so freely charged. Here again there has been too loud
an outcry against Alexander--an outcry whose indignant stridency leads
one to suppose that the sale of indulgences was a simony invented by
him, or else practised by him to an extent shamefully unprecedented.
Such is very far from being the case. The arch-type of
indulgence-seller--as of all other simoniacal practices--is Innocent
VIII. In his reign we have seen the murderer commonly given to choose
between the hangman and the purchase of a pardon, and we have seen the
moneys so obtained providing his bastard, the Cardinal Francesco Cibo,
with the means for the luxuriously licentious life whose gross disorders
prematurely killed him.

To no such flagitious lengths as these can it be shown that Alexander
carried the “sale” of the indulgences he dispensed. He had no lack of
precedent for the practice, and, so far as the actual practice itself
is concerned, it would be difficult to show that it was unjustifiable or
simoniacal so long as confined within certain well-defined bounds, and
so long as the sums levied by it were properly employed to the benefit
of Christianity. It is a practice comparable to the mulcting of a civil
offender against magisterial laws. Because our magistrates levy fines,
it does not occur to modern critics to say that they sell pardons
and immunity from gaol. It is universally recognized as a wise and
commendable measure, serving the two­fold purpose of punishing the
offender and benefiting the temporal State against which he has
offended. Need it be less commendable in the case of spiritual offences
against a spiritual State? It is more useful than the imposition of the
pattering of a dozen prayers at bedtime, and since, no doubt, it falls
more heavily upon the offender, it possibly makes to an even greater
extent for his spiritual improvement.

Thus considered, this “sale” of indulgences loses a deal of the
heinousness with which it has been invested. The funds so realized go
into the coffers of the Church, which is fit and proper. What afterwards
becomes of them at the hands of Alexander opens up another matter
altogether, one in which we cannot close our eyes to the fact that he
was as undutiful as many another who wore the Ring of the Fisherman
before him. Yet this is to be said for him: that, if he plunged his
hands freely into the treasury of the Holy See, at least he had the
ability to contrive that this treasury should be well supplied; and the
circumstance that, when he died, he left the church far wealthier and
more powerful than she had been for centuries, with her dominions which
his precursors had wantonly alienated reconsolidated into that powerful
State that was to endure for three hundred years, is an argument to the
credit of his pontificate not lightly to be set aside.

Imola and Forli had, themselves, applied to the Pontiff to appoint
Cesare Borgia their ruler in the place of the deposed Riarii. To these
was now added Cesena. In July disturbances occurred there between
Guelphs and Ghibellines. Swords were drawn and blood flowed in the
streets, until the governor was constrained to summon Ercole Bentivogli
and his horse from Forli to quell the rioting. The direct outcome of
this was that--the Ghibellines predominating in council--Cesena sent an
embassy to Rome to beg his Holiness to give the lordship of the fief
to the Duke of Valentinois. To this the Pope acceded, and on August
2 Cesare was duly appointed Lord Vicar of Cesena. He celebrated his
investiture by remitting a portion of the taxes, abolishing altogether
the duty on flour, and by bringing about a peace between the two
prevailing factions.

By the end of September Cesare’s preparations for the resumption of the
campaign were completed, and early in October (his army fortified in
spirit by the Pope’s blessing) he set out, and made his first halt at
Nepi. Lucrezia was there, with her Court and her child Roderigo, having
withdrawn to this her castle to mourn her dead husband Alfonso; and
there she abode until recalled to Rome by her father some two months
later.

Thence Cesare pushed on, as swiftly as the foul weather would allow him,
by way of Viterbo, Assisi, and Nocera to cross the Apennines at Gualdo.
Here he paused to demand the release of certain prisoners in the hill
fortress of Fossate, and to be answered by a refusal. Angered by this
resistance of his wishes and determined to discourage others from
following the example of Fossate, he was swift and terrible in his
rejoinder. He seized the Citadel, and did by force what had been refused
to his request. Setting at liberty the prisoners in durance there, he
gave the territory over to devastation by fire and pillage.

That done he resumed his march, but the weather retarded him more and
more. The heavy and continuous rains had reduced the roads to such a
condition that his artillery fell behind, and he was compelled to call
a halt once more, at Deruta, and wait there four days for his guns to
overtake him.

In Rimini the great House of Malatesta was represented by
Pandolfo--Roberto Malatesta’s bastard and successor--a degenerate so
detested by his subjects that he was known by the name of Pandolfaccio
(a contumelious augmentative, expressing the evil repute in which he was
held).

Among his many malpractices and the many abuses to which he resorted
for the purposes of extorting money from his long-suffering subjects
was that of compelling the richer men of Rimini to purchase from him the
estates which he confiscated from the fuorusciti--those who had sought
in exile safety from the anger provoked by their just resentment of his
oppressive misrule. He was in the same case as other Romagna tyrants,
and now that Venice had lifted from him her protecting aegis, he had no
illusions as to the fate in store for him. So when once more the
tramp of Cesare Borgia’s advancing legions rang through the Romagna,
Pandolfaccio disposed himself, not for battle, but for surrender on the
best terms that he might succeed in making.

He was married to Violante, the daughter of Giovanni Bentivogli of
Bologna, and in the first week of October he sent her, with their
children, to seek shelter at her father’s Court. Himself, he withdrew
into his citadel--the famous fortress of his terrible grandfather
Sigismondo. The move suggested almost that he was preparing to resist
the Duke of Valentinois, and it may have prompted the message sent him
by the Council to inquire what might be his intention.

Honour was a thing unknown to this Pandolfaccio--even so much honour
as may be required for a dignified retreat. Since all was lost it but
remained--by his lights--to make the best bargain that he could and get
the highest possible price in gold for what he was abandoning. So he
replied that the Council must do whatever it considered to its best
advantage, whilst to anticipate its members in any offer of surrender,
and thus seek the favour and deserve good terms at the hands of this
man who came to hurl him from the throne of his family, he dispatched a
confidential servant to Cesare to offer him town and citadel.

In the meantime--as Pandolfo fully expected--the Council also sent
proposals of surrender to Cesare, as well as to his lieutenant-general
of Romagna, Bishop Olivieri, at Cesena. The communications had the
effect of bringing Olivieri immediately to Rimini, and there, on October
10, the articles of capitulation were signed by the bishop, as the
duke’s representative, and by Pandolfo Malatesta. It was agreed in these
that Malatesta should have safe-conduct for himself and his familiars,
3,000 ducats and the value--to be estimated--of the artillery which he
left in the citadel. Further, for the price of 5,500 ducats he abandoned
also the strongholds of Sarsina and Medola and the castles of the
Montagna.

His tyranny thus disposed of, Pandolfaccio took ship to Ravenna, where
the price of his dishonour was to be paid him, and in security for
which he took with him Gianbattista Baldassare, the son of the ducal
commissioner.

On the day of his departure, to celebrate the bloodless conquest of
Rimini, solemn High Mass was sung in the Cathedral, and Bishop Olivieri
received the city’s oath of allegiance to the Holy See, whither very
shortly afterwards Rimini sent her ambassadors to express to the Pope
her gratitude for her release from the thraldom of Pandolfaccio.

Like Rimini, Pesaro too fell without the striking of a blow, for all
that it was by no means as readily relinquished on the part of its
ruler. Giovanni Sforza had been exerting himself desperately for the
past two months to obtain help that should enable him to hold his
tyranny against the Borgia might. But all in vain. His entreaties to the
emperor had met with no response, whilst his appeal to Francesco Gonzaga
of Mantua--whose sister, it will be remembered, had been his first
wife--had resulted in the Marquis’s sending him a hundred men under an
Albanian, named Giacopo.

What Giovanni was to do with a hundred men it is difficult to conceive,
nor are the motives of Gonzaga’s action clear. We know that at this time
he was eagerly seeking Cesare’s friendship, sorely uneasy as to the
fate that might lie in store for his own dominions, once the Duke of
Valentinois should have disposed of the feudatories of the Church. Early
in that year 1500 he had asked Cesare to stand godfather for his child,
and Cesare had readily consented, whereby a certain bond of relationship
and good feeling had been established between them, which everything
shows Gonzaga most anxious to preserve unsevered. The only reasonable
conclusion in the matter of that condotta of a hundred men is that
Gonzaga desired to show friendliness to the Lord of Pesaro, yet was
careful not to do so to any extent that might be hurtful to Valentinois.

As for Giovanni Sforza of whom so many able pens have written so
feelingly as the constant, unfortunate victim of Borgia ambition, there
is no need to enter into analyses for the purpose of judging him here.
His own subjects did so in his own day. When a prince is beloved by all
classes of his people, it must follow that he is a good prince and a
wise ruler; when his subjects are divided into two factions, one to
oppose and the other to support him, he may be good or bad, or good
and bad; but when a prince can find none to stand by him in the hour of
peril, it is to be concluded that he has deserved little at the hands of
those whom he has ruled. The latter is the case of Giovanni Sforza--this
prince whom, Yriarte tells us, “rendered sweet the lives of his
subjects.” The nobility and the proletariate of Pesaro abhorred him;
the trader classes stood neutral, anxious to avoid the consequences of
partisanship, since it was the class most exposed to those consequences.

On Sunday, October 11--the day after Pandolfo Malatesta had relinquished
Rimini--news reached Pesaro that Ercole Bentivogli’s horse was marching
upon the town, in advance of the main body of Cesare’s army. Instantly
there was an insurrection against Giovanni, and the people, taking
to arms, raised the cry of “Duca!” in acclamation of the Duke of
Valentinois, under the very windows of their ruler’s palace.

Getting together the three hundred men that constituted his army,
Giovanni beat a hasty retreat to Pesaro’s magnificent fortress, and that
same night he secretly took ship to Ravenna accompanied by the Albanian
Giacopo, and leaving his half-brother, Galeazzo Sforza di Cotignola,
in command of the citadel. Thence Giovanni repaired to Bologna, and,
already repenting his precipitate flight, he appealed for help to
Bentivogli, who was himself uneasy, despite the French protection
he enjoyed. Similarly, Giovanni addressed fresh appeals to Francesco
Gonzaga; but neither of these tyrants could or dared avail him, and,
whilst he was still imploring their intervention his fief had fallen
into Cesare’s power.

Ercole Bentivogli, with a small body of horse, had presented himself at
the gates of Pesaro on October 21, and Galeazzo Sforza, having obtained
safe-conduct for the garrison, surrendered.

Cesare, meanwhile, was at Fano, where he paused to allow his army to
come up with him, for he had outridden it from Fossate, through foul
wintry weather, attended only by his light horse. It was said that
he hoped that Fano might offer itself to him as other fiefs had done,
and--if Pandolfo Collenuccio is correct--he had been counselled by the
Pope not to attempt to impose himself upon Fano, but to allow the town
a free voice in the matter. If his hopes were as stated, he was
disappointed in them, for Fano made no offer to him, and matters
remained for the present as they were.

On the 27th, with the banners of the bull unfurled, he rode into Pesaro
at the head of two thousand men, making his entrance with his wonted
pomp, of whose dramatic values he was so fully aware. He was met at the
gates by the Council, which came to offer him the keys of the town, and,
despite the pouring rain under which he entered the city, the people of
Pesaro thronged the streets to acclaim him as he rode.

He took up his lodgings at the Sforza Palace, so lately vacated by
Giovanni--the palace where Lucrezia Borgia had held her Court when, as
Giovanni’s wife, she had been Countess of Pesaro and Cotignola. Early on
the morrow he visited the citadel, which was one of the finest in Italy,
rivalling that of Rimini for strength. On his arrival there, a flourish
of trumpets imposed silence, while the heralds greeted him formally as
Lord of Pesaro. He ordered one of the painters in his train to draw up
plans of the fortress to be sent to the Pope, and issued instructions
for certain repairs and improvements which he considered desirable.

Here in Pesaro came to him the famous Pandolfo Collenuccio, as envoy
from the Duke of Ferrara, to congratulate Cesare upon the victory.
In sending Collenuccio at such a time Ercole d’Este paid the Duke of
Valentinois a subtle, graceful compliment. This distinguished poet,
dramatist, and historian was a native of Pesaro who had been exiled ten
years earlier by Giovanni--which was the tyrant’s way of showing his
gratitude to the man who, more than any other, had contributed to
the bastard Sforza’s succession to his father as Lord of Pesaro and
Cotignola.

Collenuccio was one of the few literary men of his day who was not above
using the Italian tongue, treating it seriously as a language and not
merely as a debased form of Latin. He was eminent as a juris­consult,
and, being a man of action as well as a man of letters, he had filled
the office of Podestá in various cities; he had found employment under
Lorenzo dei Medici, and latterly under Ercole d’Este, whom we now see
him representing.

Cesare received him with all honour, sending the master of his
household, Ramiro de Lorqua, to greet him on his arrival and to bear
him the usual gifts of welcome, of barley, wine, capons, candles,
sweet-meats, etc., whilst on the morrow the duke gave him audience,
treating him in the friendliest manner, as we see from Collenuccio’s
own report to the Duke of Ferrara. In this he says of Cesare: “He is
accounted valiant, joyous, and open-handed, and it is believed that he
holds honest men in great esteem. Harsh in his vengeance, according to
many, he is great of spirit and of ambition, athirst for eminence and
fame.”

Collenuccio was reinstated by Cesare in the possessions of which
Giovanni had stripped him, a matter which so excited the resentment of
the latter that, when ultimately he returned to his dominions, one of
his first acts was to avenge it. Collenuccio, fearing that he might not
stand well with the tyrant, had withdrawn from Pesaro. But Giovanni,
with all semblance of friendliness, treacherously lured him back to cast
him into prison and have him strangled--a little matter which those who,
to the detriment of the Borgia, seek to make a hero of this Giovanni
Sforza, would do well not to suppress.

A proof of the splendid discipline prevailing in Cesare’s army is
afforded during his brief sojourn in Pesaro. In the town itself, some
two thousand of his troops were accommodated, whilst some thousands
more swarmed in the surrounding country. Occupation by such an army was,
naturally enough, cause for deep anxiety on the part of a people who
were but too well acquainted with the ways of the fifteenth­century
men-at-arms. But here was a general who knew how to curb and control his
soldiers. Under the pain of death his men were forbidden from indulging
any of the predations or violences usual to their kind; and, as a
consequence, the inhabitants of Pesaro had little to complain of.

Justolo gives us a picture of the Duke of Valentinois on the banks of
the River Montone, which again throws into relief the discipline which
his very presence--such was the force of his personality--was able to
enforce. A disturbance arose among his soldiers at the crossing of this
river, which was swollen with rains and the bridge of which had been
destroyed. It became necessary to effect the crossing in one small
boat--the only craft available--and the men, crowding to the bank,
stormed and fought for precedence until the affair grew threatening.
Cesare rode down to the river, and no more than his presence was
necessary to restore peace. Under that calm, cold eye of his the men
instantly became orderly, and, whilst he sat his horse and watched them,
the crossing was soberly effected, and as swiftly as the single craft
would permit.

The duke remained but two days in Pesaro. On the 29th, having appointed
a lieutenant to represent him, and a captain to the garrison, he marched
out again, to lie that night at Cattolica and enter Rimini on the
morrow.

There again he was received with open arms, and he justified the
people’s welcome of him by an immediate organization of affairs which
gave universal satisfaction. He made ample provision for the proper
administration of justice and the preservation of the peace; he recalled
the fuorusciti exiled by the unscrupulous Pandolfaccio, and he saw them
reinstated in the property of which that tyrant had dispossessed them.
As his lieutenant in Rimini, with strict injunctions to preserve law
and order, he left Ramiro de Lorqua, when, on November 2, he departed to
march upon Faenza, which had prepared for resistance.

What Cesare did in Rimini was no more than he was doing throughout the
Romagna, as its various archives bear witness. They bear witness no less
to his vast ability as an administrator, showing how he resolved the
prevailing chaos into form and order by his admirable organization and
suppression of injustice. The same archives show us also that he found
time for deeds of beneficence which endeared him to the people, who
everywhere hailed him as their deliverer from thraldom. It would not be
wise to join in the chorus of those who appear to have taken Cesare’s
altruism for granted. The rejection of the wild stories that picture
him as a corrupt and murderous monster, utterly inhuman, and lay a dozen
ghastly crimes to his account need not entail our viewing Cesare as an
angel of deliverance, a divine agent almost, rescuing a suffering people
from oppression out of sheer humanitarianism.

He is the one as little as the other. He is just--as Collenuccio wrote
to Ercole d’Este--“great of spirit and of ambition, athirst for
eminence and fame.” He was consumed by the desire for power and worldly
greatness, a colossus of egotism to whom men and women were pieces to
be handled by him on the chess-board of his ambition, to be sacrificed
ruthlessly where necessary to his ends, but to be husbanded and guarded
carefully where they could serve him.

With his eyes upon the career of Cesare Borgia, Macchiavelli was anon to
write of principalities newly-acquired, that “however great may be the
military resources of a prince, he will discover that, to obtain firm
footing in a province, he must engage the favour and interest of the
inhabitants.”

That was a principle self-evident to Cesare--the principle upon which
he acted throughout in his conquest of the Romagna. By causing his new
subjects to realize at once that they had exchanged an oppressive for a
generous rule, he attached them to himself.




CHAPTER VII. THE SIEGE OF FAENZA


The second campaign of the Romagna had opened for Cesare as easily as
had the first. So far his conquest had been achieved by little more than
a processional display of his armed legions. Like another Joshua, he
reduced cities by the mere blare of his trumpets. At last, however,
he was to receive a check. Where grown men had fled cravenly at his
approach, it remained for a child to resist him at Faenza, as a woman
had resisted him at Forli.

His progress north from Pesaro was of necessity slow. He paused, as
we have seen, at Rimini, and he paused again, and for a rather longer
spell, at Forli, so that it was not until the second week of November
that Astorre Manfredi--the boy of sixteen who was to hold Faenza--caught
in the distance the flash of arms and the banners with the bull device
borne by the host which the Duke of Valentinois led against him.

At first it had been Astorre’s intent to follow the examples set him by
Malatesta and Sforza, and he had already gone so far as to remove his
valuables to Ravenna, whither he, too, meant to seek refuge. But he was
in better case than any of the tyrants so far deposed inasmuch as his
family, which had ruled Faenza for two hundred years, had not provoked
the hatred of its subjects, and these were now ready and willing to
stand loyally by their young lord. But loyalty alone can do little,
unless backed by the might of arms, against such a force as Cesare was
prepared to hurl upon Faenza. This Astorre realized, and for his own
and his subjects’ sake was preparing to depart, when, to his undoing,
support reached him from an unexpected quarter.

Bologna--whose ruler, Giovanni Bentivogli, was Astorre’s grandfather--in
common with Florence and Urbino, grew daily more and more alarmed at
the continual tramp of armed multitudes about her frontiers, and at the
steady growth in numbers and in capacity of this splendid army which
followed Casare--an army captained by such enemies of the Bentivogli as
the Baglioni, the Orsini, and the exiled Malvezzi.

Bentivogli had good grounds for his anxiety, not knowing how long he
might depend upon the protection of France, and well aware that, once
that protection was removed, there would be no barrier between Bologna
and Cesare’s manifest intentions concerning her.

Next to Cesare’s utter annihilation, to check his progress was the
desire dearest just then to the heart of Bentivogli, and with this end
in view he dispatched Count Guido Torella to Faenza, in mid-October,
with an offer to assist Astorre with men and money.

Astorre, who had succeeded Galeotto Manfredi in the tyranny of Faenza at
the age of three, had been and still continued under the tutelage of
the Council which really governed his territories. To this Council came
Count Torella with Bentivogli’s offer, adding the proposal that young
Astorre should be sent to Venice for his personal safety. But to this
the Council replied that it would be useless, if that course were
adopted, to attempt resistance, as the people could only be urged to it
by their affection for their young lord, and that, if he were removed
from their midst, they would insist upon surrender.

News of these negotiations reached Rome, and on October 24 Alexander
sent Bentivogli his commands to refrain, under pain of excommunication,
from interfering in the affairs of Faenza. Bentivogli made a feeble
attempt to mask his disobedience. The troops with which he intended to
assist his grandson were sent ostensibly to Castel Bolognese, but with
instructions to desert thence and make for Faenza. This they did, and
thus was Astorre strengthened by a thousand men, whilst the work of
preparing his city for resistance went briskly forward.

Meanwhile, ahead of Cesare Borgia, swept Vitellozzo Vitelli with his
horse into Astorre’s dominions. He descended upon the valley of the
Lamone, and commenced hostilities by the capture and occupation of
Brisghella on November 7. The other lesser strongholds and townships
offered no resistance to Cesare’s arms. Indeed they were induced into
ready rebellion against their lord by Dionigio di Naldo--the sometime
defender of Imola, who had now taken service with Cesare.

On November 10 Cesare himself halted his host beneath the walls of
Faenza and called upon the town to surrender. Being denied, he encamped
his army for the siege. He chose the eastern side of the town, between
the rivers Lamone and Marzano, and, that his artillery might have free
play, he caused several houses to be demolished.

In Faenza itself, meanwhile, the easy conquest of the valley had not
produced a good effect. Moreover, the defenders had cause to fear
treachery within their gates, for a paper had been picked up out of the
moat containing an offer of terms of surrender. It had been shot into
the castle attached to an arbalest­bolt, and was intended for the
castellan Castagnini. This Castagnini was arrested, thrown into prison,
and his possessions confiscated, whilst the Council placed the citadel
in the hands of four of its own members together with Gianevangelista
Manfredi--Astorre’s half-brother, and a bastard of Galeotto’s. These
set about defending it against Cesare, who had now opened fire. The duke
caused the guns to be trained upon a certain bastion through which he
judged that a good assault might be delivered and an entrance gained.
Night and day was the bombardment of that bastion kept up, yet without
producing visible effect until the morning of the 20th, when suddenly
one of its towers collapsed thunderously into the moat.

Instantly, and without orders, the soldiers, all eager to be among the
first to enter, flung themselves forward in utter and fierce disorder to
storm the breach. Cesare, at breakfast--as he himself wrote to the Duke
of Urbino--sprang up at the great noise, and, surmising what was taking
place, dashed out to restrain his men. But the task was no easy one,
for, gathering excitement and the frenzy of combat as they ran, they had
already gained the edge of the ditch, and thither Cesare was forced to
follow them, using voice and hands to beat back again.

At last he succeeded in regaining control of them, and in compelling
them to make an orderly retreat, and curb their impatience until the
time for storming should have come, which was not yet. In the affair
Cesare had a narrow escape from a stone-shot fired from the castle,
whilst one of his officers--Onorio Savelli--was killed by a cannon-ball
from the duke’s own guns, whose men, unaware of what was taking place,
were continuing the bombardment.

Hitherto the army had been forced to endure foul weather--rain, fogs,
and wind; but there was worse come. Snow began to fall on the morning of
the 22nd. It grew to a storm, and the blizzard continued all that day,
which was a Sunday, all night, and all the following day, and lashed the
men pitilessly and blindingly. The army, already reduced by shortness of
victuals, was now in a miserable plight in its unsheltered camp, and the
defenders of Faenza, as if realizing this, made a sortie on the 23rd,
from which a fierce fight ensued, with severe loss to both sides. On the
25th the snow began again, whereupon the hitherto unconquerable Cesare,
defeated at last by the elements and seeing that his men could not
possibly continue to endure the situation, was compelled to strike camp
on the 26th and go into winter quarters, no doubt with immense chagrin
at leaving so much work unaccomplished.

So he converted the siege into a blockade, closing all roads that lead
to Faenza, with a view to shutting out supplies from the town; and he
distributed troops throughout the villages of the territory with orders
constantly to harass the garrison and allow it no rest.

He also sent an envoy with an offer of terms of surrender, but the
Council rejected it with the proud answer that its members “had agreed,
in general assembly, to defend the dominions of Manfredi to the death.”

Thereupon Cesare withdrew to Forli with 150 lances and 2,500 foot, and
here he affords a proof of his considerateness. The town had already
endured several occupations and the severities of being the seat of war
during the siege of the citadel. Cesare was determined that it should
feel the present occupation as little as possible; so he issued an order
to the inhabitants upon whom his soldiers were billeted to supply the
men only with bed, light, and fire. What more they required must be
paid for, and, to avoid disputes as to prices of victuals and other
necessaries, he ordered the Council to draw up a tariff, and issued an
edict forbidding his soldiers, under pain of death, from touching any
property of the townsfolk. Lest they should doubt his earnestness,
he hanged two of his soldiers on December 7--a Piedmontese and a
Gascon--and on the 13th a third, all from the windows of his own palace,
and all with a label hanging from their feet proclaiming that they had
been hanged for taking goods of others in spite of the ban of the Lord
Duke, etc.

He remained in Forli until the 23rd, when he departed to Cesena, which
was really his capital in Roomagna, and in the huge citadel of which
there was ample accommodation for the troops that accompanied him. In
Forli he left, as his lieutenants, the Bishop of Trani and Don Michele
da Corella--the “Michieli” of Capello’s Relation and the “Michelotto”
 of so many Borgia fables. That this officer ruled the soldiers left with
him in Forli in accordance with the stern example set him by his master
we know from the chronicles of Bernardi.

In Cesena the duke occupied the splendid palace of Malatesta Novello,
which had been magnificently equipped for him, and there, on Christmas
Eve, he entertained the Council of the town and other important citizens
to a banquet worthy of the repuation for lavishness which he enjoyed. He
was very different in this from his father, whose table habits were of
the most sparing--to which, no doubt, his Holiness owed the wonderful,
almost youthful vigour which he still enjoyed in this his seventieth
year. It was notorious that ambassadors cared little for invitations to
the Pope’s table, where the meal never consisted of more than one dish.

On Christmas Day the duke attended Mass at the Church of San Giovanni
Evangelista with great pomp, arrayed in the ducal chlamys and followed
by his gentlemen. With these young patricians Cesare made merry during
the days that followed. The time was spent in games and joustings,
in all of which the duke showed himself freely, making display of his
physical perfections, fully aware, no doubt, of what a short cut these
afforded him to the hearts of the people, ever ready to worship physical
beauty, prowess, and address.

Yet business was not altogether neglected, for on January 4 he went
to Porto Cesenatico, and there published an edict against all who had
practised with the fuorusciti from his States, forbidding the offence
under pain of death and forfeiture of possessions.

He remained in winter quarters until the following April, from which,
however, it is not to be concluded that Faenza was allowed to be at
peace for that spell. The orders which he had left behind him, that the
town was constantly to be harassed, were by no means neglected. On the
night of January 21, by arrangement with some of the inhabitants of the
beleaguered city, the foot surrounding Faenza attempted to surprise the
garrison by a secret escalade. They were, however, discovered betimes in
the attempt and repulsed, some who had the mischance--as it happened--to
gain the battlements before the alarm was raised being taken and hanged.
The duke’s troops, however, consoled themselves by capturing Russi
and Solarolo, the last two strongholds in the valley that had held for
Astorre.

Meanwhile, Cesare and his merry young patricians spent the time as
agreeably as might be in Cesena during that carnival. The author of
the Diario Cesenate is moved by the duke’s pastimes to criticize him
severely as indulging in amusements unbecoming the dignity of his
station. He is particularly shocked to know that the duke should have
gone forth in disguise with a few companions to repair to carnival
festivities in the surrounding villages and there to wrestle with the
rustics. It is not difficult to imagine the discomfiture suffered by
many a village Hercules at the hands of this lithe young man, who could
behead a bull at a single stroke of a spadoon and break a horseshoe in
his fingers. The diary in question, you will have gathered, is that of
a pedant, prim and easily scandalized. So much being obvious, it is
noteworthy that Cesare’s conduct should have afforded him no subject
for graver strictures than these, Cesare being such a man as has been
represented, and the time being that of carnival when licence was
allowed full play.

The Pope accounted that the check endured by Cesare before Faenza was
due not so much to the foul weather by which his army had been beset as
to the assistance which Giovanni Bentivogli had rendered his grandson
Astorre, and bitter were the complaints of it which he addressed to
the King of France. Alarmed by this, and fearing that he might have
compromised himself and jeopardized the French protection by his action
in the matter, Bentivogli made haste to recall his troops, and did in
fact withdraw them from Faenza early in December, shortly after Cesare
had gone into winter quarters. Nevertheless, the Pope’s complaints
continued, Alexander in his secret, crafty heart no doubt rejoicing that
Bentivogli should have afforded him so sound a grievance. As Louis
XII desired, for several reasons, to stand well with Rome, he sent an
embassy to Bentivogli to express his regret and censure of the latter’s
intervention in the affairs of Faenza. He informed Bentivogli that the
Pope was demanding the return of Bologna to the States of the Church,
and, without expressing himself clearly as to his own view of the
matter, he advised Bentivogli to refrain from alliances with the
enemies of the Holy See and to secure Bologna to himself by some sound
arrangement. This showed Bentivogli in what danger he stood, and his
uneasiness was increased by the arrival at Modena of Yves d’Allègre,
sent by the King of France with a condotta of 500 horse for purposes
which were not avowed but which Bentivogli sorely feared might prove to
be hostile to himself.

At the beginning of February Cesare moved his quarters from Cesena to
Imola, and thence he sent his envoys to demand winter quarters for his
troops in Castel Bolognese. This flung Bentivogli into positive terror,
as he interpreted the request as a threat of invasion. Castel Bolognese
was too valuable a stronghold to be so lightly placed in the duke’s
hands. Thence Bentivogli might, in case of need, hold the duke in check,
the fortress commanding, as it did, the road from Imola to Faenza.
He had the good sense, however, to compromise the matter by returning
Cesare an offer of accommodation for his men with victuals, artillery,
etc., but without the concession of Castel Bolognese. With this Cesare
was forced to be content, there being no reasonable grounds upon which
he could decline so generous an offer. It was a cunning concession on
Bentivogli’s part, for, without strengthening the duke’s position, it
yet gave the latter what he ostensibly required, and left no cause for
grievance and no grounds upon which to molest Bologna. So much was this
the case that on February 26 the Pope wrote to Bentivogli expressing his
thanks at the assistance which he had thus given Cesare in the Faenza
emprise.

It was during this sojourn of Cesare’s at Imola that the abduction took
place of Dorotea Caracciolo, the young wife of Gianbattista Caracciolo,
a captain of foot in the Venetian service. The lady, who was attached to
the Duchess of Urbino, had been residing at the latter’s Court, and in
the previous December Caracciolo had begged leave of the Council of Ten
that he might himself go to Urbino for the purpose of escorting her to
Venice. The Council, however, had replied that he should send for her,
and this the captain had done. Near Cervia, on the confines of the
Venetian territory, towards evening of February 14, the lady’s escort
was set upon by ten well­armed men, and rudely handled by them, some
being wounded and one at least killed, whilst the lady and a woman who
was with her were carried off.

The Podestá of Cervia reported to the Venetian Senate that the abductors
were Spaniards of the army of the Duke of Valentinois, and it was feared
in Venice--according to Sanuto--that the deed might be the work of
Cesare.

The matter contained in that Relation of Capello’s to the Senate must
by now have been widespread, and of a man who could perpetrate the
wickednesses therein divulged anything could be believed. Indeed, it
seems to have followed that, where any act of wickedness was brought to
light, at once men looked to see if Cesare might not be responsible,
nor looked close enough to make quite sure. To no other cause can it be
assigned that, in the stir which the Senate made, the name of Cesare
was at once suggested as that of the abductor, and this so broadly that
letters poured in upon him on all sides begging him to right this
cruel wrong. So much do you see assumed, upon no more evidence than
was contained in that letter from the Podestá of Cervia, which went no
further than to say that the abductors were “Spaniards of the Duke of
Valentinois’ army.” The envoy Manenti was dispatched at once to Cesare
by the Senate, and he went persuaded, it is clear, that Cesare Borgia
was the guilty person. He enlisted the support of Monsieur de Trans (the
French ambassador then on his way to Rome) and that of Yves d’Allègre,
and he took them with him to the Duke at Imola.

There, acting upon his strong suspicions, Manenti appears to have taken
a high tone, representing to the duke that he had done an unworthy
thing, and imploring him to restore the lady to her husband. Cesare’s
patience under the insolent assumption in justification of which Manenti
had not a single grain of evidence to advance, is--guilty or innocent--a
rare instance of self-control. He condescended to take oath that he had
not done this thing which they imputed to him. He admitted that he had
heard of the outrage, and he expressed the belief that it was the work
of one Diego Ramires--a captain of foot in his service. This Ramires, he
explained, had been in the employ of the Duke of Urbino, and in Urbino
had made the acquaintance and fallen enamoured of the lady; and he added
that the fellow had lately disappeared, but that already he had set on
foot a search for him, and that, once taken, he would make an example of
him.

In conclusion he begged that the Republic should not believe this thing
against him, assuring the envoy that he had not found the ladies of the
Romagna so difficult that he should be driven to employ such rude and
violent measures.

The French ambassador certainly appears to have attached implicit faith
to Cesare’s statement, and he privately informed Manenti that Ramires
was believed to be at Medola, and that the Republic might rest assured
that, if he were taken, exemplary justice would be done.

All this you will find recorded in Sanuto. After that his diary
entertains us with rumours which were reaching Venice, now that the
deed was the duke’s, now that the lady was with Ramires. Later the two
rumours are consolidated into one, in a report of the Podestá of Cervia
to the effect that “the lady is in the Castle of Forli with Ramires, and
that he took her there by order of the duke.” The Podestá says that a
man whom he sent to gather news had this story from one Benfaremo. But
he omits to say who and what is this Benfaremo, and what the source of
his information.

Matters remaining thus, and the affair appearing in danger of being
forgotten, Caracciolo goes before the Senate on March 16 and implores
permission to deal with it himself. This permission is denied him, the
Doge conceiving that the matter will best be dealt with by the Senate,
and Caracciolo is ordered back to his post at Gradisca. Thence he writes
to the Senate on March 30 that he is certain his wife is in the citadel
of Forli.

After this Sanuto does not mention the matter again until December of
1503--nearly three years later--when we gather that, under pressure
of constant letters from the husband, the Venetian ambassador at the
Vatican makes so vigorous a stir that the lady is at last delivered up,
and goes for the time being into a convent. But we are not told where or
how she is found, nor where the convent in which she seeks shelter. That
is Sanuto’s first important omission.

And now an odd light is thrown suddenly upon the whole affair, and
it begins to look as if the lady had been no unwilling victim of an
abduction, but, rather, a party to an elopement. She displays a positive
reluctance to return to her husband; she is afraid to do so--“in
fear for her very life”--and she implores the Senate to obtain from
Caracciolo some security for her, or else to grant her permission to
withdraw permanently to a convent.

The Senate summons the husband, and represents the case to him. He
assures the Senate that he has forgiven his wife, believing her to be
innocent. This, however, does not suffice to allay her uneasiness--or
her reluctance--for on January 4, 1504, Sanuto tells us that the Senate
has received a letter of thanks from her in which she relates her
misfortunes, and in which again she begs that her husband be compelled
to pledge security to treat her well (“darli buona vita”) or else that
she should be allowed to return to her mother. Of the nature of the
misfortunes which he tells us she related in her letter, Sanuto says
nothing. That is his second important omission.

The last mention of the subject in Sanuto relates to her restoration to
her husband. He tells us that Caracciolo received her with great joy;
but he is silent on the score of the lady’s emotions on that occasion.

There you have all that is known of Dorotea Caracciolo’s abduction,
which later writers--including Bembo in his Historiae--have positively
assigned to Cesare Borgia, drawing upon their imagination to fill up the
lacunae in the story so as to support their point of view.

Those lacunae, however, are invested with a certain eloquence which it
is well not to disregard. Admitting that the construing of silence into
evidence is a dangerous course, all fraught with pitfalls, yet it seems
permissible to pose the following questions:

If the revelation of the circumstances under which she was found, the
revelations contained in her letters to the Senate, and the revelations
which one imagines must have followed her return to her husband, confirm
past rumours and convict Cesare of the outrage, how does it happen that
Sanuto--who has never failed to record anything that could tell against
Cesare--should be silent on the matter? And how does it happen that so
many pens that busied themselves greedily with scandal that touched the
Borgias should be similarly silent? Is it unreasonable to infer that
those revelations did not incriminate him--that they gave the lie to all
the rumours that had been current? If that is not the inference, then
what is?

It is further noteworthy that on January 16--after Dorotea’s letter to
the Senate giving the details of her misfortunes, which details Sanuto
has suppressed--Diego Ramires, the real and known abductor, is still the
object of a hunt set afoot by some Venetians. Would that be the case had
her revelations shown Ramires to be no more than the duke’s instrument?
Possibly; but not probably. In such a case he would not have been worth
the trouble of pursuing.

Reasonably may it be objected: How, if Cesare was not guilty, does it
happen that he did not carry out his threat of doing exemplary justice
upon Ramires when taken--since Ramires obviously lay in his power for
years after the event? The answer to that you will find in the lady’s
reluctance to return to Caracciolo, and the tale it tells. It is not
in the least illogical to assume that, when Cesare threatened that
vengeance upon Ramires for the outrage which it was alleged had been
committed, he fully intended to execute it; but that, upon taking
Ramires, and upon discovering that here was no such outrage as had been
represented, but just the elopement of a couple of lovers, he found
there was nothing for him to avenge. Was it for Cesare Borgia to set up
as a protector and avenger of cuckolds? Rather would it be in keeping
with the feelings of his age and race to befriend the fugitive pair who
had planted the antlers upon the brow of the Venetian captain.

Lastly, Cesare’s attitude towards women may be worth considering, that
we may judge whether such an act as was imputed to him is consistent
with it. Women play no part whatever in his history. Not once shall
you find a woman’s influence swaying him; not once shall you see
him permitting dalliance to retard his advancement or jeopardize his
chances. With him, as with egotists of his type, governed by cold will
and cold intellect, the sentimental side of the relation of the sexes
has no place. With him one woman was as another woman; as he
craved women, so he took women, but with an almost contemptuous
undiscrimination. For all his needs concerning them the lupanaria
sufficed.

Is this mere speculation, think you? Is there no evidence to support
it, do you say? Consider, pray, in all its bearings the treatise on
pudendagra dedicated to a man of Cesare Borgia’s rank by the physician
Torella, written to meet his needs, and see what inference you draw
from that. Surely such an inference as will invest with the ring of
truth--expressing as it does his intimate nature, and confirming further
what has here been said--that answer of his to the Venetian envoy, “that
he had not found the ladies of Romagna so difficult that he should be
driven to such rude and violent measures.”




CHAPTER VIII. ASTORRE MANFREDI


On March 29 Cesare Borgia departed from Cesena--whither, meanwhile, he
had returned--to march upon Faenza, resume the attack, and make an end
of the city’s stubborn resistance.

During the past months, however, and notwithstanding the presence of the
Borgia troops in the territory, the people of Faenza had been able to
increase their fortifications by the erection of out-works and a stout
bastion in the neighbourhood of the Osservanza Hospital, well beyond the
walls. This bastion claimed Cesare’s first attention, and it was carried
by assault on April 12. Thither he now fetched his guns, mounted them,
and proceeded to a steady bombardment of the citadel. But the resistance
continued with unabated determination--a determination amounting to
heroism, considering the hopelessness of their case and the straits to
which the Faentini were reduced by now. Victuals and other necessaries
of life had long since been running low. Still the men of Faenza
tightened their belts, looked to their defences, and flung defiance
at the Borgia. The wealthier inhabitants distributed wine and flour at
prices purely nominal, and lent Astorre money for the payment of his
troops. It is written that to the same end the very priests, their
patriotism surmounting their duty to the Holy Father in whose name
this war was waged, consented to the despoiling of the churches and the
melting down of the sacred vessels.

Even the women of Faenza bore their share of the burden of defence,
carrying to the ramparts the heavy stones that were to be hurled down
upon the besiegers, or actually donning casque and body-armour and doing
sentry duty on the walls while the men rested.

But the end was approaching. On April 18 the Borgia cannon opened at
last a breach in the walls, and Cesare delivered a terrible assault upon
the citadel. The fight upon the smoking ruins was fierce and determined
on both sides, the duke’s men pressing forward gallantly under showers
of scalding pitch and a storm of boulders, launched upon them by the
defenders, who used the very ruins of the wall for ammunition. For four
hours was that assault maintained; nor did it cease until the deepening
dusk compelled Cesare to order the retreat, since to continue in the
failing light was but to sacrifice men to no purpose.

Cesare’s appreciation of the valour of the garrison ran high. It
inspired him with a respect which shows his dispassionate breadth of
mind, and he is reported to have declared that with an army of such men
as those who held Faenza against him he would have conquered all Italy.
He did not attempt a second assault, but confined himself during the
three days that followed to continuing the bombardment.

Within Faenza men were by now in desperate case. Weariness and hunger
were so exhausting their endurance, so sapping their high valour that
nightly there were desertions to the duke’s camp of men who could bear
no more. The fugitives from the town were well received, all save one--a
man named Grammante, a dyer by trade--who, in deserting to the duke,
came in to inform him that at a certain point of the citadel the
defences were so weak that an assault delivered there could not fail to
carry it.

This man afforded Cesare an opportunity of marking his contempt for
traitors and his respect for the gallant defenders of Faenza. The
duke hanged him for his pains under the very walls of the town he had
betrayed.

On the 21st the bombardment was kept up almost without interruption for
eight hours, and so shattered was the citadel by that pitiless cannonade
that the end was in sight at last. But the duke’s satisfaction was
tempered by his chagrin at the loss of Achille Tiberti, one of the most
valiant of his captains, and one who had followed his fortunes from the
first with conspicuous devotion. He was killed by the bursting of a gun.
A great funeral at Cesena bore witness to the extent to which Cesare
esteemed and honoured him.

Astorre, now seeing the citadel in ruins and the possibility of further
resistance utterly exhausted, assembled the Council of Faenza to
determine upon their course of action, and, as a result of their
deliberations, the young tyrant sent his ambassadors to the duke to
propose terms of surrender. It was a belated proposal, for there was no
longer on Cesare’s part the necessity to make terms. The city’s defences
were destroyed, and to talk of surrender now was to talk of giving
something that no longer existed. Yet Cesare met the ambassadors in a
spirit of splendid generosity.

The terms proposed were that the people of Faenza should have immunity
for themselves and their property; that Astorre should have freedom to
depart and to take with him his moveable possessions, his immoveables
remaining at the mercy of the Pope. By all the laws of war Cesare was
entitled to a heavy indemnity for the losses he had sustained through
the resistance opposed to him. Considering those same laws and the
application they were wont to receive in his day, no one could have
censured him had he rejected all terms and given the city over to
pillage. Yet not only does he grant the terms submitted to him, but in
addition he actually lends an ear to the Council’s prayer that out of
consideration for the great suffering of the city in the siege he should
refrain from exacting any indemnity. This was to be forbearing indeed;
but he was to carry his forbearance even further. In answer to the
Council’s expressed fears of further harm at the hands of his troopers
once these should be in Faenza, he actually consented to effect no
entrance into the town.

We are not for a moment to consider Cesare as actuated in all this by
any lofty humanitarianism. He was simply pursuing that wise policy of
his, in refraining from punishing conquered States which were to
be subject henceforth to his rule, and which, therefore, must be
conciliated that they might be loyal to him. But it is well that you
should at least appreciate this policy and the fruit it bore when you
read that Cesare Borgia was a blood-glutted monster of carnage who
ravaged the Romagna, rending and devouring it like some beast of prey.

On the 26th the Council waited upon Cesare at the Hospital of the
Osservanza--where he was lodged--to tender the oath of fealty. That same
evening Astorre himself, attended by a few of his gentlemen, came to the
duke.

To this rather sickly and melancholy lad, who had behind him a terrible
family history of violence, and to his bastard brother, Gianevangelista,
the duke accorded the most gracious welcome. Indeed, so amiable did
Astorre find the duke that, although the terms of surrender afforded
him perfect liberty to go whither he listed, he chose to accept the
invitation Cesare extended to him to remain in the duke’s train.

It is eminently probable, however, that the duke’s object in keeping the
young man about him was prompted by another phase of that policy of
his which Macchiavelli was later to formulate into rules of conduct,
expedient in a prince:

“In order to preserve a newly acquired State particular attention should
be given to two points. In the first place care should be taken entirely
to extinguish the family of the ancient sovereign; in the second, laws
should not be changed, nor taxes increased.”

Thus Macchiavelli. The second point is all that is excellent; the first
is all that is wise--cold, horrible, and revolting though it be to our
twentieth-century notions.

Cesare Borgia, as a matter of fact, hardly went so far as Macchiavelli
advises. He practised discrimination. He did not, for instance, seek the
lives of Pandolfaccio Malatesta, or of Caterina Sforza-Riario. He saw
no danger in their living, no future trouble to apprehend from them. The
hatred borne them by their subjects was to Cesare a sufficient guarantee
that they would not be likely to attempt a return to their dominions,
and so he permitted them to keep their lives. But to have allowed
Astorre Manfredi, or even his bastard brother, to live would have been
bad policy from the appallingly egotistical point of view which was
Cesare’s--a point of view, remember, which receives Macchiavelli’s
horribly intellectual, utterly unsentimental, revoltingly practical
approval.

So--to anticipate a little--we see Cesare taking Astorre and
Gianevangelista Manfredi to Rome when he returned thither in the
following June. A fortnight later--on June 26--the formidable amazon of
Forli, the Countess Sforza-Riario, was liberated, as we know, from the
Castle of Sant’ Angelo, and permitted to withdraw to Florence. But the
gates of that grim fortress, in opening to allow her to pass out, opened
also for the purpose of admitting Astorre and Gianevangelista, upon whom
they closed.

All that is known positively of the fate of these unfortunate young men
is that they never came forth again alive.

The record in Burchard (June 9, 1502) of Astorre’s body having been
found in the Tiber with a stone round his neck, suffers in probability
from the addition that, “together with it were found the bodies of two
young men with their arms tied, a certain woman, and many others.”

The dispatch of Giustiniani to the effect that: “It is said that
this night were thrown into Tiber and drowned the two lords of Faenza
together with their seneschal,” was never followed up by any other
dispatch confirming the rumour, nor is it confirmed by any dispatch so
far discovered from any other ambassador, nor yet does the matter find
place in the Chronicles of Faenza.

But that is of secondary importance. The ugliest feature of the case is
not the actual assassination of the young men, but the fact that Cesare
had pledged himself that Astorre should go free, and yet had kept him
by him--at first, it would seem, in his train, and later as a
prisoner--until he put an end to his life. It was an ugly, unscrupulous
deed; but there is no need to exaggerate its heinousness, as is
constantly done, upon no better authority than Guicciardini’s, who
wrote that the murder had been committed “saziata prima la libidine di
qualcuno.”

Of all the unspeakable calumnies of which the Borgias have been the
subject, none is more utterly wanton than this foul exhalation of
Guicciardini’s lewd invention. Let the shame that must eternally attach
to him for it brand also those subsequent writers who repeated and
retailed that abominable and utterly unsupported accusation, and more
particularly those who have not hesitated to assume that Guicciardini’s
“qualcuno” was an old man in his seventy-second year--Pope Alexander VI.

Others a little more merciful, a little more careful of physical
possibilities (but no whit less salacious) have taken it that Cesare was
intended by the Florentine historian.

But, under one form or another, the lie has spread as only such foulness
can spread. It has become woven into the warp of history; it has grown
to be one of those “facts” which are unquestioningly accepted, but it
stands upon no better foundation than the frequent repetition which a
charge so monstrous could not escape. Its source is not a contemporary
one. It is first mentioned by Guicciardini; and there is no logical
conclusion to be formed other than that Guicciardini invented it.
Another story which owes its existence mainly, and its particulars
almost entirely, to Guicciardini’s libellous pen--the story of the death
of Alexander VI, which in its place shall be examined--provoked the
righteous anger of Voltaire. Atheist and violent anti-clerical though
he was, the story’s obvious falseness so revolted him that he penned his
formidable indictment in which he branded Guicciardini as a liar who had
deceived posterity that he might vent his hatred of the Borgias. Better
cause still was there in this matter of Astorre Manfredi for Voltaire’s
indignation, as there is for the indignation of all conscientious
seekers after truth.




CHAPTER IX. CASTEL BOLOGNESE AND PIOMBINO


To return to the surrender of Faenza on April 26, 1501, we see Cesare
on the morrow of that event, striking camp with such amazing suddenness
that he does not even pause to provide for the government of the
conquered tyranny, but appoints a vicar four days later to attend to it.

He makes his abrupt departure from Faenza, and is off like a whirlwind
to sweep unexpectedly into the Bolognese territory, and, by striking
swiftly, to terrify Bentivogli into submission in the matter of Castel
Bolognese.

This fortress, standing in the duke’s dominions, on the road between
Faenza and Imola, must be a menace to him whilst in the hands of a power
that might become actively hostile.

Ahead of him Cesare sent an envoy to Bentivogli, to demand its
surrender.

The alarmed Lord of Bologna, having convened his Council (the
Reggimento), replied that they must deliberate in the matter; and two
days later they dispatched their ambassador to lay before Cesare the
fruits of these deliberations. They were to seek the duke at Imola; but
they got no farther than Castel S. Pietro, which to their dismay they
found already in the hands of Vitellozzo Vitelli’s men-at­arms. For,
what time Bentivogli had been deliberating, Cesare Borgia had
been acting with that promptness which was one of his most salient
characteristics, and, in addition to Castel S. Pietro he had already
captured Casalfiuminense, Castel Guelfo, and Medecina, which were now
invested by his troops.

When the alarming news of this swift action reached Bologna it caused
Bentivogli to bethink him at last of Louis XII’s advice, that he should
come to terms with Cesare Borgia, and he realized that the time to do
so could no longer be put off. He made haste, therefore, to agree to the
surrender of Castel Bolognese to the duke, to concede him stipend for
one hundred lances of three men each, and to enter into an undertaking
to lend him every assistance for one year against any power with which
he might be at war, the King of France excepted. In return, Cesare
was to relinquish the captured strongholds and undertake that the Pope
should confirm Bentivogli in his ancient privileges. On April 29 Paolo
Orsini went as Cesare’s plenipotentiary to Bologna to sign this treaty.

It was a crafty arrangement on Bentivogli’s part, for, over and above
the pacification of Cesare and the advantage of an alliance with him, he
gained as a result the alliance also of those famous condottieri Vitelli
and Orsini, both bitter enemies of Florence--the latter intent upon
the restoration of the Medici, the former impatient to avenge upon the
Signory the execution of his brother Paolo. As an instalment, on account
of that debt, Vitelli had already put to death Pietro da Marciano--the
brother of Count Rinuccio da Marciano--when this gentleman fell into his
hands at Medicina.

Two days before the treaty was signed, Bentivogli had seized four
members of the powerful House of Marescotti. This family was related to
the exiled Malvezzi, who were in arms with Cesare, and Bentivogli feared
that communications might be passing between the two to his undoing.
On that suspicion he kept them prisoners for the present, nor did be
release them when the treaty was signed, nor yet when, amid public
rejoicings expressing the relief of the Bolognese, it was published on
May 2.

Hermes Bentivogli--Giovanni’s youngest son--was on guard at the palace
with several other young Bolognese patricians, and he incited these to
go with him to make an end of the traitors who had sought to destroy the
peace by their alleged plottings with Bentivogli’s enemies in Cesare’s
camp. He led his companions to the chamber where the Marescotti were
confined, and there, more or less in cold blood, those four gentlemen
were murdered for no better reason--ostensibly--than because it was
suspected they had been in communication with their relatives in the
Duke of Valentinois’s army. That was the way of the Cinquecento, which
appears to have held few things of less account than human life.

In passing, it may be mentioned that Guicciardini, of course, does his
ludicrous best to make this murder appear--at least indirectly, since
directly it would be impossible--the work of Cesare Borgia.

As for Castel Bolognese itself, Cesare Borgia sent a thousand
demolishers in the following July to raze it to the ground. It is said
to have been the most beautiful castle in the Romagna; but Cesare had
other qualities than beauty to consider in the matter of a stronghold.
Its commanding position rendered it almost in the nature of a gateway
controlling, as we know, the road from Faenza to Imola, and its
occupation by the Bolognese or other enemies in time of disturbance
might be of serious consequence to Cesare. Therefore he ruthlessly
ordered Ramiro de Lorqua to set about its demolition.

The Council of Castel Bolognese made great protest, and implored Ramiro
to stay his hand until they should have communicated with the duke
petitioning for the castle’s preservation; but Ramiro--a hard, stern
man, and Cesare’s most active officer in the Romagna--told them bluntly
that to petition the duke in such a matter would be no better than a
waste of time. He was no more than right; for Cesare, being resolved
upon the expediency of the castle’s destruction, would hardly be likely
to listen to sentimental reasonings for its preservation. Confident of
this, Ramiro without more ado set about the execution of the orders he
had received. He pulled down the walls and filled up the moat, until
nothing remained so much as to show the place where the fortress had
stood.

Another fortress which shared the fate of Castel Bolognese was the
Castle of Sant’ Arcangelo, and similarly would Cesare have disposed
of Solarolo, but that, being of lesser importance and the inhabitants
offering, in their petition for its preservation, to undertake,
themselves, the payment of the Castellan, he allowed it to remain.

Scarcely was the treaty with Bologna signed than Cesare received letters
from the Pope recalling him to Rome, and recommending that he should not
molest the Florentines in his passage--a recommendation which Alexander
deemed very necessary considering the disposition towards Florence
of Vitelli and Orsini. He foresaw that they would employ arguments to
induce Valentinois into an enterprise of which all the cost would be
his, and all the possible profit their own.

The duke would certainly have obeyed and avoided Tuscany, but
that--precisely as the shrewd Pope had feared--Vitelli and Orsini
implored him to march through Florentine territory. Vitelli, indeed,
flung himself on his knees before Cesare in the vehemence of his
supplications, urging that his only motive was to effect the deliverance
from his unjust imprisonment of Cerbone, who had been his executed
brother’s chancellor. Beyond that, he swore he would make no demands
upon Florence, that he would not attempt to mix himself in the affairs
of the Medici, and that he would do no violence to town or country.

Thus implored, Cesare gave way. Probably he remembered the very
circumstances under which Vitelli had joined his banner, and considered
that he could not now oppose a request backed by a promise of so much
moderation; so on May 7 he sent his envoys to the Signory to crave leave
of passage for his troops through Florentine territory.

Whilst still in the Bolognese he was sought out by Giuliano de’Medici,
who begged to be allowed to accompany him, a request which Cesare
instantly refused, as being contrary to that to which he had engaged
himself, and he caused Giuliano to fall behind at Lojano. Nor would he
so much as receive in audience Piero de’Medici, who likewise sought to
join him in Siennese territory, as soon as he perceived what was toward.
Yet, however much the duke protested that he had no intention to make
any change in the State of Florence, there were few who believed him.
Florence, weary and sorely reduced by the long struggle of the Pisan
war, was an easy prey. Conscious of this, great was her anxiety and
alarm at Cesare’s request for passage. The Signory replied granting him
the permission sought, but imposing the condition that he should keep to
the country, refraining from entering any town, nor bring with him into
Florentine territory Vitelli, Orsini, or any other enemy of the existing
government. It happened, however, that when the Florentine ambassador
reached him with this reply the duke was already over the frontier of
Tuscany with the excluded condottieri in his train.

It was incumbent upon him, as a consequence, to vindicate this
high-handed anticipation of the unqualified Florentine permission which
had not arrived. So he declared that he had been offended last year by
Florence in the matter of Forli, and again this year in the matter of
Faenza, both of which cities he charged the Signory with having assisted
to resist him, and he announced that, to justify his intentions so far
as Florence was concerned, he would explain himself at Barberino.

There, on May 12, he gave audience to the ambassador. He declared to him
that he desired a good understanding with Florence, and that she should
offer no hindrance to the conquest of Piombino, upon which he was now
bound; adding that since he placed no trust in the present government,
which already had broken faith with him, he would require some good
security for the treaty to be made. Of reinstating the Medici he said
nothing; but he demanded that some satisfaction be given Vitelli and
Orsini, and, to quicken Florence in coming to a decision, he pushed
forward with his army as far as Forno dei Campi--almost under her very
walls.

The Republic was thrown into consternation. Instantly she got together
what forces she disposed of, and proceeded to fling her artillery into
the Arno, to the end that she should be constrained neither to refuse it
to Cesare upon his demand, nor yet to deliver it.

Macchiavelli censures the Signory’s conduct of this affair as impolitic.
He contends that the duke, being in great strength of arms, and Florence
not armed at all, and therefore in no case to hinder his passage, it
would have been wiser and the Signory would better have saved its face
and dignity, had it accorded Cesare the permission to pass which he
demanded, rather than have been subjected to behold him enforce that
passage by weight of arms. But all that now concerned the Florentines
was to be rid of an army whose presence in their territory was a
constant menace. And to gain that end they were ready to give any
undertakings, just as they were resolved to fulfil none.

Similarly, it chanced that Cesare was in no less a hurry to be gone; for
he had received another letter from the Pope commanding his withdrawal,
and in addition, he was being plagued by Vitelli and Orsini--grown
restive--with entreaties for permission to go into either Florence or
Pistoja, where they did not lack for friends. To resist them Cesare had
need of all the severity and resolution he could command; and he even
went so far as to back his refusal by a threat himself to take up arms
against them if they insisted.

On the 15th, at last, the treaty--which amounted to an offensive and
defensive alliance--was signed. By the terms of this, Florence undertook
to give Cesare a condotta of 300 lances for three years, to be used in
Florentine service, with a stipend of 36,000 ducats yearly. How much
this really meant the duke was to discover two days later, when he
sent to ask the Signory to lend him some cannon for the emprise against
Piombino, and to pay him the first instalment of one quarter of the
yearly stipend before he left Florentine territory. The Signory replied
that, by the terms of the agreement, there was no obligation for
the immediate payment of the instalment, whilst in the matter of the
artillery they put him off from day to day, until Cesare understood that
their only aim in signing the treaty had been the immediate one of being
rid of his army.

The risk Florence incurred in so playing fast-and-loose with such a
man, particularly in a moment of such utter unfitness to resist him, is,
notwithstanding the French protection enjoyed by the Signory, amazing
in its reckless audacity. It was fortunate for Florence that the Pope’s
orders tied the duke’s hands--and it may be that of this the Signory
had knowledge, and that it was upon such knowledge, in conjunction with
France’s protection, that it was presuming. Cesare took the matter in
the spirit of an excellent loser.

Not a hint of his chagrin and resentment did he betray; instead, he set
about furnishing his needs elsewhere, sending Vitelli to Pisa with a
request for artillery, a request to which Pisa very readily responded,
as much on Vitelli’s account as on the duke’s. As for Florence, if
Cesare Borgia could be terribly swift in punishing, he could also be
formidably slow. If he could strike upon the instant where the opening
for a blow appeared, he could also wait for months until the opening
should be found. He waited now.

It would be at about this time that young Loenardo da Vinci sought
employment in Cesare Borgia’s service. Leonardo had been in Milan until
the summer of 1500, when he repaired to Florence in quest of better
fortune; but, finding little or no work to engage him there, he took the
chance of the duke of Valentinois’s passage to offer his service to one
whose liberal patronage of the arts was become proverbial. Cesare
took him into his employ as engineer and architect, leaving him in the
Romagna for the present. Leonardo may have superintended the repairs of
the Castle of Forli, whilst he certainly built the canal from Cesena to
the Porto Cesenatico, before rejoining the duke in Rome.

On May 25 Cesare moved by the way of the valley of Cecina to try
conclusions with Giacomo d’Appiano, Tyrant of Piombino, who with some
Genoese and some Florentine aid, was disposed to offer resistance to the
duke. The first strategic movement in this affair must be the capture
of the Isle of Elba, whence aid might reach Piombino on its promontory
thrusting out into the sea. For this purpose the Pope sent from Civita
Vecchia six galleys, three brigantines, and two galleons under the
command of Lodovico Mosca, captain of the papal navy, whilst Cesare
was further reinforced by some vessels sent him from Pisa together with
eight pieces of cannon. With these he made an easy capture of Elba and
Pianosa. That done, he proceeded to lay siege to Piombino, which, after
making a gallant resistance enduring for two months, was finally pressed
to capitulate.

Long before that happened, however, Cesare had taken his departure.
Being awaited in Rome, he was unable to conduct the siege operations
in person. So he quitted Piombino in June to join the French under
d’Aubigny, bound at last upon the conquest of Naples, and claiming--as
their treaty with him provided--Cesare’s collaboration.




CHAPTER X. THE END OF THE HOUSE OF ARAGON


Cesare arrived in Rome on June 13. There was none of the usual pomp on
this occasion. He made his entrance quietly, attended only by a small
body of men-at-arms, and he was followed, on the morrow, by Yves
d’Allègre with the army--considerably reduced by the detachments which
had been left to garrison the Romagna, and to lay siege to Piombino.

Repairing to his quarters in the Vatican, the duke remained so close
there for the few weeks that he abode in Rome on this occasion(1) that,
from now onward, it became a matter of the utmost difficulty to obtain
audience from him. This may have been due to his habit of turning night
into day and day into night, whether at work or at play, which in fact
was the excuse offered by the Pope to certain envoys sent to Cesare
from Rimini, who were left to cool their heels about the Vatican
ante-chambers for a fortnight without succeeding in obtaining an
audience.


  1 “Mansit in Palatio secrete,” says Burchard.


Cesare Borgia was now Lord of Imola, Forli, Rimini, Faenza and Piombino,
warranting his assumption of the inclusive title of Duke of Romagna
which he had taken immediately after the fall of Faenza.

As his State grew, so naturally did the affairs of government; and,
during those four weeks in Rome, business claimed his attention and an
enormous amount of it was dispatched. Chiefly was he engaged upon the
administration of the affairs of Faenza, which he had so hurriedly
quitted. In this his shrewd policy of generosity is again apparent. As
his representative and lieutenant he appointed a prominent citizen of
Faenza named Pasi, one of the very members of that Council which had
been engaged in defending the city and resisting Cesare. The duke gave
it as his motive for the choice that the man was obviously worthy of
trust in view of his fidelity to Astorre.

And there you have not only the shrewdness of the man who knows how
to choose his servants--which is one of the most important factors of
success--but a breadth of mind very unusual indeed in the Cinquecento.

In addition to the immunity from indemnity provided for by the terms
of the city’s capitulation, Cesare actually went so far as to grant the
peasantry of the valley 2,000 ducats as compensation for damage done in
the war. Further, he supported the intercessions of the Council to the
Pope for the erection of a new convent to replace the one that had been
destroyed in the bombardment. In giving his consent to this--in a brief
dated July 12, 1501--the Pope announces that he does so in response to
the prayers of the Council and of the duke.

Giovanni Vera, Cesare’s erstwhile preceptor--and still affectionately
accorded this title by the duke--was now Archbiship of Salerno, Cardinal
of Santa Balbina, and papal legate in Macerata, and he was chosen by the
Pope to go to Pesaro and Fano for the purpose of receiving the oath of
fealty. With him Cesare sent, as his own personal representative, his
secretary, Agabito Gherardi, who had been in his employ in that capacity
since the duke’s journey into France, and who was to follow his fortunes
to the end.

However the people of Fano may have refrained from offering themselves
to the duke’s dominion when, in the previous October, he had afforded
them by his presence the opportunity of doing so, their conduct
now hardly indicated that the earlier abstention had been born of
reluctance, or else their minds had undergone, in the meanwhile, a
considerable change. For, when they received the brief appointing
him their lord, they celebrated the event by public rejoicings and
illuminations; whilst on July 21 the Council, representing the people,
in the presence of Vera and Gherardi, took oath upon the Gospels of
allegiance to Cesare and his descendants for ever.

In the Consistory of June 25 of that year the French and Spanish
ambassadors came formally to notify the Holy Father of the treaty of
Granada, entered into in the previous November by Louis XII of the one
part, and Ferdinand and Isabella of the other, concerning the conquest
and division of the Kingdom of Naples. The rival claimants had come to
a compromise by virtue of which they were to undertake together the
conquest and thereafter share the spoil--Naples and the Abruzzi going to
France, and Calabria and Puglia to Spain.

Alexander immediately published his Bull declaring Federigo of Naples
deposed for disobedience to the Church, and for having called the Turk
to his aid, either of which charges it would have taxed Alexander’s
ingenuity--vast though it was--convincingly to have established; or,
being established, to censure when all the facts were considered.
The charges were no better than pretexts for the spoliation of the
unfortunate king who, in the matter of his daughter’s alliance with
Cesare, had conceived that he might flout the Borgias with impunity.

On June 28 d’Aubigny left Rome with the French troops, accompanied by
the bulk of the considerable army with which Cesare supported his French
ally, besides 1,000 foot raised by the Pope and a condotta of 100 lances
under Morgante Baglioni. As the troops defiled before the Castle of
Sant’ Angelo they received the apostolic benediction from the Pope, who
stood on the lower ramparts of the fortress.

Cesare himself cannot have followed to join the army until after July
10, for as late as that date there is an edict indited by him against
all who should offer injury to his Romagna officers. At about the same
time that he quitted Rome to ride after the French, Gonsalo de Cordoba
landed a Spanish army in Calabria, and the days of the Aragon dominion
in Naples were numbered.

King Federigo prepared to face the foe. Whilst himself remaining in
Naples with Prospero Colonna, he sent the bulk of his forces to Capua
under Fabrizio Colonna and Count Rinuccio Marciano--the brother of that
Marciano whom Vitelli had put to death in Tuscany.

Ravaging the territory and forcing its strongholds as they came, the
allies were under the walls of Capua within three weeks of setting out;
but on July 17, when within two miles of the town, they were met by six
hundred lances under Colonna, who attempted to dispute their passage.
It was Cesare Borgia himself who led the charge against them. Jean
d’Auton--in his Chronicles of Louis XII--speaks in warm terms of the
duke’s valour and of the manner in which, by words and by example, he
encouraged his followers to charge the Colonna forces, with such good
effect that they utterly routed the Neapolitans, and drove them headlong
back to the shelter of Capua’s walls.

The allies brought up their cannon, and opened the bombardment. This
lasted incessantly from July 17--which was a Monday--until the following
Friday, when two bastions were so shattered that the French were able
to gain possession of them, putting to the sword some two hundred
Neapolitan soldiers who had been left to defend those outworks. Thence
admittance to the town itself was gained four days later--on the
25th--through a breach, according to some, through the treacherous
opening of a gate, according to others. Through gate or breach the
besiegers stormed to meet a fierce resistance, and the most horrible
carnage followed. Back and back they drove the defenders, fighting their
way through the streets and sparing none in the awful fury that beset
them. The defence was shattered; resistance was at an end; yet still
the bloody work went on. The combat had imperceptibly merged into a
slaughter; demoralized and panic-stricken in the reaction from their
late gallantry, the soldiers of Naples flung down their weapons and
fled, shrieking for quarter. But none was given. The invader butchered
every human thing he came upon, indiscriminant of age or sex, and the
blood of some four thousand victims flowed through the streets of Capua
like water after a thundershower. That sack of Capua is one of the most
horrid pages in the horrid history of sacks. You will find full details
in d’Auton’s chronicle, if you have a mind for such horrors. There is
a brief summary of the event in Burchard’s diary under date of July 26,
1501, which runs as follows:

“At about the fourth hour last night the Pope had news of the capture of
Capua by the Duke of Valentinois. The capture was due to the treason of
one Fabrizio--a citizen of Capua--who secretly introduced the besiegers
and was the first to be killed by them. After him the same fate was
met by some three thousand foot and some two hundred horse-soldiers, by
citizens, priests, conventuals of both sexes, even in the very churches
and monasteries, and all the women taken were given in prey to the
greatest cruelty. The total number of the slain is estimated at four
thousand.”

D’Auton, too, bears witness to this wholesale violation of the women,
“which,” he adds, “is the very worst of all war’s excesses.” He informs
us further that “the foot-soldiers of the Duke of Valentinois acquitted
themselves so well in this, that thirty of the most beautiful women went
captive to Rome,” a figure which is confirmed by Burchard.

“What an opportunity was not this for Guicciardini! The foot-soldiers
of the Duke of Valentinois acquitted themselves so well in this, that
thirty of the most beautiful women went captive to Rome.”

Under his nimble, malicious, unscrupulous pen that statement is
re-edited until not thirty but forty is the number of the captured
victims taken to Rome, and not Valentinois’s foot, but Valentinois
himself the ravisher of the entire forty! But hear the elegant
Florentine’s own words:

“It was spread about [divulgossi]” he writes, “that, besides other
wickednesses worthy of eternal infamy, many women who had taken refuge
in a tower, and thus escaped the first fury of the assault, were found
by the Duke of Valentinois, who, with the title of King’s Lieutenant,
followed the army with no more people than his gentlemen and his
guards.(1) He desired to see them all, and, after carefully examining
them [consideratele diligentemente] he retained forty of the most
beautiful.”


  1  This, incidentally, is another misstatement.  Valentinois had with
him, besides the thousand foot levied by the Pope and the hundred lances
under Morgante Baglioni, an army some thousands strong led for him by
Yves d’Allègre.


Guicciardini’s aim is, of course, to shock you; he considers it
necessary to maintain in Cesare the character of ravenous wolf which he
had bestowed upon him. The marvel is not that Guicciardini should have
penned that utterly ludicrous accusation, but that more or less serious
subsequent writers--and writers of our own time even--instead of being
moved to contemptuous laughter at the wild foolishness of the story,
instead of seeking in the available records the germ of true fact from
which it was sprung, should sedulously and unblushingly have carried
forward its dissemination.

Yriarte not only repeats the tale with all the sober calm of one utterly
destitute of a sense of the ridiculous, but he improves upon it by a
delicious touch, worthy of Guicciardini himself, when he assures us that
Cesare took these forty women for his harem!

It is a nice instance of how Borgia history has grown, and is still
growing.

If verisimilitude itself does not repudiate Guicciardini’s story, there
are the Capuan chronicles to do it--particularly that of Pellegrini, who
witnessed the pillage. In those chronicles from which Guicciardini drew
the matter for this portion of his history of Italy, you will seek in
vain for any confirmation of that fiction with which the Florentine
historian--he who had a pen of gold for his friends and one of iron for
his foes--thought well to adorn his facts.

If the grotesque in history-building is of interest to you, you may turn
the pages of the Storia Civile di Capua, by F. Granata, published in
1752. This writer has carefully followed the Capuan chroniclers in their
relation of the siege; but when it comes to these details of the forty
ladies in the tower (in which those chroniclers fail him) he actually
gives Guicciardini as his authority, setting a fashion which has not
lacked for unconscious, and no less egregious, imitators.

To return from the criticism of fiction to the consideration of fact,
Fabrizio Colonna and Rinuccio da Marciano were among the many captains
of the Neapolitan army that were taken prisoners. Rinuccio was the
head of the Florentine faction which had caused the execution of Paolo
Vitelli, and Giovio has it that Vitellozzo Vitelli, who had already
taken an instalment of vengeance by putting Pietro da Marciano to death
in Tuscany, caused Rinuccio’s wounds to be poisoned, so that he died two
days later.

The fall of Capua was very shortly followed by that of Gaeta, and,
within a week, by that of Naples, which was entered on August 3 by
Cesare Borgia in command of the vanguard of the army. “He who had come
as a cardinal to crown King Federigo, came now as a condottiero to
depose him.”

Federigo offered to surrender to the French all the fortresses that
still held for him, on condition that he should have safe-conduct to
Ischia and liberty to remain there for six months. This was agreed, and
Federigo was further permitted to take with him his moveable possessions
and his artillery, which latter, however, he afterwards sold to the
Pope.

Thus the last member of the House of Aragon to sit upon the throne of
Naples took his departure, accompanied by the few faithful ones who
loved him well enough to follow him into exile; amongst these was that
poet Sanazzaro, who, to avenge the wrong suffered by the master whom he
loved, was to launch his terrible epigrams against Alexander, Cesare,
and Lucrezia, and by means of those surviving verses enable the enemies
of the House of Borgia to vilify their memories through centuries to
follow.

Federigo’s captains Prospero and Fabrizio Colonna, upon being ransomed,
took their swords to Gonzalo de Cordoba, hoping for the day when they
might avenge upon the Borgia the ruin which, even in this Neapolitan
conquest they attributed to the Pope and his son.

And here, so far as Naples is concerned, closes the history of the House
of Aragon. In Italy it was extinct; and it was to become so, too, in
Spain within the century.




CHAPTER XI. THE LETTER TO SILVIO SAVELLI


By September 15 Cesare was back in Rome, the richer in renown, in French
favour, and in a matter of 40,000 ducats, which is estimated as the
total of the sums paid him by France and Spain for the support which his
condotta had afforded them.

During his absence two important events had taken place: the betrothal
of his widowed sister Lucrezia to Alfonso d’Este, son of Duke Ercole of
Ferrara, and the publication of the Bull of excommunication (of August
20) against the Savelli and Colonna in consideration of all that they
had wrought against the Holy See from the pontificate of Sixtus IV
to the present time. By virtue of that Bull the Pope ordered the
confiscation of the possessions of the excommunicated families, whilst
the Caetani suffered in like manner at the same time.

These possessions were divided into two parts, and by the Bull of
September 17 they were bestowed, one upon Lucrezia’s boy Roderigo, and
with them the title of Duke of Sermoneta; the other to a child, Giovanni
Borgia (who is made something of a mystery) with the title of Duke of
Nepi and Palestrina.

The entire proceeding is undoubtedly open to grave censure, since the
distribution of the confiscated fiefs subjects to impeachment the purity
of the motives that prompted this confiscation. It was on the part
of Alexander a gross act of nepotism, a gross abuse of his pontifical
authority; but there is, at least, this to be said, that in perpetrating
it he was doing no more than in his epoch it was customary for Popes to
do. Alexander, it may be said again in this connection, was part of a
corrupt system, not the corrupter of a pure one.

Touching the boy Giovanni Borgia, the mystery attaching to him concerns
his parentage, and arises out of the singular circumstance that there
are two papal Bulls, both dated September 1, 1501, in each of which a
different father is assigned to him, the second appearing to supplement
and correct the first.

The first of these Bulls, addressed to “Dilecto Filio Nobili Joanni de
Borgia, Infanti Romano,” declares him to be a child of three years of
age, the illegitimate son of Cesare Borgia, unmarried (as Cesare was at
the time of the child’s birth) and of a woman (unnamed, as was usual in
such cases) also unmarried.

The second declares him, instead, to be the son of Alexander, and runs:
“Since you bear this deficiency not from the said duke, but from us and
the said woman, which we for good reasons did not desire to express in
the preceding writing.”

That the second Bull undoubtedly contains the truth of the matter is the
only possible explanation of its existence, and the “good reasons”
 that existed for the first one are, no doubt, as Gregorovius says, that
officially and by canon law the Pope was inhibited from recognizing
children. (His other children, be it remembered, were recognized by him
during his cardinalate and before his elevation to St. Peter’s throne.)
Hence the attempt by these Bulls to circumvent the law to the end that
the child should not suffer in the matter of his inheritance.

Burchard, under date of November 3 of that year, freely mentions this
Giovanni Borgia as the son of the Pope and “a certain Roman woman”
 (“quadam Romana”).

On the same date borne by those two Bulls a third one was issued
confirming the House of Este perpetually in the dominion of Ferrara and
its other Romagna possessions, and reducing by one-third the tribute of
4,000 ducats yearly imposed upon that family by Sixtus IV; and it was
explicitly added that these concessions were made for Lucrezia and her
descendants.

Three days later a courier from Duke Ercole brought the news that the
marriage contract had been signed in Ferrara, and it was in salvoes
of artillery that day and illuminations after dark that the Pope gave
expression to the satisfaction afforded him by the prospect of his
daughter’s entering one of the most ancient families and ascending one
of the noblest thrones in Italy.

It would be idle to pretend that the marriage was other than one of
convenience. Love between the contracting parties played no part in this
transaction, and Ercole d’Este was urged to it under suasion of the
King of France, out of fear of the growing might of Cesare, and out of
consideration for the splendid dowry which he demanded and in the matter
of which he displayed a spirit which Alexander contemptuously described
as that of a tradesman. Nor would Ercole send the escort to Rome for the
bride until he had in his hands the Bull of investiture in the fiefs
of Cento and Pieve, which, with 100,000 ducats, constituted Lucrezia’s
dowry. Altogether a most unromantic affair.

The following letter from the Ferrarese ambassador in Rome, dated
September 23, is of interest in connection with this marriage:


“MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE AND MOST NOBLE LORD,

“His Holiness the Pope, taking into consideration such matters as
might occasion displeasure not only to your Excellency and to the Most
Illustrious Don Alfonso, but also to the duchess and even to himself,
has charged us to write to your Excellency to urge you so to contrive
that the Lord Giovanni of Pesaro, who, as your Excellency is aware,
is in Mantua, shall not be in Ferrara at the time of the nuptials.
Notwithstanding that his divorce from the said duchess is absolutely
legitimate and accomplished in accordance with pure truth, as is
publicly known not only from the proceedings of the trial but also from
the free confession of the said Don Giovanni, it is possible that he may
still be actuated by some lingering ill-will; wherefore, should he
find himself in any place where the said lady might be seen by him, her
Excellency might, in consequence, be compelled to withdraw into privacy,
to be spared the memory of the past. Wherefore, his Holiness exhorts
your Excellency to provide with your habitual prudence against such a
contingency.”


Meanwhile, the festivities wherewith her betrothal was celebrated went
merrily amain, and into the midst of them, to bear his share, came
Cesare crowned with fresh laurels gained in the Neapolitan war. No
merry-makings ever held under the auspices of Pope Alexander VI at the
Vatican had escaped being the source of much scandalous rumour, but none
had been so scandalous and disgraceful as the stories put abroad on
this occasion. These found a fitting climax in that anonymous Letter to
Silvio Savelli, published in Germany--which at the time, be it borne in
mind, was extremely inimical to the Pope, viewing with jaundiced eyes
his ever-growing power, and stirred perhaps to this unspeakable burst of
venomous fury by the noble Este alliance, so valuable to Cesare in that
it gave him a friend upon the frontier of his Romagna possessions.

The appalling publication, which is given in full in Burchard, was
fictitiously dated from Gonzola de Cordoba’s Spanish camp at Taranto
on November 25. A copy of this anonymous pamphlet, which is the most
violent attack on the Borgias ever penned, perhaps the most terrible
indictment against any family ever published--a pamphlet which
Gregorovius does not hesitate to call “an authentic document of the
state of Rome under the Borgias”--fell into the hands of the Cardinal of
Modena, who on the last day of the year carried it to the Pope.

Before considering that letter it is well to turn to the entries in
Burchard’s diary under the dates of October 27 and November 11 of that
same year. You will find two statements which have no parallel in the
rest of the entire diary, few parallels in any sober narrative of facts.
The sane mind must recoil and close up before them, so impossible does
it seem to accept them.

The first of these is the relation of the supper given by Cesare in the
Vatican to fifty courtesans--a relation which possibly suggested to
the debauched Regent d’Orléans his fêtes d’Adam, a couple of centuries
later.

Burchard tells us how, for the amusement of Cesare, of the Pope, and of
Lucrezia, these fifty courtesans were set to dance after supper with
the servants and some others who were present, dressed at first and
afterwards not so. He draws for us a picture of those fifty women on all
fours, in all their plastic nudity, striving for the chestnuts flung to
them in that chamber of the Apostolic Palace by Christ’s Vicar--an old
man of seventy--by his son and his daughter. Nor is that all by
any means. There is much worse to follow--matter which we dare not
translate, but must leave more or less discreetly veiled in the decadent
Latin of the Caerimoniarius:

“Tandem exposita dona ultima, diploides de serico, paria caligarum,
bireta ed alia pro illis qui pluries dictas meretrices carnaliter
agnoscerent; que fuerunt ibidem in aula publice carnaliter tractate
arbitrio presentium, dona distributa victoribus.”

Such is the monstrous story!

Gregorovius, in his defence of Lucrezia Borgia, refuses to believe
that she was present; but he is reluctant to carry his incredulity any
further.

“Some orgy of that nature,” he writes, “or something similar may very
well have taken place. But who will believe that Lucrezia, already the
legal wife of Alfonso d’Este and on the eve of departure for Ferrara,
can have been present as a smiling spectator?”

Quite so. Gregorovius puts his finger at once upon one of the obvious
weaknesses of the story. But where there is one falsehood there are
usually others; and if we are not to believe that Lucrezia was present,
why should we be asked to believe in the presence of the Pope? If
Burchard was mistaken in the one, why might he not be mistaken in the
other? But the question is not really one of whom you will believe to
have been present at that unspeakable performance, but rather whether
you can possibly bring yourself to believe that it ever took place as it
is related in the Diarium.

Gregorovius says, you will observe, “Some orgy of that nature, or
something similar, may very well have taken place.” We could credit
that Cesare held “some orgy of that nature.” He had apartments in the
Vatican, and if it shock you to think that it pleased him, with his
gentlemen, to make merry by feasting a parcel of Roman harlots, you
are--if you value justice--to be shocked at the times rather than
the man. The sense of humour of the Cinquecento was primitive, and
in primitive humour prurience plays ever an important part, as is
discernible in the literature and comedies of that age. If you would
appreciate this to the full, consider Burchard’s details of the masks
worn at Carnival by some merry-makers (“Venerunt ad plateam St. Petri
larvati...habentes nasos lungos et grossos in forma priaporum”) and you
must realize that in Cesare’s conduct in this matter there would have
been nothing so very abnormal considered from the point of view of
the Cinquecento, even though it were to approach the details given by
Burchard.

But even so, you will hesitate before you accept the story of that
saturnalia in its entirety, and before you believe that an old man of
seventy, a priest and Christ’s Vicar, was present with Cesare and his
friends. Burchard does not say that he himself was a witness of what he
relates. But the matter shall presently be further considered.

Meanwhile, let us pass to the second of these entries in the diary, and
(a not unimportant detail) on the very next page of it, under the date
of November 11. In this it is related that certain peasants entered Rome
by the Viridarian Gate, driving two mares laden with timber; that, in
crossing the Square of St. Peter’s, some servants of the Pope’s ran
out and cut the cords so that the timber was loosened and the beasts
relieved of their burden; they were then led to a courtyard within the
precincts of the palace, where four stallions were loosed upon them.
“Ascenderunt equas et coierunt cum eis et eas graviter pistarunt et
leserunt,” whilst the Pope at a window above the doorway of the Palace,
with Madonna Lucrezia, witnessed with great laughter and delight, the
show which it is suggested was specially provided for their amusement.

The improbabilities of the saturnalia of the fifty courtesans pale
before the almost utter impossibility of this narrative. To render it
possible in the case of two chance animals as these must have been
under the related circumstances, a biological coincidence is demanded so
utterly unlikely and incredible that we are at once moved to treat the
story with scorn, and reject it as a fiction. Yet not one of those many
writers who have retailed that story from Burchard’s Diarium as a truth
incontestable as the Gospels, has paused to consider this--so blinded
are we when it is a case of accepting that which we desire to accept.

The narrative, too, is oddly--suspiciously--circumstantial, even to the
unimportant detail of the particular gate by which the peasants entered
Rome. In a piece of fiction it is perfectly natural to fill in such
minor details to the end that the picture shall be complete; but they
are rare in narratives of fact. And one may be permitted to wonder how
came the Master of Ceremonies at the Vatican to know the precise gate by
which those peasants came. It is not--as we have seen--the only occasion
on which an excess of detail in the matter of a gate renders suspicious
the accuracy of a story of Burchard’s.

Both these affairs find a prominent place in the Letter to Silvio
Savelli. Indeed Gregorovius cites the pamphlet as one of the authorities
to support Burchard, and to show that what Burchard wrote must have been
true; the other authority he cites is Matarazzo, disregarding not only
the remarkable discrepancy between Matarazzo’s relation and that of
Burchard, but the circumstance that the matter of that pamphlet became
current throughout Italy, and that it was thus--and only thus--that
Matarazzo came to hear of the scandal.(1)


  1  The frequency with which the German historian cites Matarazzo as an
authority is oddly inconsistent, considering that when he finds
Matarazzo’s story of the murder of the Duke of Gandia upsetting the
theory which Gregorovius himself prefers, by fastening the guilt
upon Giovanni Sforza, he devotes some space to showing--with perfect
justice--that Matarazzo is no authority at all.


The Letter to Silvio Savelli opens by congratulating him upon his escape
from the hands of the robbers who had stripped him of his possessions,
and upon his having found a refuge in Germany at the Emperor’s Court.
It proceeds to marvel that thence he should have written letters to
the Pope begging for justice and reinstatement, his wonder being at the
credulity of Savelli in supposing that the Pope--“betrayer of the human
race, who has spent his life in betrayals”--will ever do any just thing
other than through fear or force. Rather does the writer suggest the
adoption of other methods; he urges Savelli to make known to the Emperor
and all princes of the Empire the atrocious crimes of that “infamous
wild beasts” which have been perpetrated in contempt of God and
religion. He then proceeds to relate these crimes. Alexander, Cesare,
and Lucrezia, among others of the Borgia family, bear their share of the
formidable accusations. Of the Pope are related perfidies, simonies, and
ravishments; against Lucrezia are urged the matter of her incest, the
supper of the fifty courtesans, and the scene of the stallions; against
Cesare there are the death of Biselli, the murder of Pedro Caldes, the
ruin of the Romagna, whence he has driven out the legitimate lords, and
the universal fear in which he is held.

It is, indeed, a compendium of all the stories which from Milan, Naples,
and Venice--the three States where the Borgias for obvious reasons are
best hated--have been disseminated by their enemies, and a more violent
work of rage and political malice was never uttered. This malice becomes
particularly evident in the indictment of Cesare for the ruin of the
Romagna. Whatever Cesare might have done, he had not done that--his
bitterest detractor could not (without deliberately lying) say that the
Romagna was other than benefiting under his sway. That is not a matter
of opinion, not a matter of inference or deduction. It is a matter of
absolute fact and irrefutable knowledge.

To return now to the two entries in Burchard’s Diarium when considered
in conjunction with the Letter to Silvio Savelli (which Burchard quotes
in full), it is remarkable that nowhere else in the discovered writings
of absolute contemporaries is there the least mention of either of those
scandalous stories. The affair of the stallions, for instance, must have
been of a fairly public character. Scandal-mongering Rome could not have
resisted the dissemination of it. Yet, apart from the Savelli letter, no
single record of it has been discovered to confirm Burchard.

At this time, moreover, it is to be remembered, Lucrezia’s betrothal to
Alfonso d’Este was already accomplished; preparations for her departure
and wedding were going forward, and the escort from Ferrara was daily
expected in Rome. If Lucrezia had never been circumspect, she must be
circumspect now, when the eyes of Italy were upon her, and there
were not wanting those who would have been glad to have thwarted the
marriage--the object, no doubt, of the pamphlet we are considering. Yet
all that was written to Ferrara was in praise of her--in praise of
her goodness and her modesty, her prudence, her devoutness, and her
discretion, as presently we shall see.

If from this we are to conclude--as seems reasonable--that there was no
gossip current in Rome of the courtesans’ supper and the rest, we may
assume that there was no knowledge in Rome of such matters; for with
knowledge silence would have been impossible. So much being admitted,
it becomes a matter of determining whether the author of the Letter to
Silvio Savelli had access to the diary of Burchard for his facts, or
whether Burchard availed himself of the Letter to Silvio Savelli to
compile these particular entries. The former alternative being out of
the question, there but remains the latter--unless it is possible that
the said entries have crept into the copies of the “Diarium” and are not
present in the original, which is not available.

This theory of interpolation, tentatively put forward, is justified, to
some extent at least, by the following remarkable circumstances: that
two such entries, having--as we have said--absolutely no parallel in the
whole of the Diarium, should follow almost immediately the one upon the
other; and that Burchard should relate them coldly, without reproof or
comment of any kind--a most unnatural reticence in a writer who loosed
his indignation one Easter-tide to see Lucrezia and her ladies occupying
the choir of St. Peter’s, where women never sat.

The Pope read the anonymous libel when it was submitted to him by the
Cardinal of Modena--read it, laughed it to scorn, and treated it with
the contempt which it deserved, yet a contempt which, considering its
nature, asks a certain greatness of mind.

If the libel was true it is almost incredible that he should not have
sought to avenge it, for an ugly truth is notoriously hurtful and
provocative of resentment, far more so than is a lie. Cesare, however,
was not of a temper quite as long-suffering as his father. Enough and
more of libels and lampoons had he endured already. Early in December
a masked man--a Neapolitan of the name of Mancioni--who had been going
through Rome uttering infamies against him was seized and so dealt with
that he should in future neither speak nor write anything in any man’s
defamation. His tongue was cut out and his right hand chopped off, and
the hand, with the tongue attached to its little finger, was hung in
sight of all and as a warning from a window of the Church of Holy Cross.

And towards the end of January, whilst Cesare’s fury at that pamphlet
out of Germany was still unappeased, a Venetian was seized in Rome for
having translated from Greek into Latin another libel against the Pope
and his son. The Venetian ambassador intervened to save the wretch, but
his intervention was vain. The libeller was executed that same night.

Costabili--the Ferrara ambassador--who spoke to the Pope on the matter
of this execution, reported that his Holiness said that more than once
had he told the duke that Rome was a free city, in which any one was at
liberty to say or write what he pleased; that of himself, too, much evil
was being spoken, but that he paid no heed to it.

“The duke,” proceeded Alexander, “is good-natured, but he has not
yet learnt to bear insult.” And he added that, irritated, Cesare had
protested that, “However much Rome may be in the habit of speaking and
writing, for my own part I shall give these libellers a lesson in good
manners.”

The lesson he intended was not one they should live to practise.




CHAPTER XII. LUCREZIA’S THIRD MARRIAGE


At about the same time that Burchard was making in his Diarium those
entries which reflect so grossly upon the Pope and Lucrezia, Gianluca
Pozzi, the ambassador of Ferrara at the Vatican, was writing the
following letter to his master, Duke Ercole, Lucrezia’s father-in-law
elect:

“This evening, after supper, I accompanied Messer Gerardo Saraceni to
visit the Most Illustrious Madonna Lucrezia in your Excellency’s name
and that of the Most Illustrious Don Alfonso. We entered into a long
discussion touching various matters. In truth she showed herself a
prudent, discreet, and good-natured lady.”(1)


  1  See Gregorovius’s Lucrezia Borgia.


The handsome, athletic Cardinal Ippolito d’Este, with his brothers
Sigismondo and Fernando, had arrived in Rome on December 23 with the
imposing escort that was to accompany their brother Alfonso’s bride back
to Ferrara.

Cesare was prominent in the welcome given them. Never, perhaps, had he
made greater display than on the occasion of his riding out to meet the
Ferrarese, accompanied by no fewer than 4,000 men-at-arms, and mounted
on a great war-horse whose trappings of cloth of gold and jewels were
estimated at 10,000 ducats.

The days and nights that followed, until Lucrezia’s departure a
fortnight later, were days and nights of gaiety and merry-making at the
Vatican; in banquets, dancing, the performance of comedies, masques,
etc., was the time made to pass as agreeably as might be for the guests
from Ferrara, and in all Cesare was conspicuous, either for the grace
and zest with which he nightly danced, or for the skill and daring
which he displayed in the daily joustings and entertainments, and more
particularly in the bull-fight that was included in them.

Lucrezia was splendidly endowed, to the extent, it was estimated,
of 300,000 ducats, made up by 100,000 ducats in gold, her jewels and
equipage, and the value of the Castles of Pieve and Cento. Her departure
from Rome took place on January 6, and so she passes out of this
chronicle, which, after all, has been little concerned with her.

Of the honour done her everywhere on that journey to Ferrara, the
details are given elsewhere, particularly in the book devoted to her
history and rehabilitation by Herr Gregorovius. After all, the real
Lucrezia Borgia fills a comparatively small place in the actual history
of her house. It is in the fictions concerning her family that she is
given such unenviable importance, and presented as a Maenad, a poisoner,
and worse. In reality she appears to us, during her life in Rome, as a
rather childish, naïve, and entirely passive figure, important only in
so far as she found employment at her father’s or brother’s hands for
the advancement of their high ambitions and unscrupulous aims.

In the popular imagination she lives chiefly as a terrific poisoner, an
appalling artist in venenation. It is remarkable that this should be the
case, for not even the scandal of her day so much as suggests that
she was connected--directly or even indirectly--with a single case of
poisoning. No doubt that popular conception owes its being entirely to
Victor Hugo’s drama.

Away from Rome and settled in Ferrara from the twenty-second year of her
age, to become anon its duchess, her life is well known and admits of
no argument. The archives of the State she ruled show her devout,
god-fearing, and beloved in life, and deeply mourned in death by a
sorrowing husband and a sorrowing people. Not a breath of scandal
touches her from the moment that she quits the scandalous environment of
the Papal Court.

Cesare continued at the Vatican after her departure. His duchess was to
have come to Rome in that Easter of 1502, and it had been disposed that
the ladies and gentlemen who had gone as escort of honour with Lucrezia
should proceed--after leaving her in Ferrara--to Lombardy, to do the
like office by Charlotte d’Albret, and, meeting her there, accompany her
to Rome. She was coming with her brother, the Cardinal Amanieu d’Albret,
and bringing with her Cesare’s little daughter, Louise de Valentinois,
now two years of age. But the duchess fell ill at the last moment, and
was unable to undertake the journey, of which Cardinal d’Albret brought
word to Rome, where he arrived on February 7.

Ten days later Cesare set out with his father for Piombino, for which
purpose six galleons awaited them at Civita Vecchia under the command
of Lodovico Mosca, the captain of the Pontifical navy. On these the
Pope and his son embarked, upon their visit to the scene of the latest
addition to Cesare’s ever-growing dominions.

They landed at Piombino on February 21, and made a solemn entrance into
the town, the Pope carried in state in the Sedia Gestatoria, under
a canopy, attended by six cardinals and six singers from the Sixtine
Chapel, whilst Cesare was accompanied by a number of his gentlemen.

They abode four days in Piombino, whence they crossed to Elba, for the
purpose of disposing for the erection there of two fortresses--a matter
most probably entrusted to Leonardo da Vinci, who continued in the ducal
train as architect and engineer.

On March 1 they took ship to return to Rome; but they were detained
at sea for five days by a tempest which seems to have imperilled
the vessels. The Pope was on board the captain’s galley with his
cardinals-in-waiting and servants, and when these were reduced by
the storm and the imminent danger to a state of abject terror, the
Pope--this old man of seventy-one--sat calm and intrepid, occasionally
crossing himself and pronouncing the name of Jesus, and encouraging the
very sailors by his example as much as by his words.

In Piombino Cesare had left Michele da Corella as his governor. This
Corella was a captain of foot, a soldier of fortune, who from the
earliest days of Cesare’s military career had followed the duke’s
fortunes--the very man who is alleged to have strangled Alfonso of
Aragon by Cesare’s orders. He is generally assumed to have been a
Spaniard, and is commonly designated as Michelotto, or Don Miguel; but
Alvisi supposes him, from his name of Corella, to have been a Venetian,
and he tells us that by his fidelity to Cesare and the implicit
manner in which he executed his master’s orders, he earned--as is
notorious--considerable hatred. He has been spoken of, indeed, as the
âme damnée of Cesare Borgia; but that is a purely romantic touch akin to
that which gave the same designation to Richelieu’s Father Joseph.

The Romagna was at this time administered for Cesare Borgia by Ramiro
de Lorqua, who, since the previous November, had held the office of
Governor in addition to that of Lieutenant-General in which he had
been earlier invested. His power in the Romagna was now absolute, all
Cesare’s other officers, even the very treasurers, being subject to him.

He was a man of some fifty years of age, violent and domineering, feared
by all, and the dispenser of a harsh justice which had at least the
merit of an impartiality that took no account of persons.

Bernardi gives us an instance of the man’s stern, uncompromising,
pitiless nature. On January 29, 1502, two malefactors were hanged in
Faenza. The rope suspending one of them broke while the fellow was
alive, and the crowd into which he tumbled begged for mercy for him at
first, then, swayed by pity, the people resolved to save him in spite
of the officers of justice who demanded his surrender. Preventing
his recapture, the mob bore him off to the Church of the Cerviti. The
Lieutenant of Faenza came to demand the person of the criminal, but he
was denied by the Prior, who claimed to extend him sanctuary.

But the days of sanctuary were overpast, and the laws of the time held
that any church or consecrated place in which a criminal took refuge
should ipso facto be deemed unconsecrated by his pursuers, and further,
that any ecclesiastic sheltering such a fugitive did so under peril of
excommunication from his bishop. This law Ramiro accounted it his duty
to enforce when news was carried to him at Imola of what had happened.

He came at once to Faenza, and, compelling the Prior by actual force
to yield up the man he sheltered, he hanged the wretch, for the second
time, from a window of the Palace of the Podestá. At the same time he
seized several who were alleged to have been ringleaders of the fellow’s
rescue from the hands of the officers, and made the citizens of Faenza
compromise for the lives of these by payment of a fine of 10,000 ducats,
giving them a month in which to find the money.

The Faentini sent their envoys to Ramiro to intercede with him; but that
harsh man refused so much as to grant them audience--which was well for
them, for, as a consequence, the Council sent ambassadors to Rome to
submit the case to the Pope’s Holiness and to the Duke of Valentinois,
together with a petition that the fine should be remitted--a petition
that was readily granted.

Harsh as it was, however, Ramiro’s rule was salutary, its very harshness
necessary in a province where lawlessness had become a habit through
generations of misgovernment. Under Cesare’s dominion the change already
was remarkable. During his two years of administration--to count from
its commencement--the Romagna was already converted from a seething
hell of dissensions, disorders and crimes--chartered brigandage and
murder--into a powerful State, law-abiding and orderly, where human life
and personal possessions found zealous protection, and where those who
disturbed the peace met with a justice that was never tempered by mercy.

A strong hand was wanted there, and the duke, supreme judge of the tools
to do his work, ruled the Romagna and crushed its turbulence by means of
the iron hand of Ramiro de Lorqua.

It was also under the patronage of Valentinois that the first
printing-press of any consequence came to be established in Italy. This
was set up at Fano by Girolamo Sancino in 1501, and began the issue of
worthy books. One of the earliest works undertaken (says Alvisi) was the
printing of the Statutes of Fano for the first time in January of 1502.
And it was approved by the Council, civil and ecclesiastical, that
Sancino should undertake this printing of the Statutes “Ad perpetuam
memoriam Illmi. Domini nostri Ducis.”




CHAPTER XIII. URBINO AND CAMERINO


It may well be that it was about this time that Cesare, his ambition
spreading--as men’s ambition will spread with being gratified--was
considering the consolidation of Central Italy into a kingdom of which
he would assume the crown.

It was a scheme in the contemplation of which he was encouraged by
Vitellozzo Vitelli, who no doubt conceived that in its fulfilment the
ruin of Florence would be entailed--which was all that Vitelli cared
about. What to Cesare would have been no more than the means, would have
been to Vitelli a most satisfactory end.

Before, however, going so far there was still the work of subjugating
the States of the Church to be completed, as this could not be so
considered until Urbino, Camerino, and Sinigaglia should be under the
Borgia dominion.

For this, no doubt, Cesare was disposing during that Easter of 1502
which he spent in Rome, and during which there were heard from the south
the first rumblings of the storm of war whereof ill-starred Naples was
once more--for the third time within ten years--to be the scene. The
allies of yesterday were become the antagonists of to-day, and France
and Spain were ready to fly at each other’s throats over the division of
the spoil, as a consequence of certain ill-definitions of the matter
in the treaty of Granada. The French Viceroy, Louis d’Armagnac, and the
great Spanish Captain, Gonzalo de Cordoba, were on the point of coming
to blows.

Nor was the menace of disturbance confined to Naples. In Florence, too,
the torch of war was alight, and if--as he afterwards swore--Cesare
Borgia had no hand in kindling it, it is at least undeniable that he
complacently watched the conflagration, conscious that it would make
for the fulfilment of his own ends. Besides, there was still that little
matter of the treaty of Forno dei Campi between Cesare and Florence,
a treaty which the Signory had never fulfilled and never intended to
fulfil, and Cesare was not the man to forget how he had been fooled.

But for the protection of France which she enjoyed, Florence must long
ere this have been called to account by him, and crushed out of
all shape under the weight of his mailed hand. As it was she was to
experience the hurt of his passive resentment, and find this rather more
than she could bear.

Vitellozzo Vitelli, that vindictive firebrand whose original motive in
allying himself with Cesare had been the hope that the duke might help
him to make Florence expiate his brother’s blood, finding that Cesare
withheld the expected help, was bent at last upon dealing, himself,
with Florence. He entered into plots with the exiled Piero de’Medici
to restore the latter to his dominion; he set intrigues afoot in Pisa,
where his influence was vast, and in Siena, whose tyrant, Pandolfo
Petrucci, was ready and willing to forward his designs, and generally
made so disturbing a stir in Tuscany that the Signory became gravely
alarmed.

Cesare certainly took no apparent active part in the affair. He lent
Vitelli no aid; but neither did he attempt to restrain him or any other
of the Borgia condottieri who were allied with him.

The unrest, spreading and growing sullenly a while, burst suddenly forth
in Arezzo on June 4, when the cries of “Medici!” and “Marzocco!” rang
in its streets, to announce that the city was in arms against the
government of Florence. Arezzo followed this up by summoning Vitelli,
and the waiting, watchful condottiero was quick to answer the desired
call. He entered the town three days later at the head of a small body
of foot, and was very shortly afterwards followed by his brother
Giulio Vitelli, Bishop of Città di Castello, with the artillery, and,
presently, by Gianpaolo Baglioni with a condotta of horse.

A few days later Vitelli was in possession of all the strongholds of
the Val di Chiana, and panic-stricken Florence was speeding ambassadors
hot-foot to Rome to lay her complaints of these matters before the Pope.

Alexander was able to reply that, far from supporting the belligerents,
he had launched a Bull against them, provoked by the poisoning of the
Bishop de’Pazzi.

Cesare looked on with the inscrutable calm for which Macchiavelli was
presently to find him so remarkable. Aware as he was of the French
protection which Florence enjoyed and could invoke, he perceived how
vain must ultimately prove Vitelli’s efforts, saw, perhaps, in all
this the grave danger of ultimate ruin which Vitelli was incurring. Yet
Vitelli’s action served Cesare’s own purposes, and, so that his purposes
were served, there were no other considerations likely to weigh with
that cold egotist. Let Vitelli be caught in the toils he was spinning,
and be choked in them. Meanwhile, Florence was being harrowed, and
that was all to Cesare’s satisfaction and advantage. When sufficiently
humbled, it might well befall that the Republic should come on her knees
to implore his intervention, and his pardon for having flouted him.

While matters stood so in Arezzo, Pisa declared spontaneously for
Cesare, and sent (on June 10) to offer herself to his dominion and to
announce to him that his banner was already flying from her turrets--and
the growth of Florence’s alarm at this is readily conceived.

To Cesare it must have been a sore temptation. To accept such a
pied-à-terre in Tuscany as was now offered him would have been the first
great step towards founding that kingdom of his dreams. An impulsive
man had surely gulped the bait. But Cesare, boundless in audacity, most
swift to determine and to act, was not impulsive. Cold reason, foresight
and calculation were the ministers of his indomitable will. He looked
ahead and beyond in the matter of Pisa’s offer, and he perceived the
danger that might await him in the acceptance. The time for that was
not yet. To take what Pisa offered might entail offending France, and
although Cesare was now in case to dispense with French support, he was
in no case to resist her opposition.

And so, the matter being considered and determined, Cesare quitted Rome
on the 12th and left it for the Pope to give answer to the Pisan envoys
in the Consistory of June 14--that neither his Holiness nor the Duke of
Valentinois could assent to the proposals which Pisa made.

From Rome Cesare travelled swiftly to Spoleto, where his army, some ten
thousand strong, was encamped. He was bent at last upon the conquest
of Camerino, and, ever an opportunist, he had seized the moment when
Florence, which might have been disposed to befriend Varano, Tyrant of
Camerino, was over-busy with her own affairs.

In addition to the powerful army awaiting him at Spoleto, the duke had
a further 2,000 men in the Romagna; another 1,000 men held themselves
at his orders between Sinigaglia and Urbino, and Dionigio di Naldo was
arming yet another 1,000 men at Verucchio for his service. Yet further
to increase this force, Cesare issued an edict during his brief sojourn
at Spoleto ordering every house in the Romagna to supply him with one
man-at-arms.

It was whilst here--as he afterwards wrote to the Pope--that news
reached him that Guidobaldo da Montefeltre, Duke of Urbino, was arming
men and raising funds for the assistance of Camerino. He wrote that
he could not at first believe it, but that shortly afterwards--at
Foligni--he took a chancellor of Camerino who admitted that the hopes
of this State were all founded upon Urbino’s assistance; and later, a
messenger from Urbino falling into his hands, he discovered that there
was a plot afoot to seize the Borgia artillery as it passed through
Ugubio, it being known that, as Cesare had no suspicions, the guns would
be guarded only by a small force. Of this treachery the duke strongly
expressed his indignation in his letter to the Pope.

Whether the matter was true--or whether Cesare believed it to be
true--it is impossible to ascertain with absolute conviction. But it
is in the highest degree unlikely that Cesare would have written such
a letter to his father solely by way of setting up a pretext. Had that
been his only aim, letters expressing his simulated indignation would
have been in better case to serve his ends had they been addressed to
others.

If Guidobaldo did engage in such an act, amounting to a betrayal, he was
certainly paid by Cesare in kind and with interest. If the duke had
been short of a pretext for carrying a drawn sword into the dominions
of Guidobaldo, he had that pretext now in this act of enmity against
himself and the Holy See.

First, however, he disposed for the attack upon Camerino. This State,
lying on the Eastern spurs of the Apennines, midway between Spoleto and
Urbino, was ruled by Giulio Cesare Varano, an old war-dog of seventy
years of age, ruthless and bloodthirsty, who owed his throne to his
murder of his own brother.

He was aided in the government of his tyranny by his four sons,
Venanzio, Annibale, Pietro, and Gianmaria.

Several times already had he been menaced by Cesare Borgia, for he was
one of the Vicars proscribed for the non-payment of tribute due to
the Holy See, and at last his hour was come. Against him Cesare now
dispatched an army under the command of Francesco Orsini, Duke of
Gravina, and Oliverotto Eufreducci, another murderous, bloody gentleman
who had hitherto served the duke in Vitelli’s condotta, and who, by an
atrocious act of infamy and brigandage, had made himself Lord of Fermo,
which he pretended--being as sly as he was bloody--to hold as Vicar for
the Holy See.

This Oliverotto Eufreducci--hereafter known as Oliverotto da Fermo--was
a nephew of Giovanni Fogliano, Lord of Fermo. He had returned home to
his uncle’s Court in the early part of that year, and was there received
with great honour and affection by Fogliano and his other relatives.
To celebrate his home-coming, Oliverotto invited his uncle and the
principal citizens of Fermo to a banquet, and at table contrived to turn
the conversation upon the Pope and the Duke of Valentinois; whereupon,
saying that these were matters to be discussed more in private, he rose
from table and begged them to withdraw with him into another room.

All unsuspecting--what should old Fogliano suspect from one so loved and
so deeply in his debt?--they followed him to the chamber where he had
secretly posted a body of his men-at-arms. There, no sooner had the
door closed upon this uncle, and those others who had shown him so
much affection, than he gave the signal for the slaughter that had been
concerted. His soldiers fell upon those poor, surprised victims of his
greed, and made a speedy and bloody end of all.

That first and chief step being taken, Oliverotto flung himself on his
horse, and, gathering his men-at-arms about him, rode through Fermo on
the business of butchering what other relatives and friends of Fogliano
might remain. Among these were Raffaele della Rovere and two of his
children, one of whom was inhumanly slaughtered in its mother’s lap.

Thereafter he confiscated to his own uses the property of those whom he
had murdered, and of those who, more fortunate, had fled his butcher’s
hands. He dismissed the existing Council and replaced it by a government
of his own. Which done--to shelter himself from the consequences--he
sent word to the Pope that he held Fermo as Vicar of the Church.

Whilst a portion of his army marched on Camerino, Cesare, armed with his
pretext for the overthrow of Guidobaldo, set himself deliberately and
by an elaborate stratagem to the capture of Urbino. Of this there can
be little doubt. The cunning of the scheme is of an unsavoury sort, when
considered by the notions that obtain to-day, for the stratagem was no
better than an act of base treachery. Yet, lest even in this you should
be in danger of judging Cesare Borgia by standards which cannot apply to
his age, you will do well to consider that there is no lack of evidence
that the fifteenth century applauded the business as a clever coup.

Guidobaldo da Montefeltre was a good prince. None in all Italy was
more beloved by his people, towards whom he bore himself with a kindly,
paternal bonhomie. He was a cultured, scholarly man, a patron of the
arts, happiest in the splendid library of the Palace of Urbino. It
happened, unfortunately, that he had no heir, which laid his dominions
open to the danger of division amongst the neighbouring greedy tyrants
after his death. To avoid this he had adopted Francesco Maria della
Rovere, hereditary Prefect of Sinigaglia, his sister’s child and
a nephew of Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere’s. There was wisdom and
foresight in the adoption, considering the favour enjoyed in Rome and in
France by the powerful cardinal.

From Nocera Cesare sent Guidobaldo a message calculated to allay
whatever uneasiness he may have been feeling, and to throw him
completely off his guard. The duke notified him that he was marching
upon Camerino--which was at once true and untrue--and begged Guidobaldo
to assist him in this enterprise by sending him provisions to Gubbio,
which he should reach on the morrow--since he was marching by way of
Cagli and Sassoferrato. Further--and obviously with intent that the
Duke of Urbino should reduce the forces at his disposal--he desired
Guidobaldo to send Vitelli the support of a thousand men, which the
latter had earlier solicited, but which Guidobaldo had refused to
supply without orders from the Pope. Cesare concluded his letter with
protestations of brotherly love--the Judas’ kiss which makes him hateful
to us in this affair.

It all proved very reassuring to Guidobaldo who set his mind at ease
and never bethought him of looking to his defences, when, from Nocera,
Cesare made one of those sudden movements, terrible in their swiftness
as the spring of a tiger--enabling him to drive home his claws where
least expected. Leaving all baggage behind him, and with provisions
for only three days, he brought his troops by forced marches to Cagli,
within the Urbino State, and possessed himself of it almost before the
town had come to realize his presence.

Not until the citadel, taken entirely by surprise, was in Cesare’s hands
did a messenger speed to Guidobaldo with the unwelcome tidings that
the Duke of Valentinois was in arms, as an enemy, within the territory.
Together with that message came others into the garden of the Zoccolanti
monastery--that favourite resort of Guidobaldo’s--where he was indulging
his not unusual custom of supping in the cool of that summer evening.
They brought him word that, while Valentinois was advancing upon him
from the south, a force of 1,000 men were marching upon Urbino from
Isola di Fano in the east, and twice that number through the passes
of Sant’ Angelo and Verucchio in the north--all converging upon his
capital.

The attack had been shrewdly planned and timed, and if anything can
condone the treachery by which Guidobaldo was lulled into his false
security, it is the circumstance that this conduct of the matter avoided
bloodshed--a circumstance not wholly negligible, and one that was ever
a part of Cesare Borgia’s policy, save where punishment had to be
inflicted or reprisals taken.

Guidobaldo, seeing himself thus beset upon all sides at once, and
being all unprepared for resistance, perceived that nothing but flight
remained him; and that very night he left Urbino hurriedly, taking with
him the boy Francesco Maria, and intending at first to seek shelter in
his Castle of S. Leo--a fortress that was practically impregnable. But
already it was too late. The passes leading thither were by now in
the hands of the enemy, as Guidobaldo discovered at dawn. Thereupon,
changing his plans, he sent the boy and his few attendants to Bagno,
and, himself, disguised as a peasant, took to the hills, despite the
gout by which he was tormented. Thus he won to Ravenna, which was fast
becoming a home for dethroned princes.

Urbino, meanwhile, in no case to resist, sent its castellan to meet
Cesare and to make surrender to him--whereof Cesare, in the letter
already mentioned, gives news to the Pope, excusing himself for having
undertaken this thing without the Pope’s knowledge, but that “the
treachery employed against me by Guidobaldo was so enormous that I could
not suffer it.”

Within a few hours of poor Guidobaldo’s flight Cesare was housed in
Urbino’s splendid palace, whose stupendous library was the marvel of
all scholars of that day. Much of this, together with many of the
art-treasures collected by the Montefeltri, Cesare began shortly
afterwards to transfer to Cesena.

In addition to publishing an edict against pillage and violence in the
City of Urbino, Cesare made doubly sure that none should take place
by sending his soldiers to encamp at Fermignano, retaining near him in
Urbino no more than his gentlemen-at-arms. The capital being taken,
the remainder of the duchy made ready surrender, all the strongholds
announcing their submission to Cesare with the exception of that
almost inaccessible Castle of S. Leo, which capitulated only after a
considerable resistance.

From Urbino Cesare now entered into communication with the Florentines,
and asked that a representative should be sent to come to an agreement
with him. In response to this request, the Republic sent him Bishop
Soderini as her ambassador. The latter arrived in Urbino on June 25 and
was immediately and very cordially received by the duke. With him,
in the subordinate capacity of secretary, came a lean, small-headed,
tight-lipped man, with wide-set, intelligent eyes and prominent
cheek-bones--one Niccolò Macchiavelli, who, in needy circumstances at
present, and comparatively obscure, was destined to immortal fame. Thus
did Macchiavelli meet Cesare Borgia for the first time, and, for all
that we have no records of it, it is not to be doubted that his study of
that remarkable man began then in Urbino, to be continued presently,
as we shall see, when Macchiavelli returns to him in the quality of an
ambassador himself.

To Soderini the duke expounded his just grievance, founded upon the
Florentines’ unobservance of the treaty of Forno dei Campi; he demanded
that a fresh treaty should be drawn up to replace the broken one, and
that, for the purpose, Florence should change her government, as in
the ruling one, after what had passed, he could repose no faith. He
disclaimed all associations with the affair of Vitelli, but frankly
declared himself glad of it, as it had, no doubt, led Florence to
perceive what came of not keeping faith with him. He concluded by
assuring Soderini that, with himself for their friend, the Florentines
need fear no molestation from any one; but he begged that the Republic
should declare herself in the matter, since, if she did not care to have
him for her friend, she was, of course, at liberty to make of him her
enemy.

So impressed was Soderini by Cesare Borgia that on that same night he
wrote to the Signory:

“This lord is very magnificent and splendid, and so spirited in feats of
arms that there is nothing so great but that it must seem small to him.
In the pursuit of glory and in the acquisition of dominions he never
rests, and he knows neither danger nor fatigue. He moves so swiftly that
he arrives at a place before it is known that he has set out for it.
He knows how to make himself beloved of his soldiers, and he has in his
service the best men of Italy. These things render him victorious and
formidable, and to these is yet to be added his perpetual good fortune.
He argues,” the Florentine envoy proceeds, “with such sound reason that
to dispute with him would be a long affair, for his wit and eloquence
never fail him” (“dello ingegno e della lingua si vale quanto vuole”).

You are to remember that this homage is one of the few surviving
impressions of one who came into personal contact with Cesare, and of
one, moreover, representing a Government more or less inimical to him,
who would therefore have no reason to draw a favourable portrait of
him for that Government’s benefit. One single page of such testimony is
worth a dozen volumes of speculation and inference drawn afterwards by
men who never knew him--in many cases by men who never began to know his
epoch.

The envoy concludes by informing the Signory that he has the duke’s
assurances that the latter has no thought of attempting to deprive
Florence of any of her possessions, as “the object of his campaign has
not been to tyrannize, but to extirpate tyrants.”

Whilst Cesare awaited the Florentines’ reply to their ambassador’s
communication, he withdrew to the camp at Fermignano, where he was
sought on July 6 by a herald from Louis XII. This messenger came to
exhort Cesare to embark upon no enterprise against the Florentine
Republic, because to offend Florence would be to offend the Majesty of
France. Simultaneously, however, Florence received messages from the
Cardinal d’Amboise, suggesting that they should come to terms with
Valentinois by conceding him at least a part of what had been agreed in
the Treaty of Forno dei Campi.

As a consequence, Soderini was able to inform Cesare that the Republic
was ready to treat with him, but that first he must withdraw Vitelli
from Arezzo, and compel him to yield up the captured fortresses. The
duke, not trusting--as he had frankly avowed--a Government which once
already had broken faith with him, and perceiving that, if he whistled
his war-dogs to heel as requested, he would have lost the advantages of
his position, refused to take any such steps until the treaty should be
concluded. He consented, however, to enforce meanwhile an armistice.

But now it happened that news reached Florence of the advance of Louis
XII with an army of 20,000 men, bound for Naples to settle the dispute
with Spain. So the Republic--sly and treacherous as any other Italian
Government of the Cinquecento--instructed Soderini to temporize with
the duke; to spend the days in amiable, inconclusive interviews and
discussions of terms which the Signory did not mean to make. Thus they
counted upon gaining time, until the arrival of the French should put
an end to the trouble caused by Vitelli, and to the need for any
compromise.

But Cesare, though forced to submit, was not fooled by Soderini’s
smooth, evasive methods. He too--having private sources of information
in France--was advised of the French advance and of the imminence of
danger to himself in consequence of the affairs of Florence. And it
occasioned him no surprise to see Soderini come on July 19 to take his
leave of him, advised by the Signory that the French vanguard was at
hand, and that, consequently, the negotiations might now with safety be
abandoned.

To console him, he had news on the morrow of the conquest of Camerino.

The septuagenarian Giulio Cesare Varano had opposed to the Borgia forces
a stout resistance, what time he sent his two sons Pietro and Gianmaria
to Venice for help. It was in the hope of this solicited assistance that
he determined to defend his tyranny, and the war opened by a cavalry
skirmish in which Venanzio Varano routed the Borgia horse under the
command of the Duke of Gravina. Thereafter, however, the Varani had to
endure a siege; and the old story of the Romagna sieges was repeated.
Varano had given his subjects too much offence in the past, and it was
for his subjects now to call the reckoning.

A strong faction, led by a patrician youth of Camerino, demanded the
surrender of the State, and, upon being resisted, took arms and opened
the gates to the troops of Valentinois. The three Varani were taken
prisoners. Old Giulio Cesare was shut up in the Castle of Pergola, where
he shortly afterwards died--which was not wonderful or unnatural at his
time of life, and does not warrant Guicciardini for stating, without
authority, that he was strangled. Venanzio and Annibale were imprisoned
in the fortress of Cattolica.

In connection with this surrender of Camerino, Cesare wrote the
following affectionate letter to his sister Lucrezia--who was
dangerously ill at Ferrara in consequence of her delivery of a
still-born child:

“Most Illustrious and most Excellent Lady, our very dear
Sister,--Confident of the circumstance that there can be no more
efficacious and salutary medicine for the indisposition from which you
are at present suffering than the announcement of good and happy news,
we advise you that at this very moment we have received sure tidings of
the capture of Camerino. We beg that you will do honour to this message
by an immediate improvement, and inform us of it, because, tormented as
we are to know you so ill, nothing, not even this felicitous event,
can suffice to afford us pleasure. We beg you also kindly to convey
the present to the Illustrious Lord Don Alfonso, your husband and our
beloved Brother-in-law, to whom we are not writing to-day.”




CHAPTER XIV. THE REVOLT OF THE CONDOTTIERI


The coincidence of the arrival of the French army with the conquest of
Urbino and Camerino and the Tuscan troubles caused one more to be added
to that ceaseless stream of rumours that flowed through Italy concerning
the Borgias. This time the envy and malice that are ever provoked by
success and power gave voice in that rumour to the thing it hoped,
and there ensued as pretty a comedy as you shall find in the pages of
history.

The rumour had it that Louis XII, resentful and mistrustful of the
growth of Cesare’s might, which tended to weaken France in Italy and
became a menace to the French dominions, was come to make an end of him.
Instantly Louis’s Court in Milan was thronged by all whom Cesare had
offended--and they made up by now a goodly crowd, for a man may not rise
so swiftly to such eminence without raising a rich crop of enemies.

Meanwhile, however, Valentinois in the Montefeltre Palace at
Urbino remained extremely at ease. He was not the man to be without
intelligences. In the train of Louis was Francesco Troche, the Pope’s
confidential chamberlain and Cesare’s devoted servant, who, possessed
of information, was able to advise Valentinois precisely what were the
intentions of the King of France. Gathering from these advices that it
was Louis’s wish that the Florentines should not be molested further,
and naturally anxious not to run counter to the king’s intentions,
Cesare perceived that the time to take action had arrived, the time for
passivity in the affairs of Florence was at an end.

So he dispatched an envoy to Vitelli, ordering his instant evacuation
of Arezzo and his withdrawal with his troops from Tuscany, and he backed
the command by a threat to compel Vitelli by force of arms, and
to punish disobedience by depriving him of his state of Città di
Castello--“a matter,” Cesare informed him, “which would be easily
accomplished, as the best men of that State have already offered
themselves to me.”

It was a command which Vitelli had no choice but to obey, not being
in sufficient force to oppose the duke. So on July 29, with Gianpaolo
Baglioni, he relinquished the possession of Arezzo and departed out of
Tuscany, as he had been bidden. But so incensed was he against the duke
for this intervention between himself and his revenge, and so freely did
he express himself in the matter, that it was put about at once that he
intended to go against Cesare.

And that is the first hint of the revolt of the condottieri.

Having launched that interdict of his, Cesare, on July 25, in the garb
of a knight of St. John of Jerusalem, and with only four attendants,
departed secretly from Urbino to repair to Milan and King Louis. He
paused for fresh horses at Forli on the morrow, and on the 28th reached
Ferrara, where he remained for a couple of hours to visit Lucrezia, who
was now in convalescence. Ahead of him he dispatched, thence, a courier
to Milan to announce his coming, and, accompanied by Alfonso d’Este,
resumed his journey.

Meanwhile, the assembly of Cesare’s enemies had been increasing daily in
Milan, whither they repaired to support Louis and to vent their hatred
of Cesare and their grievances against him. There, amongst others,
might be seen the Duke of Urbino, Pietro Varano (one of the sons of
the deposed Lord of Camerino), Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro, and Francesco
Gonzaga of Mantua--which latter was ever ready to turn whichever way the
wind was blowing, and was now loudest in his denunciations of Cesare and
eagerly advocating the formation of a league against him.

Louis received the news of Cesare’s coming, and--endowed, it is clear,
with a nice sense of humour-­kept the matter secret until within a
few hours of the duke’s actual arrival. On the morning of August 5,
according to Bernardi,(1) he whispered the information in Trivulzio’s
ear-­and whispered it loudly enough to be overheard by those courtiers
who stood nearest.


  1 Cronache Forlivesi.


Whatever check their satisfaction at the supposed state of things may
have received then was as nothing to their feelings a few hours later
when they witnessed the greeting that passed between king and duke.
Under their uneasy eyes Louis rode forth to meet his visitor, and gave
him a glad and friendly welcome, addressing him as “cousin” and “dear
relative,” and so, no doubt, striking dismay into the hearts of those
courtiers, who may well have deemed that perhaps they had expressed
themselves too freely.

Louis, in person, accompanied Valentinois to the apartments prepared
for him in the Castle of Milan, and on the morrow gave a banquet and
commanded merry-makings in his visitor’s honour.

Conceive the feelings of those deposed tyrants and their friends, and
the sudden collapse of the hopes which they had imagined the king to be
encouraging. They did, of course, the only thing there was to do. They
took their leave precipitately and went their ways--all save Gonzaga,
whom the king retained that he might make his peace with Cesare, and
engage in friendship with him, a friendship consolidated there and then
by the betrothal of their infant children: little Francesco Gonzaga
and Louise de Valentinois, aged two, the daughter whom Cesare had never
beheld and was never to behold.

Two factors were at work in the interests of Valentinois--the coming war
in Naples with the Spaniard, which caused Louis to desire to stand well
with the Pope; and the ambition of Louis’s friend and counsellor, the
Cardinal d’Amboise, to wear the tiara, which caused this prelate to
desire to stand well with Cesare himself, since the latter’s will in
the matter of a Pope to succeed his father should be omnipotent with the
Sacred College.

Therefore, that they might serve their interests in the end, both king
and cardinal served Cesare’s in the meantime.

The Duke of Valentinois’s visit to Milan had served to increase the
choler of Vitelli, who accounted that by this action Cesare had put him
in disgrace with the King of France; and Vitelli cried out that thus was
he repaid for having sought to make Cesare King of Tuscany. In such high
dudgeon was the fierce Tyrant of Città di Castello that he would not go
to pay his court to Louis, and was still the more angry to hear of the
warm welcome accorded in Milan to the Cardinal Orsini. In this he
read approval of the Orsini for having stood neutral in the Florentine
business, and, by inference from that, disapproval of himself.

Before accusing Valentinois of treachery to his condottieri, before
saying that he shifted the blame of the Tuscan affair on to the
shoulders of his captains, it would be well to ascertain that there was
any blame to shift--that is to say, any blame that must originally have
fallen upon Cesare. Certainly he made no effort to restrain Vitelli
until the King of France had arrived and he had secret information which
caused him to deem it politic to intervene. But of what avail until that
moment, would any but an armed intervention have been with so vindictive
and one-idea’d a man, and what manner of fool would not Cesare have
been to have spent his strength in battle with his condottieri for the
purpose of befriending a people who had never shown themselves other
than his own enemies?

Like the perfect egotist he was, he sat on the fence, and took pleasure
in the spectacle of the harassing of his enemies by his friends,
prepared to reap any advantages there might be, but equally prepared to
avoid any disadvantages.

It was not heroic, it was not noble; but it was extremely human.

Cesare was with the King of France in Genoa at the end of August, and
remained in his train until September 2, when finally he took his leave
of him. When they heard of his departure from the Court of Louis, his
numerous enemies experienced almost as much chagrin as that which had
been occasioned them by his going thither. For they had been consoling
themselves of late with a fresh rumour; and again they were believing
what it pleased them to believe. Rumours, you perceive, were never
wanting where the Borgias were concerned, and it may be that you are
beginning to rate these voces populi at their proper value, and to
apprehend the worth of many of those that have been embalmed as truths
in the abiding records.

This last one had it that Louis was purposely keeping Cesare by him, and
intended ultimately to carry him off to France, and so put an end to the
disturbances the duke was creating in Italy. What a consolation would
not that have been to those Italian princelings to whose undoing he had
warred! And can you marvel that they believed and circulated so readily
the thing for which they hoped so fondly? By your appreciation of that
may you measure the fresh disappointment that was theirs.

So mistaken were they, indeed, as it now transpired, that Louis had
actually, at last, removed his protection from Bologna, under the
persuasion of Cesare and the Pope. Before the duke took his departure
from King Louis’s Court, the latter entered into a treaty with him in
that connection to supply him with three hundred lances: “De bailler au
Valentinois trois cents lances pour l’aider à conquérir Bologne au nome
de l’Eglise, et opprimer les Ursins, Baillons et Vitelozze.”

It was a double-dealing age, and Louis’s attitude in this affair
sorted well with it. Feeling that he owed Bologna some explanation, he
presently sent a singularly lame one by Claude de Seyssel. He put it
that the Bentivogli personally were none the less under his protection
than they had been hitherto, but that the terms of the protection
provided that it was granted exclusively of the rights and authority
of the Holy Roman See over Bologna, and that the king could not embroil
himself with the Pope. With such a shifty message went M. de Seyssel
to make it quite clear to Bentivogli what his position was. And on the
heels of it came, on September 2, a papal brief citing Bentivogli and
his two sons to appear before the Pontiff within fifteen days for the
purpose of considering with his Holiness the matter of the pacification
and better government of Bologna, which for so many years had been so
disorderly and turbulent. Thus the Pope’s summons, with a menace that
was all too thinly veiled.

But Bentivogli was not taken unawares. He was not even astonished. Ever
since Cesare’s departure from Rome in the previous spring he had been
disposing against such a possibility as this--fortifying Bologna,
throwing up outworks and erecting bastions beyond the city, and levying
and arming men, in all of which he depended largely upon the citizens
and particularly upon the art-guild, which was devoted to the House of
Bentivogli.

Stronger than the affection for their lord--which, when all is said,
was none too great in Bologna--was the deep-seated hatred of the clergy
entertained by the Bolognese. This it was that rallied to Bentivogli
such men as Fileno della Tuate, who actually hated him. But it was a
choice of evils with Fileno and many of his kidney. Detesting the ruling
house, and indignant at the injustices it practised, they detested the
priests still more--so much that they would have taken sides with Satan
himself against the Pontificals. In this spirit did they carry their
swords to Bentivogli.

Upon the nobles Bentivogli could not count--less than ever since the
cold-blooded murder of the Marescotti; but in the burghers’ adherence he
deemed himself secure, and indeed on September 17 he had some testimony
of it.

On that date--the fortnight’s grace expiring--the brief was again read
to the Reggimento; but it was impossible to adopt any resolution. The
people were in arms, and, with enormous uproar, protested that they
would not allow Giovanni Bentivogli or his sons to go to Rome, lest they
should be in danger once they had left their own State.

Italy was full of rumours at the time of Cesare’s proposed emprise
against Bologna, and it was added that he intended, further, to make
himself master of Città di Castello and Perugia, and thus, by depriving
them of their tyrannies, punish Vitelli and Baglioni for their
defection.

This was the natural result of the terms of Cesare’s treaty with France
having become known; but the part of it which regarded the Orsini,
Vitelli, and Baglioni was purely provisional. Considering that these
condottieri were now at odds with Cesare, they might see fit to consider
themselves bound to Bentivogli by the Treaty of Villafontana, signed by
Vitelli and Orsini on the duke’s behalf at the time of the capitulation
of Castel Bolognese. They might choose to disregard the fact that this
treaty had already been violated by Bentivogli himself, through the
non-fulfilment of the terms of it, and refuse to proceed against him
upon being so bidden by Valentinois.

It was for such a contingency as this that provision was made by the
clause concerning them in Cesare’s treaty with Louis.

The Orsini were still in the duke’s service, in command of troops levied
for him and paid by him, and considering that with them Cesare had no
quarrel, it is by no means clear why they should have gone over to the
alliance of the condottieri that was now forming against the duke. Join
it, however, they did. They, too, were in the Treaty of Villafontana;
but that they should consider themselves bound by it, would have
been--had they urged it--more in the nature of a pretext than a reason.
But they chose a pretext even more slender. They gave out that in Milan
Louis XII had told Cardinal Orsini that the Pope’s intention was to
destroy the Orsini.

To accept such a statement as true, we should have to believe in a
disloyalty and a double-dealing on the part of Louis XII altogether
incredible. To what end should he, on the one side, engage to assist
Cesare with 300 lances to “oppress” the Orsini--if necessary, and among
others--whilst, on the other, he goes to Orsini with the story which
they attribute to him? What a mean, treacherous, unkingly figure must
he not cut as a consequence! He may have been--we know, indeed, that he
was--no more averse to double­dealing than any other Cinquecentist; but
he was probably as averse to being found out in a meanness and made
to look contemptible as any double-dealer of our own times. It is a
consideration worth digesting.

When word of the story put about by the Orsini was carried to the
Pope he strenuously denied the imputation, and informed the Venetian
ambassador that he had written to complain of this to the King of
France, and that, far from such a thing being true, Cesare was so
devoted to the Orsini as to be “more Orsini than Borgian.”

It is further worth considering that the defection of the Orsini was
neither immediate nor spontaneous, as must surely have been the case had
the story been true. It was the Baglioni and Vitelli only who first met
to plot at Todi, to declare that they would not move against their ally
of Bologna, and to express the hope that they might bring the Orsini to
the same mind. They succeeded so well that the second meeting was held
at Magione--a place belonging to the powerful Cardinal Orsini, situated
near the Baglioni’s stronghold of Perugia. Vitellozzo was carried
thither on his bed, so stricken with the morbo gallico--which in Italy
was besetting most princes, temporal and ecclesiastical--that he was
unable to walk.

Gentile and Gianpaolo Baglioni, Cardinal Gianbattista Orsini, Francesco
Orsini, Duke of Gravina, Paolo Orsini, the bastard son of the Archbishop
of Trani, Pandolfo Petrucci--Lord of Siena--and Hermes Bentivogli were
all present. The last-named, prone to the direct methods of murder by
which he had rid Bologna of the Marescotti, is said to have declared
that he would kill Cesare Borgia if he but had the opportunity, whilst
Vitelli swore solemnly that within a year he would slay or capture the
duke, or else drive him out of Italy.

From this it will be seen that the Diet of Magione was no mere defensive
alliance, but actually an offensive one, with the annihilation of Cesare
Borgia for its objective.

They certainly had the power to carry out their resolutions, for
whilst Cesare disposed at that moment of not more than 2,500 foot, 300
men-at-arms, and the 100 lances of his Caesarean guard of patricians,
the confederates had in arms some 9,000 foot and 1,000 horse. Conscious
of their superior strength, they determined to strike at once, before
Cesare should be further supported by the French lances, and to make
sure of him by assailing him on every side at once. To this end it was
resolved that Bentivogli should instantly march upon Imola, where Cesare
lay, whilst the others should possess themselves of Urbino and Pesaro
simultaneously.

They even approached Florence and Venice in the matter, inviting the
Republics to come into the league against Valentinois.

The Florentines, however, could not trust such enemies of their own as
Vitelli and the Orsini, nor dared they join in an enterprise which had
for scope to make war upon an ally of France; and they sent word to
Cesare of their resolve to enter into no schemes against him.

The Venetians would gladly have moved to crush a man who had snatched
the Romagna from under their covetous eyes; but in view of the league
with France they dared not. What they dared, they did. They wrote to
Louis at length of the evils that were befalling Italy at the hands of
the Duke of Valentinois, and of the dishonour to the French crown which
lay for Louis in his alliance with Cesare Borgia. They even went so
far--and most treacherously, considering the league--as to allow their
famous captain, Bartolomeo d’Alviano, to reconduct Guidobaldo to Urbino,
as we shall presently see.

Had the confederates but kept faith with one another Cesare’s knell
had soon been tolled. But they were a weak-kneed pack of traitors,
irresolute in their enmity as in their friendships. The Orsini hung
back. They urged that they did not trust themselves to attack Cesare
with men actually in his pay; whilst Bentivogli--treacherous by nature
to the back-bone of him--actually went so far as to attempt to open
secret negotiations with Cesare through Ercole d’Este of Ferrara.




CHAPTER XV. MACCHIAVELLI’S LEGATION


On October 2 news of the revolt of the condottieri and the diet of
Magione had reached the Vatican and rendered the Pope uneasy. Cesare,
however, had been informed of it some time before at Imola, where he was
awaiting the French lances that should enable him to raid the Bolognese
and drive out the Bentivogli.

Where another might have been paralyzed by a defection which left him
almost without an army, and would have taken the course of sending
envoys to the rebels to attempt to make terms and by concessions to
patch up a treaty, Cesare, with characteristic courage, assurance, and
promptitude of action, flung out officers on every side to levy him
fresh troops.

His great reputation as a condottiero, the fame of his wealth and his
notorious liberality, stood him now in excellent stead. The response to
his call was instantaneous. Soldiers of fortune and mercenaries showed
the trust they had in him, and flocked to his standard from every
quarter. One of the first to arrive was Gasparo Sanseverino, known as
Fracassa, a condottiero of great renown, who had been in the Pontifical
service since the election of Pope Alexander. He was a valuable
acquisition to Cesare, who placed him in command of the horse. Another
was Lodovico Pico della Mirandola, who brought a small condotta of 60
lances and 60 light horse. Ranieri della Sassetta rode in at the head
of 100 mounted arbalisters, and Francesco de Luna with a body of 50
arquebusiers.(1)


  1  The arquebus, although it had existed in Italy for nearly a century,
was only just coming into general use.


Valentinois sent out Raffaele dei Pazzi and Galeotto Pallavicini, the
one into Lombardy to recruit 1,000 Gascons, the other to raise a body of
Swiss mercenaries. Yet, when all is said, these were but supplementary
forces; the main strength of Cesare’s new army lay in the troops raised
in the Romagna, which, faithful to him and confident of his power and
success, rallied to him now in the hour of his need. Than this there can
be no more eloquent testimony to the quality of his rule. In command of
these Romagnuoli troops he placed such Romagnuoli captains as Dionigio
di Naldo and Marcantonio da Fano, thereby again affording proof of his
wisdom, by giving these soldiers their own compatriots and men with whom
they were in sympathy for their leaders.

With such speed had he acted, and such was the influence of his name,
that already, by October 14, he had assembled an army of upwards of
6,000 men, which his officers were diligently drilling at Imola, whilst
daily now were the French lances expected, and the Swiss and Gascon
mercenaries he had sent to levy.

It may well be that this gave the confederates pause, and suggested
to them that they should reconsider their position and ask themselves
whether the opportunity for crushing Cesare had not slipped by whilst
they had stood undecided.

It was Pandolfo Petrucci who took the first step towards a
reconciliation, by sending word to Valentinois that it was not his
intention to take any measures that might displease his Excellency. His
Excellency will no doubt have smiled at that belated assurance from
the sparrow to the hawk. Then, a few days later, came news that Giulio
Orsini had entered into an agreement with the Pope. This appeared to
give the confederacy its death-blow, and Paolo Orsini was on the point
of setting out to seek Cesare at Imola for the purpose of treating
with him--which would definitely have given burial to the revolt--when
suddenly there befell an event which threw the scales the other way.

Cesare’s people were carrying out some work in the Castle of S. Leo,
in the interior of which a new wall was in course of erection. For the
purposes of this, great baulks of timber were being brought into the
castle from the surrounding country. Some peasants, headed by one
Brizio, who had been a squire of Guidobaldo’s, availed themselves of the
circumstance to capture the castle by a stratagem. Bringing forward some
great masses of timber and felled trees, they set them down along the
drawbridge in such a manner as to prevent its being hoisted. That done,
an attack in force was directed against the fortress. The place, whose
natural defences rendered it practically impregnable, was but slightly
manned; being thus surprised, and unable to raise the bridge, it was
powerless to offer any resistance, so that the Montefeltre peasants,
having killed every Borgia soldier of the garrison, took possession of
it and held it for Duke Guidobaldo.

This capture of S. Leo was as a spark that fired a train. Instantly the
hardy hillmen of Urbino were in arms to reconquer Guidobaldo’s duchy for
him. Stronghold after stronghold fell into their hands, until they
were in Urbino itself. They made short work of the capital’s scanty
defenders, flung Cesare’s governor into prison, and finally obtained
possession of the citadel.

It was the news of this that caused the confederates once more to pause.
Before declaring themselves, they waited to see what action Venice would
take, whilst in the meantime they sought shelter behind a declaration
that they were soldiers of the Church and would do nothing against the
will of the Pontiff. They were confidently assured that Venice would
befriend Guidobaldo, and help him back to his throne now that his own
people had done so much towards that end. It remained, however, to be
seen whether Venice would at the same time befriend Pesaro and Rimini.

Instantly Cesare Borgia--who was assailed by grave doubts concerning the
Venetians--took his measures. He ordered Bartolomeo da Capranica, who
was chief in command of his troops in Urbino, to fall back upon Rimini
with all his companies, whilst to Pesaro the duke dispatched Michele da
Corella and Ramiro de Lorqua.

It was a busy time of action with the duke at Imola, and yet, amid all
the occupation which this equipment of a new army must have given him,
he still found time for diplomatic measures, and, taking advantage of
the expressed friendliness of Florence, he had replied by desiring
the Signory to send an envoy to confer with him. Florence responded by
sending, as her representative, that same Niccolò Macchiavelli who had
earlier accompanied Soderini on a similar mission to Valentinois, and
who had meanwhile been advanced to the dignity of Secretary of State.

Macchiavelli has left us, in his dispatches to his Government, the
most precious and valuable information concerning that period of Cesare
Borgia’s history during which he was with the duke on the business of
his legation. Not only is it the rare evidence of an eye-witness that
Macchiavelli affords us, but the evidence, as we have said, of one
endowed with singular acumen and an extraordinary gift of psychological
analysis. The one clear and certain inference to be drawn, not only from
those dispatches, but from the Florentine secretary’s later writings,
is that, at close quarters with Cesare Borgia, a critical witness of his
methods, he conceived for him a transcending admiration which was later
to find its fullest expression in his immortal book The Prince--a
book, remember, compiled to serve as a guide in government to Giuliano
de’Medici, the feeble brother of Pope Leo X, a book inspired by Cesare
Borgia, who is the model prince held up by Macchiavelli for emulation.

Does it serve any purpose, in the face of this work from the pen of the
acknowledged inventor of state-craft, to describe Cesare’s conquest
of the Romagna by opprobrious epithets and sweeping statements of
condemnation and censure--statements kept carefully general, and never
permitted to enter into detail which must destroy their own ends and
expose their falsehood?

Gregorovius, in this connection, is as full of contradictions as any
man must be who does not sift out the truth and rigidly follow it in his
writings. Consider the following scrupulously translated extracts from
his Geschichte der Stadt Rom:

  (a) “Cesare departed from Rome to resume his bloody work in the
Romagna.”

  (b) “...the frightful deeds performed by Cesare on both sides of the
Apennines. He assumes the semblance of an exterminating angel, and
performs such hellish iniquities that we can only shudder at the
contemplation of the evil of which human nature is capable.”

And now, pray, consider and compare with those the following excerpt
from the very next page of that same monumental work:

“Before him [Cesare] cities trembled; the magistrates prostrated
themselves in the dust; sycophantic courtiers praised him to the stars.
Yet it is undeniable that his government was energetic and good; for
the first time Romagna enjoyed peace and was rid of her vampires. In the
name of Cesare justice was administered by Antonio di Monte Sansovino,
President of the Ruota of Cesena, a man universally beloved.”

It is almost as if the truth had slipped out unawares, for the first
period hardly seems a logical prelude to the second, by which it is
largely contradicted. If Cesare’s government was so good that Romagna
knew peace at last and was rid of her vampires, why did cities tremble
before him? There is, by the way, no evidence of such trepidations in
any of the chronicles of the conquered States, one and all of which hail
Cesare as their deliverer. Why, if he was held in such terror, did city
after city--as we have seen--spontaneously offer itself to Cesare’s
dominion?

But to rebut those statements of Gregorovius’s there is scarce the need
to pose these questions; sufficiently does Gregorovius himself
rebut them. The men who praised Cesare, the historian tells us, were
sycophantic courtiers. But where is the wonder of his being praised if
his government was as good as Gregorovius admits it to have been? What
was unnatural in that praise? What so untruthful as to deserve to be
branded sycophantic? And by what right is an historian to reject as
sycophants the writers who praise a man, whilst accepting every word
of his detractors as the words of inspired evangelists, even when
their falsehoods are so transparent as to provoke the derision of the
thoughtful and analytic?

As l’Espinois points out in his masterly essay in the Revue des
Questions Historiques, Gregorovius refuses to recognize in Cesare Borgia
the Messiah of a united Central Italy, but considers him merely as
a high-flying adventurer; whilst Villari, in his Life and Times of
Macchiavelli, tells you bluntly that Cesare Borgia was neither a
statesman nor a soldier but a brigand-chief.

These are mere words; and to utter words is easier than to make them
good.

“High-flying adventurer,” or “brigand-chief,” by all means, if it
please you. What but a high-flying adventurer was the wood-cutter, Muzio
Attendolo, founder of the ducal House of Sforza? What but a high-flying
adventurer was that Count Henry of Burgundy who founded the kingdom
of Portugal? What else was the Norman bastard William, who conquered
England? What else the artillery officer, Napoleon Bonaparte, who became
Emperor of the French? What else was the founder of any dynasty but a
high-flying adventurer--or a brigand-chief, if the melodramatic term is
more captivating to your fancy?

These terms are used to belittle Cesare. They achieve no more, however,
than to belittle those who penned them; for, even as they are true,
the marvel is that the admirable matter in these truths appears to have
escaped those authors.

What else Gregorovius opines--that Cesare was no Messiah of United
Italy--is true enough. Cesare was the Messiah of Cesare. The well-being
of Italy for its own sake exercised his mind not so much as
the well-being of the horse he rode. He wrought for his own
aggrandisement--but he wrought wisely; and, whilst the end in view is no
more to be censured than the ambition of any man, the means employed
are in the highest degree to be commended, since the well-being of
the Romagna, which was not an aim, was, nevertheless, an essential and
praiseworthy incident.

When it can be shown that every other of those conquerors who cut heroic
figures in history were purest altruists, it will be time to damn Cesare
Borgia for his egotism.

What Villari says, for the purpose of adding rhetorical force to
his “brigand-chief”--that Cesare was no statesman and no soldier--is
entirely of a piece with the rest of the chapter in which it
occurs(1)--a chapter rich in sweeping inaccuracies concerning Cesare.
But it is staggering to find the statement in such a place, amid
Macchiavelli’s letters on Cesare, breathing an obvious and profound
admiration of the duke’s talents as a politician and a soldier--an
admiration which later is to go perilously near to worship. To
Macchiavelli, Cesare is the incarnation of a hazy ideal, as is
abundantly shown in The Prince. For Villari to reconcile all this with
his own views must seem impossible. And impossible it is; yet Villari
achieves it, with an audacity that leaves you breathless.


  1  In his Niccolò Machiavelli.


No--he practically tells you--this Macchiavelli, who daily saw and spoke
with Cesare for two months (and during a critical time, which is when
men best reveal their natures), this acute Florentine--the acutest
man of his age, perhaps--who studied and analysed Cesare, and sent his
Government the results of his analyses, and was inspired by them later
to write The Prince--this man did not know Cesare Borgia. He wrote, not
about Cesare himself, but about a creation of his own intellect.

That is what Villari pretends. Macchiavelli, the representative of a
power unfriendly at heart under the mask of the expedient friendliness,
his mind already poisoned by all the rumours current throughout Italy,
comes on this mission to Valentinois. Florence, fearing and hating
Valentinois as she does, would doubtless take pleasure in detractory
advices. Other ambassadors--particularly those of Venice--pander to
their Governments’ wishes in this respect, conscious that there is a
sycophancy in slander contrasted with which the ordinary sycophancy of
flattery is as water to wine; they diligently send home every scrap
of indecent or scandalous rumour they can pick up in the Roman
ante-chambers, however unlikely, uncorroborated, or unconcerning the
business of an ambassador.

But Macchiavelli, in Cesare Borgia’s presence, is overawed by his
greatness, his force and his intellect, and these attributes engage him
in his dispatches. These same dispatches are a stumbling-block to all
who prefer to tread the beaten, sensational track, and to see in
Cesare Borgia a villain of melodrama, a monster of crime, brutal, and,
consequently, of no intellectual force. But Villari contrives to step
more or less neatly, if fatuously, over that formidable obstacle, by
telling you that Macchiavelli presents to you not really Cesare Borgia,
but a creation of his own intellect, which he had come to admire. It
is a simple, elementary expedient by means of which every piece of
historical evidence ever penned may be destroyed--including all that
which defames the House of Borgia.

Macchiavelli arrived at Imola on the evening of October 7, 1502, and,
all travel-stained as he was, repaired straight to the duke, as if
the message with which he was charged was one that would not brook a
moment’s delay in its deliverance. Actually, however, he had nothing to
offer Cesare but the empty expressions of Florence’s friendship and
the hopes she founded upon Cesare’s reciprocation. The crafty young
Florentine--he was thirty-three at the time--was sent to temporize and
to avoid committing himself or his Government.

Valentinois listened to the specious compliments, and replied by similar
protestations and by reminding Florence how he had curbed the hand
of those very condottieri who had now rebelled against him as a
consequence. He showed himself calm and tranquil at the loss of Urbino,
telling Macchiavelli that he “had not forgotten the way to reconquer
it,” when it should suit him. Of the revolted condottieri he
contemptuously said that he accounted them fools for not having known
how to choose a more favourable moment in which to harm him, and that
they would presently find such a fire burning under their feet as would
call for more water to quench it than such men as these disposed of.

Meanwhile, the success of those rustics of Urbino who had risen, and
the ease of their victories, had fired others of the territory to follow
their example. Fossombrone and Pergola were the next to rebel and to put
the Borgia garrisons to the sword; but, in their reckless audacity,
they chose their moment ill, for Michele da Corella was at hand with his
lances, and, although his orders had been to repair straight to Pesaro,
he ventured to depart from them to the extent of turning aside to punish
the insurgence of those towns by launching his men-at-arms upon them and
subjecting them to an appalling and pitiless sack.

When Cesare heard the news of it and the details of the horrors that had
been perpetrated, he turned, smiling cruelly, to Macchiavelli, who
was with him, and, “The constellations this year seem unfavourable to
rebels,” he observed.

A battle of wits was toward between the Florentines’ Secretary of State
and the Duke of Valentinois, each mistrustful of the other. In the end
Cesare, a little out of patience at so much inconclusiveness, though
outwardly preserving his immutable serenity, sought to come to grips by
demanding that Florence should declare whether he was to account her his
friend or not. But this was precisely what Macchiavelli’s instructions
forbade him from declaring. He answered that he must first write to the
Signory, and begged the duke to tell him what terms he proposed should
form the treaty. But there it was the duke’s turn to fence and to avoid
a direct answer, desiring that Florence should open the negotiations and
that from her should come the first proposal.

He reminded Macchiavelli that Florence would do well to come to a
decision before the Orsini sought to patch up a peace with him, since,
once that was done, there would be fresh difficulties, owing, of course,
to Orsini’s enmity to the existing Florentine Government. And of such a
peace there was now every indication, Paolo Orsini having at last
sent Cesare proposals for rejoining him, subject to his abandoning the
Bologna enterprise (in which, the Orsini argued, they could not bear
a hand without breaking faith with Bentivogli) and turning against
Florence. Vitelli, at the same time, announced himself ready to return
to Cesare’s service, but first he required some “honest security.”

Well might it have pleased Cesare to oblige the Orsini to the letter,
and to give a lesson in straight-dealing to these shuffling Florentine
pedlars who sent a nimble-witted Secretary of State to hold him in play
with sweet words of barren meaning. But there was France and her wishes
to be considered, and he could not commit himself. So his answer was
peremptory and condescending. He told them that, if they desired to show
themselves his friends, they could set about reconquering and holding
Urbino for him.

It looked as if the condottieri agreed to this, for on October 11
Vitelli seized Castel Durante, and on the next day Baglioni was in
possession of Cagli.

In view of this, Cesare bade the troops which he had withdrawn to
advance again upon the city of Urbino and take possession of it. But
suddenly, on the 12th, a messenger from Guidobaldo rode into Urbino to
announce their duke’s return within a few days to defend the subjects
who had shown themselves so loyal to him. This, the shifty confederates
accounted, must be done with the support of Venice, whence they
concluded that Venice must have declared against Valentinois, and again
they treacherously changed sides.

The Orsini proceeded to prompt action. Assured of their return to
himself, and counting upon their support in Urbino, Cesare had contented
himself with sending thither a small force of 100 lances and 200
light horse. Upon these fell the Orsini, and put them to utter rout at
Calmazzo, near Fossombrone, capturing Ugo di Moncada, who commanded
one of the companies, but missing Michele da Corella, who contrived to
escape to Fossombrone.

The conquerors entered Urbino that evening, and, as if to put it on
record that they burnt their boats with Valentinois, Paolo Orsini wrote
that same night to the Venetian Senate advices of the victory won.
Three days later--on October 18--Guidobaldo, accompanied by his nephews
Ottaviano Fregioso and Gianmaria Varano, re-entered his capital amid the
cheers and enthusiasm of his loyal and loving people.

Vitelli made haste to place his artillery at Guidobaldo’s disposal for
the reduction of Cagli, Pergola, and Fossombrone, which were still held
for Valentinois, whilst Oliverotto da Fermo went with Gianmaria Varano
to attempt the reconquest of Camerino, and Gianpaolo Baglioni to Fano,
which, however, he did not attempt to enter as an enemy--an idle course,
seeing how loyally the town held for Cesare--but as a ducal condottiero.

Fired by Orsini’s example, Bentivogli also took the offensive, and began
by ordering the canonists of Bologna University to go to the churches
and encourage the people to disregard the excommunications launched
against the city. He wrote to the King of France to complain that Cesare
had broken the Treaty of Villafontana by which he had undertaken never
again to molest Bologna--naïvely ignoring the circumstance that he
himself had been the first to violate the terms of that same treaty, and
that it was precisely upon such grounds that Cesare was threatening him.

Thus matters stood, the confederates turning anxious eyes towards
Venice, and, haply, beginning to wonder whether the Republic was indeed
going to move to their support as they had so confidently expected, and
realizing perhaps by now their rashness, and the ruin that awaited them
should Venice fail them. And fail them Venice did. The Venetians had
received a reply from Louis XII to that letter in which they had heaped
odium upon the Borgia and shown the king what dishonour to himself dwelt
in his alliance with Valentinois. Their criticisms and accusations were
ignored in that reply, which resolved itself into nothing more than a
threat that “if they opposed themselves to the enterprise of the Church
they would be treated by him as enemies,” and of this letter he sent
Cesare a copy, as Cesare himself told Macchiavelli.

So, whilst Valentinois in Imola was able to breathe more freely, the
condottieri in Urbino may well have been overcome with horror at their
position and at having been thus left in the lurch by Venice. None was
better aware than Pandolfo Petrucci of the folly of their action and of
the danger that now impended, and he sent his secretary to Valentinois
to say that if the duke would but reassure them on the score of his
intentions they would return to him and aid him in recovering what had
been lost.

Following upon this message came Paolo Orsini himself to Imola on the
25th, disguised as a courier, and having first taken the precaution of
obtaining a safe-conduct. He left again on the 29th, bearing with him
a treaty the terms of which had been agreed between himself and Cesare
during that visit. These were that Cesare should engage to protect the
States of all his allied condottieri, and they to serve him and the
Church in return. A special convention was to follow, to decide the
matter of the Bentivogli, which should be resolved by Cesare, Cardinal
Orsini, and Pandolfo Petrucci in consultation, their judgment to be
binding upon all.

Cesare’s contempt for the Orsini and the rest of the shifty men who
formed that confederacy--that “diet of bankrupts,” as he had termed
it--was expressed plainly enough to Macchiavelli.

“To-day,” said he, “Messer Paolo is to visit me, and to-morrow there
will be the cardinal; and thus they think to befool me, at their
pleasure. But I, on my side, am only dallying with them. I listen to all
they have to say and bide my own time.”

Later, Macchiavelli was to remember those words, which meanwhile
afforded him matter for reflection.

As Paolo Orsini rode away from Imola, the duke’s secretary, Gherardi,
followed and overtook him to say that Cesare desired to add to the
treaty another clause--one relating to the King of France. To this Paolo
Orsini refused to consent, but, upon being pressed in the matter by
Gherardi, went so far as to promise to submit the clause to the others.

On October 30 Cesare published a notice in the Romagna, intimating the
return to obedience on the part of his captains.

Macchiavelli was mystified by this, and apprehensive--as men will be
of the things they cannot fathom--of what might be reserved in it for
Florence. It was Gherardi who reassured him, laughing in the face of the
crafty Florentine, as he informed him that even children should come to
smile at such a treaty as this. He added that he had gone after Paolo
Orsini to beg the addition of another clause, intentionally omitted by
the duke.

“If they accept that clause,” concluded Messer Agabito, “it will open a
window; if they refuse it, a door, by which the duke can issue from the
treaty.”

Macchiavelli’s wonder increased. But the subject of it now was that the
condottieri should be hoodwinked by a document in such terms, and well
may he have bethought him then of those words which Cesare had used to
him a few days earlier.




CHAPTER XVI. RAMIRO DE LORQUA


It really seemed as if the condottieri were determined to make their
score as heavy as possible. For even whilst Paolo Orsini had been on his
mission of peace to Cesare, and whilst they awaited his return, they had
continued in arms against the duke. The Vitelli had aided Guidobaldo
to reconquer his territory, and had killed, in the course of doing so,
Bartolomeo da Capranica, Cesare’s most valued captain and Vitelli’s
brother­in-arms of yesterday. The Baglioni were pressing Michele da
Corella in Pesaro, but to little purpose; whilst the butcher Oliverotto
da Fermo in Camerino--of which he had taken possession with Gianmaria
Varano--was slaughtering every Spaniard he could find.

On the other side, Corella in Pesaro hanged five men whom he caught
practising against the duke’s government, and, having taken young Pietro
Varano--who was on his way to join his brother in Camerino in view of
the revolt there--he had him strangled in the market-place. There is a
story that, with life not yet extinct, the poor youth was carried into
church by the pitiful crowd. But here a friar, discovering that he still
lived, called in the soldiers and bade them finish him. This friar,
going later through Cagli, was recognized, set upon by a mob, and torn
to pieces--in which, if the rest of the tale be true, he was richly
served.

Into the theatre of bloodshed came Paolo Orsini from his mission
to Valentinois, bringing with him the treaty for signature by the
condottieri. Accustomed as they were to playing fast and loose,
they opined that, so far as Urbino was concerned, enough changes of
government had they contrived there already. Vitelli pointed out the
unseemliness of once again deposing Guidobaldo, whom they had just
reseated upon his throne. Besides, he perceived in the treaty the end
of his hopes of a descent upon Florence, which was the cause of all his
labours. So he rejected it.

But Valentinois had already got the Orsini and Pandolfo Petrucci on
his side, and so the confederacy was divided. Another factor came to
befriend the duke. On November 2 he was visited by Antonio Galeazzo
Bentivogli, sent by his father Giovanni to propose a treaty with
him--this state of affairs having been brought about by the mediation of
Ercole d’Este. From the negotiations that followed it resulted that, on
the 13th, the Orsini had word from Cesare that he had entered into
an alliance with the Bentivogli--which definitely removed their main
objection to bearing arms with him.

It was resigning much on Cesare’s part, but the treaty, after all, was
only for two years, and might, of course, be broken before then, as they
understood these matters. This treaty was signed at the Vatican on the
23rd, between Borgia and Bentivogli, to guarantee the States of both.
The King of France, the Signory of Florence, and the Duke of Ferrara
guaranteed the alliance.

Inter alia, it was agreed between them that Bologna should supply Cesare
with 100 lances and 200 light horse for one or two enterprises within
the year, and that the condotta of 100 lances which Cesare held from
Bologna by the last treaty should be renewed. The terms of the treaty
were to be kept utterly secret for the next three months, so that
the affairs of Urbino and Camerino should not be prejudiced by their
publication.

The result was instantaneous. On November 27 Paolo Orsini was back at
Imola with the other treaty, which bore now the signatures of all the
confederates. Vitelli, finding himself isolated, had swallowed his
chagrin in the matter of Florence, and his scruples in the matter of
Urbino, abandoning the unfortunate Guidobaldo to his fate. This came
swiftly. From Imola, Paolo Orsini rode to Fano on the 29th, and ordered
his men to advance upon Urbino and seize the city in the Duke of
Valentinois’s name, proclaiming a pardon for all rebels who would be
submissive.

Guidobaldo and the ill-starred Lord of Faenza were the two exceptions in
Romagna--the only two who had known how to win the affections of their
subjects. For Guidobaldo there was nothing that the men of Urbino would
not have done. They rallied to him now, and the women of Valbone--like
the ladies of England to save Coeur-de-Lion--came with their jewels and
trinkets, offering them that he might have the means to levy troops and
resist. But this gentle, kindly Guidobaldo could not subject his country
to further ravages of war; and so he determined, in his subjects’
interests as much as in his own, to depart for the second time.

Early in December the Orsini troops are in his territory, and Paolo,
halting them a few miles out of Urbino, sends to beg Guidobaldo’s
attendance in his camp. Guidobaldo, crippled by gout and unable at the
time to walk a step, sends Paolo his excuses and begs that he will come
to Urbino, where he awaits him. There Guidobaldo makes formal surrender
to him, takes leave of his faithful friends, enjoins fidelity to
Valentinois and trust in God, and so on December 19 he departs into
exile, the one pathetic noble figure amid so many ignoble ones. Paolo,
taking possession of the duchy, assumes the title of governor.

The Florentines had had their chance of an alliance with Cesare, and had
deliberately neglected it. Early in November they had received letters
from the King of France urging them to come to an accord with Cesare,
and they had made known to the duke that they desired to reoccupy Pisa
and to assure themselves of Vitelli; but, when he pressed that Florence
should give him a condotta, Macchiavelli--following his instructions
not to commit the Republic in any way--had answered “that his Excellency
must not be considered as other lords, but as a new potentate in Italy,
with whom it is more seemly to make an alliance or a friendship than to
grant him a condotta; and, as alliances are maintained by arms, and
that is the only power to compel their observance, the Signory could
not perceive what security they would have when three-quarters or
three-fifths of their arms would be in the duke’s hands.” Macchiavelli
added diplomatically that “he did not say this to impugn the duke’s
good faith, but to show him that princes should be circumspect and never
enter into anything that leaves a possibility of their being put at a
disadvantage.”(1)


  1  See the twenty-first letter from Macchiavelli on this legation.


Cesare answered him calmly (“senza segno d’alterazione alcuna”) that
without a condotta, he didn’t know what to make of a private friendship
whose first principles were denied him. And there the matter hung,
for Macchiavelli’s legation had for only aim to ensure the immunity
of Tuscany and to safeguard Florentine interests without conceding any
advantages to Cesare--as the latter had perceived from the first.

On December 10 Cesare moved from Imola with his entire army, intent now
upon the conquest of Sinigaglia, which State Giuliano della Rovere had
been unable to save for his nephew, as king and Pope had alike turned
a deaf ear upon the excuses he had sought to make for the Prefetessa,
Giovanna da Montefeltre--the mother of the young prefect--who had aided
her brother Guidobaldo in the late war in Urbino.

On the morrow Valentinois arrived in Cesena and encamped his army there
for Christmas, as in the previous year. The country was beginning
to feel the effects of this prolonged vast military occupation, and
although the duke, with intent to relieve the people, had done all that
was possible to provision the troops, and had purchased from Venice
30,000 bushels of wheat for the purpose, yet all had been consumed. “The
very stones have been eaten,” says Macchiavelli.

To account for this state of things--and possibly for certain other
matters--Messer Ramiro de Lorqua, the Governor-General, was summoned
from Pesaro; whilst to avert the threatened famine Cesare ordered that
the cereals in the private granaries of Cesena should be sold at reduced
prices, and he further proceeded, at heavy expense, to procure grain
from without. Another, less far-seeing than Valentinois, might have
made capital out of Urbino’s late rebellion, and pillaged the country to
provide for pressing needs. But that would have been opposed to Cesare’s
policy, of fostering the goodwill of the people he subjected.

On December 20 three of the companies of French lances that had been
with Cesare took their leave of him and returned to Lombardy, so
that Cesare was left with only one company. There appears to be some
confusion as to the reasons for this, and it is stated by some
that those companies were recalled to Milan by the French governor.
Macchiavelli, ever inquisitive and inquiring, questioned one of the
French officers in the matter, to be told that the lances were returning
because the duke no longer needed them, the inference being that this
was in consequence of the return of the condottieri to their allegiance.
But the astute secretary did not at the time account this convincing,
arguing that the duke could not yet be said to be secure, nor could
he know for certain how far he might trust Vitelli and the Orsini.
Presumably, however, he afterwards obtained more certain information,
for he says later that Valentinois himself dismissed the French, and
that the dismissal was part of the stratagem he was preparing, and had
for object to reassure Vitelli and the other confederates, and to throw
them off their guard, by causing them to suppose him indifferently
supported.

But the departure of the French did not take place without much
discussion being provoked, and rumour making extremely busy, whilst
it was generally assumed that it would retard the Sinigaglia conquest.
Nevertheless, the duke calmly pursued his preparations, and proceeded
now to send forward his artillery. There was no real ground upon which
to assume that he would adopt any other course. Cesare was now in
considerable strength, apart from French lances, and even as these
left him he was joined by a thousand Swiss, and another six hundred
Romagnuoli from the Val di Lamone. Moreover, as far as the reduction of
Sinigaglia was concerned, no resistance was to be expected, for Cardinal
Giuliano della Rovere had written enjoining the people to surrender
peacefully to the duke.

What matters Cesare may have found in Cesena to justify the arrest of
his Governor-General we do not know to the full with absolute certainty.
On December 22 Ramiro de Lorqua, coming from Pesaro in response to his
master’s summons, was arrested on his arrival and flung into prison. His
examination was to follow.

Macchiavelli, reporting the arrest, says: “It is thought he [Cesare] may
sacrifice him to the people, who have a very great desire of it.”

Ramiro had made himself detested in Romagna by the ruthlessness of his
rule, and a ruthless servant reflects upon his master, a matter which
could nowise suit Borgia. To all who have read The Prince it will be
clear that upon that ground alone--of having brought Valentinois’s
justice into disrepute by the harshness which in Valentinois’s name he
practised--Macchiavelli would have approved the execution of Ramiro.
He would have accounted it perfectly justifiable that Ramiro should
be sacrificed to the people for no better reason than because he had
provoked their hatred, since this sacrifice made for the duke’s welfare.
He does, as a matter of fact, justify this execution, but upon much
fuller grounds than these. Still, had the reasons been no better than
are mentioned, he would still have justified it upon those. So much
is clear; and, when so much is clear, much more will be clear to you
touching this strange epoch.

There was, however, more than a matter of sacrificing the
Governor-General to the hatred of the people. There was, for one thing,
the matter of that wheat which had disappeared. Ramiro was charged with
having fraudulently sold it to his own dishonest profit, putting
the duke to the heavy expense of importing fresh supplies for the
nourishment of the people. The seriousness of the charge will be
appreciated when it is considered that, had a famine resulted from
this peculation, grave disorder might have ensued and perhaps even a
rebellion against a government which could provide no better.

The duke published the news of the governor’s arrest throughout Romagna.
He announced his displeasure and regret at the harshnesses and corrupt
practices of Ramiro de Lorqua, in spite of the most urgent admonishings
that he should refrain from all undue exactions and the threat of grave
punishment should he disobey. These frauds, corruption, extortion, and
rapine practised by the governor were so grave, continuous and general,
stated the duke in his manifesto, that “there is no city, country-side,
or castle, nor any place in all Romagna, nor officer or minister of
the duke’s, who does not know of these abuses; and, amongst others,
the famine of wheat occasioned by the traffic which he held against our
express prohibition, sending out such quantities as would abundantly
have sufficed for the people and the army.”

He concludes with assurances of his intention that, in the future, they
shall be ruled with justice and integrity, and he urges all who may
have charges to prefer against the said governor to bring them forward
immediately.

It was freely rumoured that the charges against Ramiro by no means ended
there, and in Bologna--and from Bologna the truth of such a matter might
well transpire, all things considered--it was openly said that Ramiro
had been in secret treaty with the Bentivogli, Orsini, and Vitelli,
against the Duke of Valentinois: “Aveva provixione da Messer Zoane
Bentivogli e da Orsini e Vitelozo contro el duca,” writes Fileno della
Tuate, who, it will be borne in mind, was no friend of the Borgia, and
would be at no pains to find justification for the duke’s deeds.

But of that secret treaty there was, for the moment, no official
mention. Later the rumour of it was to receive the fullest confirmation,
and, together with that, we shall give, in the next chapter, the duke’s
obvious reasons for having kept the matter secret at first. Matter
enough and to spare was there already upon which to dispose of Messer
Ramiro de Lorqua and disposed of he was, with the most summary justice.

On the morning of December 26 the first folk to be astir in Cesena
beheld, in the grey light of that wintry dawn, the body of Ramiro lying
headless in the square. It was richly dressed, with all his ornaments
upon it, a scarlet cloak about it, and the hands were gloved. On a
pike beside the body the black-bearded head was set up to view, and
so remained throughout that day, a terrible display of the swift and
pitiless justice of the duke.

Macchiavelli wrote: “The reason of his death is not properly known”
 (“non si sa bene la cagione della sua morte”) “beyond the fact that such
was the pleasure of the prince, who shows us that he can make and unmake
men according to their deserts.”

The Cronica Civitas Faventiae, the Diariurn Caesenate, and the Cronache
Forlivese, all express the people’s extreme satisfaction at the deed,
and endorse the charges of brutality against the man which are contained
in Cesare’s letter.




CHAPTER XVII. “THE BEAUTIFUL STRATAGEM”


Cesare left Cesena very early on the morning of December 26--the morning
of Ramiro’s execution--and by the 29th he was at Fano, where he received
the envoys who came from Ancona with protestations of loyalty, as well
as a messenger from Vitellozzo Vitelli, who brought him news of the
surrender of Sinigaglia. The citadel itself was still being held by
Andrea Doria--the same who was afterwards to become so famous in Genoa;
this, it was stated, was solely because Doria desired to make surrender
to the duke himself. The Prefectress, Giovanna da Montefeltre, had
already departed from the city, which she ruled as regent for her
eleven-year old boy, and had gone by sea to Venice.

The duke returned answer to Vitelli that he would be in Sinigaglia
himself upon the morrow, and he invited the condottieri to receive him
there, since he was decided to possess himself of the citadel at once,
whether Doria chose to surrender it peacefully or not; and that, to
provide for emergencies, he would bring his artillery with him. Lastly,
Vitelli was bidden to prepare quarters within the new town for the
troops that would accompany Cesare. To do this it was necessary to
dispose the soldiers of Oliverotto da Fermo in the borgo. These were the
only troops with the condottieri in Sinigaglia; the remainder of their
forces were quartered in the strongholds of the territory at distances
of from five to seven miles of the town.

On the last day of that year 1502 Cesare Borgia appeared before
Sinigaglia to receive the homage of those men who had used him so
treacherously, and whom--with the exception of Paolo Orsini--he now
met face to face for the first time since their rebellion. Here were
Francesco Orsini, Duke of Gravina, with Paolo and the latter’s son
Fabio; here was Oliverotto, the ruffianly Lord of Fermo, who had won his
lordship by the cold-blooded murder of his kinsman, and concerning whom
a rumour ran in Rome that Cesare had sworn to choke him with his own
hands; and here was Vitellozzo Vitelli, the arch-traitor of them all.

Gianpaolo Baglioni was absent through illness--a matter less fatal to
him than was their health to those who were present--and the Cardinal
and Giulio Orsini were in Rome.

Were these captains mad to suppose that such a man as Cesare Borgia
could so forget the wrong they had done him, and forgive them in this
easy fashion, exacting no amends? Were they mad to suppose that, after
such proofs as they had given him of what manner of faith they kept,
he would trust them hereafter with their lives to work further mischief
against him? (Well might Macchiavelli have marvelled when he beheld
the terms of the treaty the duke had made with them.) Were they mad to
imagine that one so crafty as Valentinois would so place himself into
their hands--the hands of men who had sworn his ruin and death? Truly,
mad they must have been--rendered so by the gods who would destroy them.

The tale of that happening is graphically told by the pen of the
admiring Macchiavelli, who names the affair “Il Bellissimo Inganno.”
 That he so named it should suffice us and restrain us from criticisms of
our own, accepting that criticism of his. To us, judged from our modern
standpoint, the affair of Sinigaglia is the last word in treachery
and iscariotism. But you are here concerned with the standpoint of
the Cinquecento, and that standpoint Macchiavelli gives you when he
describes this business as “the beautiful stratagem.” To offer judgment
in despite of that is to commit a fatuity, which too often already has
been committed.

Here, then, is Macchiavelli’s story of the event:

On the morning of December 31 Cesare’s army, composed of 10,000 foot
and 3,000 horse,(1) was drawn up on the banks of the River Metauro--some
five miles from Sinigaglia--in accordance with his orders, awaiting his
arrival. He came at daybreak, and immediately ordered forward 200 lances
under the command of Don Michele da Corella; he bade the foot to march
after these, and himself brought up the rear with the main body of the
horse.


  1 This is Macchiavelli’s report of the forces; but, it appears to be an
exaggeration, for, upon leaving Cesena, Cesare does not appear to have
commanded more than 10,000 men in all.


In Sinigaglia, as we have seen, the condottieri had only the troops of
Oliverotto--1,000 foot and 150 horse--which had been quartered in the
borgo, and were now drawn up in the market-place, Oliverotto at their
head, to do honour to the duke.

As the horse under Don Michele gained the little river Misa and the
bridge that spanned it, almost directly opposite to the gates of
Sinigaglia, their captain halted them and drew them up into two files,
between which a lane was opened. Through this the foot went forward
and straight into the town, and after came Cesare himself, a graceful,
youthful figure, resplendent in full armour at the head of his lances.
To meet him advanced now the three Orsini and Vitellozzo Vitelli.
Macchiavelli tells us of the latter’s uneasiness, of his premonitions of
evil, and the farewells (all of which Macchiavelli had afterwards heard
reported) which he had taken of his family before coming to Sinigaglia.
Probably these are no more than the stories that grow up about such men
after such an event as that which was about to happen.

The condottieri came unarmed, Vitelli mounted on a mule, wearing a cloak
with a green lining. In that group he is the only man deserving of any
respect or pity--a victim of his sense of duty to his family, driven to
his rebellion and faithlessness to Valentinois by his consuming desire
to avenge his brother’s death upon the Florentines. The others were
poor creatures, incapable even of keeping faith with one another. Paolo
Orsini was actually said to be in secret concert with Valentinois since
his mission to him at Imola, and to have accepted heavy bribes from him.
Oliverotto you have seen at work, making a holocaust of his family and
friends under the base spur of his cupidity; whilst of the absent ones,
Pandolfo Petrucci alone was a man of any steadfastness and honesty.

The duke’s reception of them was invested with that gracious
friendliness of which none knew the art better than did he, intent
upon showing them that the past was forgiven and their offences against
himself forgotten. As they turned and rode with him through the gates
of Sinigaglia some of the duke’s gentlemen hemmed them about in the
preconcerted manner, lest even now they should be taken with alarm. But
it was all done unostentatiously and with every show of friendliness,
that no suspicions should be aroused.

From the group Cesare had missed Oliverotto, and as they now approached
the market-square, where the Tyrant of Fermo sat on his horse at the
head of his troops, Cesare made a sign with his eyes to Don Michele, the
purport of which was plain to the captain. He rode ahead to suggest to
Ohiverotto that this was no time to have his men under arms and out of
their lodgings, and to point out to him that, if they were not dismissed
they would be in danger of having their quarters snatched from them by
the duke’s men, from which trouble might arise. To this he added that
the duke was expecting his lordship.

Oliverotto, persuaded, gave the order for the dismissal of his troops,
and the duke, coming up at that moment, called to him. In response
he went to greet him, and fell in thereafter with the others who were
riding with Valentinois.

In amiable conversation with them all, and riding between Vitelli and
Francesco Orsini, the duke passed from the borgo into the town itself,
and so to the palace, where the condottieri disposed to take their leave
of him. But Cesare was not for parting with them yet; he bade them in
with him, and they perforce must accept his invitation. Besides, his
mood was so agreeable that surely there could be nought to fear.

But scarce were they inside when his manner changed of a sudden, and at
a sign from him they were instantly overpowered and arrested by those
gentlemen of his own who were of the party and who came to it well
schooled in what they were to do.

Buonaccorsi compiled his diary carefully from the letters of
Macchiavelli to the Ten, in so far as this and other affairs are
concerned; and to Buonaccorsi we must now turn for what immediately
follows, which is no doubt from Macchiavelli’s second letter of December
31, in which the full details of the affair are given. His first letter
no more than briefly states the happening; the second unfortunately
is missing; so that the above particulars--and some yet to follow--are
culled from the relations which he afterwards penned (“Del modo tenuto,”
 etc.), edited, however, by the help of his dispatches at the time in
regard to the causes which led to the affair. Between these and the
actual relation there are some minor discrepancies. Unquestionably the
dispatches are the more reliable, so that, where such discrepancies
occur, the version in the dispatches has been preferred.

To turn for a moment to Buonaccorsi, he tells us that, as the Florentine
envoy (who was, of course, Macchiavelli) following the Duke of
Valentinois entered the town later, after the arrest of the condottieri,
and found all uproar and confusion, he repaired straight to the palace
to ascertain the truth. As he approached he met the duke, riding out in
full armour to quell the rioting and restrain his men, who were by
now all out of hand and pillaging the city. Cesare, perceiving the
secretary, reined in and called him.

“This,” he said, “is what I wanted to tell Monsignor di Volterra
[Soderini] when he came to Urbino, but I could not entrust him with the
secret. Now that my opportunity has come, I have known very well how to
make use of it, and I have done a great service to your masters.”

And with that Cesare left him, and, calling his captains about him,
rode down into the town to put an end to the horrors that were being
perpetrated there.

Immediately upon the arrest of the condottieri Cesare had issued orders
to attack the soldiers of Vitelli and Orsini, and to dislodge them from
the castles of the territory where they were quartered, and similarly
to dislodge Oliverotto’s men and drive them out of Sinigaglia. This had
been swiftly accomplished. But the duke’s men were not disposed to leave
matters at that. Excited by the taste of battle that had been theirs,
they returned to wreak their fury upon the town, and were proceeding to
put it to sack, directing particular attention to the wealthy quarter
occupied by the Venetian merchants, which is said to have been plundered
by them to the extent of some 20,000 ducats. They would have made an
end of Sinigaglia but for the sudden appearance amongst them of the duke
himself. He rode through the streets, angrily ordering the pillage to
cease; and, to show how much he was in earnest, with his own hands he
cut down some who were insolent or slow to obey him; thus, before dusk,
he had restored order and quiet.

As for the condottieri, Vitelli and Oliverotto were dealt with that very
night. There is a story that Oliverotto, seeing that all was lost, drew
a dagger and would have put it through his heart to save himself from
dying at the hands of the hangman. If it is true, then that was his last
show of spirit. He turned craven at the end, and protested tearfully to
his judges--for a trial was given them--that the fault of all the wrong
wrought against the duke lay with his brother-in-law, Vitellozzo. More
wonderful was it that the grim Vitelli’s courage also should break down
at the end, and that he should beg that the Pope be implored to grant
him a plenary indulgence and that his answer be awaited.

But at dawn--the night having been consumed in their trial--they were
placed back to back, and so strangled, and their bodies were taken to
the church of the Misericordia Hospital.

The Orsini were not dealt with just yet. They were kept prisoners, and
Valentinois would go no further until he should have heard from Rome
that Giulio Orsini and the powerful cardinal were also under arrest. To
put to death at present the men in his power might be to alarm and so
lose the others. They are right who say that his craft was devilish; but
what else was to be expected of the times?

On the morrow--January 1, 1503--the duke issued dispatches to the Powers
of Italy giving his account of the deed. It set forth that the Orsini
and their confederates, notwithstanding the pardon accorded them for
their first betrayal and revolt, upon learning of the departure of the
French lances--and concluding that the duke was thereby weakened, and
left with only a few followers of no account--had plotted a fresh and
still greater treachery. Under pretence of assisting him in the
taking of Sinigaglia, whither it was known that he was going, they had
assembled there in their full strength, but displaying only one-third
of it, and concealing the remainder in the castles of the surrounding
country. They had then agreed with the castellan of Sinigaglia, that on
that night they should attack him on every side of the new town, which,
being small, could contain, as they knew, but few of his people. This
treachery coming to his knowledge, he had been able to forestall it,
and, entering Sinigaglia with all his troops, he had seized the
traitors and taken the forces of Oliverotto by surprise. He concluded by
exhorting all to render thanks unto God that an end was set to the many
calamities suffered in Italy in consequence of those malignant ones.(1)


  1  See this letter in the documents appended to Alvisi’s Cesare Borgia,
document 76.


For once Cesare Borgia is heard giving his own side of an affair. But
are the particulars of his version true? Who shall say positively? His
statement is not by any means contrary to the known facts, although it
sets upon them an explanation rather different to that afforded us by
Macchiavelli. But it is to be remembered that, after all, Macchiavelli
had to fall back upon the inferences which he drew from what he beheld,
and that there is no scrap of evidence directly to refute any one of
Cesare’s statements. There is even confirmation of the statement that
the condottieri conceived that he was weakened by the departure of the
French lances and left with only a few followers of no account. For
Macchiavelli himself dwells upon the artifice with which Cesare broke up
his forces and disposed of them in comparatively small numbers here and
there to the end that his full strength should remain concealed; and he
admires the strategy of that proceeding.

Certainly the duke’s narrative tends to increase his justification for
acting as he did. But at best it can only increase it, for the actual
justification was always there, and by the light of his epoch it is
difficult to see how he should be blamed. These men had openly sworn
to have his life, and from what has been seen of them there is little
reason to suppose they would not have kept their word had they but been
given the opportunity.

In connection with Cesare’s version, it is well to go back for a moment
to the execution of Ramiro de Lorqua, and to recall the alleged secret
motives that led to it. Macchiavelli himself was not satisfied that all
was disclosed, and that the governor’s harshness and dishonesty had been
the sole causes of the justice done upon him. “The reason of his death
is not properly known,” wrote the Florentine secretary. Another envoy
of that day would have filled his dispatches with the rumours that were
current, with the matters that were being whispered at street corners.
But Macchiavelli’s habit was to disregard rumours as a rule, knowing
their danger--a circumstance which renders his evidence the most
valuable which we possess.

It is perhaps permissible to ask: What dark secrets had the torture of
the cord drawn from Messer Ramiro? Had these informed the duke of the
true state of affairs at Sinigaglia, and had the knowledge brought him
straight from Cesena to deal with the matter?

There is justification for these questions, inasmuch as on January 4 the
Pope related to Giustiniani--for which see his dispatches--that Ramiro
de Lorqua, being sentenced to death, stated that he desired to inform
the duke of certain matters, and informed him that he had concerted with
the Orsini to give the latter the territory of Cesena; but that, as
this could not now be done, in consequence of Cesare’s treaty with the
condottieri, Vitelli had arranged to kill the duke, in which design he
had the concurrence of Oliverotto. They had planned that a crossbow-man
should shoot the duke as he rode into Sinigaglia, in consequence of
which the duke took great care of himself and never put off his armour
until the affair was over. Vitellozzo, the Pope said, had confessed
before he died that all that Ramiro had told the duke was true, and
at the Consistory of January 6, when the Sacred College begged for
the release of the old Cardinal Orsini--who had been taken with the
Archbishop of Florence, Giacomo di Santacroce, and Gianbattista da
Virginio--the Pope answered by informing the cardinals of this plot
against the duke’s life.

These statements by Cesare and his father are perfectly consistent
with each other and with the events. Yet, for want of independent
confirmation, they are not to be insisted upon as affording the true
version--as, of course, the Pope may have urged what he did as a pretext
to justify what was yet to follow.

It is readily conceivable that Ramiro, under torture, or in the hope
perhaps of saving his life, may have betrayed the alleged plot to murder
Cesare. And it is perfectly consistent with Cesare’s character and with
his age that he should have entered into a bargain to learn what Ramiro
might have to disclose, and then have repudiated it and given him to the
executioner. If Cesare, under such circumstances as these, had learnt
what was contemplated, he would very naturally have kept silent on the
score of it until he had dealt with the condottieri. To do otherwise
might be to forewarn them. He was, as Macchiavelli says, a secret man,
and the more dangerous for his closeness, since he never let it be known
what he intended until he had executed his designs.

Guicciardini, of course, has called the Sinigaglia affair a villainy
(“scelleragine”) whilst Fabio Orsini and a nephew of Vitelli’s who
escaped from Sinigaglia and arrived two days later at Perugia, sought to
engage sympathy by means of an extraordinary tale, so alien to all the
facts--apart from their obvious reasons to lie and provoke resentment
against Cesare--as not to be worth citing.




CHAPTER XVIII. THE ZENITH


Andrea Doria did not remain to make formal surrender of the citadel
of Sinigaglia to the duke--for which purpose, be it borne in mind, had
Cesare been invited, indirectly, to come to Sinigaglia. He fled during
the night that saw Vitelli and Oliverotto writhing their last in the
strangler’s hands. And his flight adds colour to the versions of the
affair that were afforded the world by Cesare and his father. Andrea
Doria, waiting to surrender his trust, had nothing to fear from the
duke, no reason to do anything but remain. Andrea Doria, intriguing
against the duke’s life with the condottieri, finding them seized by the
duke, and inferring that all was discovered, had every reason to fly.

The citadel made surrender on that New Year’s morning, when Cesare
summoned it to do so, whilst the troops of the Orsini and Vitelli lodged
in the castles of the territory, being taken unawares, were speedily
disposed of. So, there being nothing more left to do in Sinigaglia,
Cesare once more marshalled his men and set out for Città di
Castello--the tyranny of the Vitelli, which he found undefended and of
which he took possession in the name of the Church. Thence he rushed
on towards Perugia, for he had word that Guidobaldo of Urbino, Fabio
Orsini, Annibale and Venanzio Varano, and Vitelli’s nephew were
assembled there under the wing of Gianpaolo Baglioni, who, with a
considerable condotta at his back, was making big talk of resisting
the Duke of Romagna and Valentinois. In this, Gianpaolo persevered most
bravely until he had news that the duke was as near as Gualdo, when
precipitately he fled--leaving his guests to shift for themselves. He
had remembered, perhaps, at the last moment how narrow an escape he
had had of it at Sinigaglia, and he repaired to Siena to join Pandolfo
Petrucci, who had been equally fortunate in that connection.

To meet the advancing and irresistible duke came ambassadors from
Perugia with smooth words of welcome, the offer of the city, and their
thanks for his having delivered them of the tyrants that oppressed
them; and there is not the slightest cause to suppose that this was mere
sycophancy, for a more bloody, murderous crew than these Baglioni--whose
feuds not only with the rival family of the Oddi, but among their
very selves, had more than once embrued the walls of that city in the
hills--it would be difficult to find in Italy, or anywhere in Europe.
The history of the Baglioni is one record of slaughter. Under their
rule in Perugia human blood seems commonly to have flowed anywhere more
freely than in human veins. It is no matter for wonder that the people
sent their ambassador to thank Cesare for having delivered them from the
yoke that had oppressed them.

Perugia having rendered him her oath of fealty, the duke left her
his secretary, Agabito Gherardi, as his commissioner, whilst sending
Vincenzo Calmeta to Fermo--Oliverotto’s tyranny--another State which was
very fervent in the thanks it expressed for this deliverance.

Scarcely was Cesare gone from Perugia when into the hands of his people
fell the person of the Lady Panthasilea Baglioni d’Alviano--the wife of
the famous Venetian condottiero Bartolomeo d’Alviano--and they, aware of
the feelings prevailing between their lord and the Government of Venice,
bethought them that here was a valuable hostage. So they shut her up
in the Castle of Todi, together with her children and the women who had
been with her when she was taken.

As in the case of Dorotea Caracciolo, the rumour is instantly put about
that it was Cesare who had seized her, that he had taken her to his
camp, and that this poor woman had fallen a prey to that lustful
monster. So--and in some such words--ran the story, and such a hold did
it take upon folks’ credulity that we see Piero di Bibieno before the
Council of Ten, laying a more or less formal charge against the duke in
rather broader terms than are here set down. So much, few of those
who have repeated his story omit to tell you. But for some reason, not
obviously apparent, they do not think it worth while to add that the
Doge himself--better informed, it is clear, for he speaks with finality
in the matter--reproved him by denying the rumour and definitely stating
that it was not true, as you may read in the Diary of Marino Sanuto.
That same diary shows you the husband--a person of great consequence in
Venice--before the Council, clamouring for the enlargement of his lady;
yet never once does he mention the name of Valentinois. The Council of
Ten sends an envoy to wait upon the Pope; and the Pope expresses his
profound regret and his esteem for Alviano, and informs the envoy that
he is writing to Valentinois to demand her instant release--in fact,
shows the envoy the letter.

To that same letter the duke replied on January 29 that he had known
nothing of the matter until this communication reached him; that he has
since ascertained that the lady was indeed captured and that she has
since been detained in the Castle of Todi with all the consideration
due to her rank; and that, immediately upon ascertaining this he had
commanded that she should be set at liberty, which was done.

And so the Lady Panthasilea returned unharmed to her husband.

In Assisi Cesare received the Florentine ambassador Salviati, who came
to congratulate the duke upon the affair of Sinigaglia and to replace
Macchiavelli--the latter having been ordered home again. Congratulations
indeed were addressed to him by all those Powers that had received his
official intimation of the event. Amongst these were the felicitations
of the beautiful and accomplished Isabella d’Este, Marchioness of
Gonzaga--whose relations with him were ever of the friendliest, even
when Faenza by its bravery evoked her pity--and with these she sent him,
for the coming carnival, a present of a hundred masks of rare variety
and singular beauty, because she opined that “after the fatigues he had
suffered in these glorious enterprises, he would desire to contrive for
some recreation.”

Here in Assisi, too, he received the Siennese envoys who came to wait
upon him, and he demanded that, out of respect for the King of France,
they should drive out Pandolfo Petrucci from Siena. For, to use his
own words, “having deprived his enemies of their weapons, he would now
deprive them of their brain,” by which he paid Petrucci the compliment
of accounting him the “brain” of all that had been attempted against
him. To show the Siennese how much he was in earnest, he leaves all
baggage and stores at Assisi, and, unhampered, makes one of his sudden
swoops towards Siena, pausing on January 13 at Castel della Pieve to
publish, at last, his treaty with Bentivogli. The latter being
now sincere, no doubt out of fear of the consequences of further
insincerity, at once sends Cesare 30 lances and 100 arbalisters under
the command of Antonio della Volta.

It was there in Assisi, on the morning of striking his camp again, that
Cesare completed the work that had been begun at Sinigaglia by having
Paolo Orsini and the Duke of Gravina strangled. There was no cause
to delay the matter longer. He had word from Rome of the capture of
Cardinal Orsini, of Gianbattista da Virginio, of Giacomo di Santacroce,
and Rinaldo Orsini, Archbishop of Florence.

On January 27, Pandolfo Petrucci being still in Siena, and Cesare’s
patience exhausted, he issued an ultimatum from his camp at Sartiano in
which he declared that if, within twenty-four hours, Petrucci had not
been expelled from the city, he would loose his soldiers upon Siena to
devastate the territory, and would treat every inhabitant “as a Pandolfo
and an enemy.”

Siena judged it well to bow before that threatening command, and Cesare,
seeing himself obeyed, was free to depart to Rome, whither the Pope had
recalled him and where work awaited him. He was required to make an end
of the resistance of the barons, a task which had been entrusted to his
brother Giuffredo, but which the latter had been unable to carry out.

In this matter Cesare and his father are said to have violently
disagreed, and it is reported that high words flew between them; for
Cesare--who looked ahead and had his own future to consider, which
should extend beyond the lifetime of Alexander VI--would not move
against Silvio Savelli in Palombara, nor Gian Giordano in Bracciano,
alleging, as his reason for the latter forbearance, that Gian Giordano,
being a knight of St. Michael like himself, he was inhibited by the
terms of that knighthood from levying war upon him. To that he adhered,
whilst disposing, however, to lay siege to Ceri, where Giulio and
Giovanni Orsini had taken refuge.

In the meantime, the Cardinal Gianbattista Orsini had breathed his last
in the Castle of Sant’ Angelo.

Soderini had written ironically to Florence on February 15: “Cardinal
Orsini, in prison, shows signs of frenzy. I leave your Sublimities
to conclude, in your wisdom, the judgment that is formed of such an
illness.”

It was not, however, until a week later--on February 22--that he
succumbed, when the cry of “Poison!” grew so loud and general that the
Pope ordered the cardinal’s body to be carried on a bier with the face
exposed, that all the world might see its calm and the absence of such
stains as were believed usually to accompany venenation.

Nevertheless, the opinion spread that he had been poisoned--and the
poisoning of Cardinal Orsini has been included in the long list of the
Crimes of the Borgias with which we have been entertained. That the
rumour should have spread is not in the least wonderful, considering
in what bad odour were the Orsini at the Vatican just then, and--be it
remembered--what provocation they had given. Although Valentinois dubbed
Pandolfo Petrucci the “brain” of the conspiracy against him, the real
guiding spirit, there can be little doubt, was this Cardinal Orsini,
in whose stronghold at Magione the diet had met to plot Valentinois’s
ruin--the ruin of the Gonfalonier of the Church, and the fresh
alienation from the Holy See of the tyrannies which it claimed for its
own, and which at great cost had been recovered to it.

Against the Pope, considered as a temporal ruler, that was treason
in the highest degree, and punishable by death; and, assuming that
Alexander did cause the death of Cardinal Orsini, the only just censure
that could fall upon him for the deed concerns the means employed. Yet
even against that it might be urged that thus was the dignity of the
purple saved the dishonouring touch of the hangman’s hands.

Some six weeks later--on April 10--died Giovanni Michieli, Cardinal of
Sant’ Angelo, and Giustiniani, the Venetian ambassador, wrote to his
Government that the cardinal had been ill for only two days, and
that his illness had been attended by violent sickness. This--and the
reticence of it--was no doubt intended to arouse the suspicion that the
cardinal had been poisoned. Giustiniani adds that Michieli’s house was
stripped that very night by the Pope, who profited thereby to the extent
of some 150,000 ducats, besides plate and other valuables; and this was
intended to show an indecent eagerness on the Pope’s part to possess
himself of that which by the cardinal’s death he inherited, whereas, in
truth, the measure would be one of wise precaution against the customary
danger of pillage by the mob.

But in March of the year 1504, under the pontificate of Julius
II (Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere) a subdeacon, named Asquino de
Colloredo, was arrested for defaming the dead cardinal (“interfector
bone memorie Cardinalis S. Angeli”).(1) What other suspicions were
entertained against him, what other revelations it was hoped to extract
from him, cannot be said; but Asquino was put to the question, to
the usual accompaniment of the torture of the cord, and under this he
confessed that he had poisoned Cardinal Michieli, constrained to it
by Pope Alexander VI and the Duke of Valentinois, against his will and
without reward (“verumtamen non voluisse et pecunias non habuisse”).


  1  Burchard’s Diarium, March 6, 1504.


Now if Asquino defamed the memory of Cardinal Michieli it seems to
follow naturally that he had hated the cardinal; and, if we know that he
hated him, we need not marvel that, out of that hatred, he poisoned him.
But something must have been suspected as a motive for his arrest
in addition to the slanders he was uttering, otherwise how came
the questions put to him to be directed so as to wring from him the
confession that he had poisoned the cardinal? If you choose to believe
his further statement that he was constrained to it by Pope Alexander
and the Duke of Valentinois, you are, of course, at liberty to do so.
But you will do well first to determine precisely what degree of credit
such a man might be worth when seeking to extenuate a fault admitted
under pressure of the torture--and offering the extenuation likeliest to
gain him the favour of the della Rovere Pope, whose life’s task--as we
shall see--was the defamation of the hated Borgias. You will also do
well closely to examine the last part of his confession--that he was
constrained to it “against his will and without reward.” Would the deed
have been so very much against the will of one who went about publishing
his hatred of the dead cardinal by the slanders he emitted?

Upon such evidence as that the accusation of the Pope’s murder of
Cardinal Michieli has been definitely established--and it must be
admitted that it is, if anything, rather more evidence than is usually
forthcoming of the vampirism and atrocities alleged against him.

Giustiniani, writing to his Government in the spring of 1503, informs
the Council of Ten that it is the Pope’s way to fatten his cardinals
before disposing of them--that is to say, enriching them before
poisoning them, that he may inherit their possessions. It was a wild and
sweeping statement, dictated by political animus, and it has since grown
to proportions more monstrous than the original. You may read usque
ad nauseam of the Pope and Cesare’s constant practice of poisoning
cardinals who had grown rich, for the purpose of seizing their
possessions, and you are very naturally filled with horror at so much
and such abominable turpitude. In this matter, assertion--coupled with
whorling periods of vituperation--have ever been considered by the
accusers all that was necessary to establish the accusations. It has
never, for instance, been considered necessary to cite the names of the
cardinals composing that regiment of victims. That, of course, would be
to challenge easy refutation of the wholesale charge; and refutation is
not desired by those who prefer the sensational manner.

The omission may, in part at least, be repaired by giving a list of
the cardinals who died during the eleven years of the pontificate
of Alexander VI. Those deaths, in eleven years, number
twenty-one--representing, incidentally, a percentage that compares
favourably with any other eleven years of any other pontificate or
pontificates. They are:

     Ardicino della Porta   .   .     In 1493, at Rome
     Giovanni de’Conti.   .   .       In 1493, at Rome
     Domenico della Rovere  .   .     In 1494, at Rome
     Gonzalo de Mendoza.   .   .      In 1495, in Spain
     Louis André d’Epinay   .   .     In 1495, in France
     Gian Giacomo Sclafetano.   .     In 1496, at Rome
     Bernardino di Lunati   .   .     In 1497, at Rome
     Paolo Fregosi.   .   .   .       In 1498, at Rome
     Gianbattista Savelli   .   .     In 1498, at Rome
     Giovanni della Grolaye .   .     In 1499, at Rome
     Giovanni Borgia  .   .   .       In 1500, at Fossombrone
     Bartolomeo Martini.   .   .      In 1500, at Rome
     John Morton.   .   .   .         In 1500, in England
     Battista Zeno.   .   .   .       In 1501, at Rome
     Juan Lopez .   .   .   .         In 1501, at Rome
     Gianbattista Ferrari   .   .     In 1502, at Rome
     Hurtado de Mendoza.   .   .      In 1502, in Spain
     Gianbattista Orsini.   .   .     In 1503, at Rome
     Giovanni Michieli.   .   .       In 1503, at Rome
     Giovanni Borgia (Seniore).   .   In 1503, at Rome
     Federico Casimir .   .   .       In 1503, in Poland

Now, search as you will, not only such contemporary records as diaries,
chronicles, and dispatches from ambassadors in Rome during that period
of eleven years but also subsequent writings compiled from them, and you
shall find no breath of scandal attaching to the death of seventeen of
those cardinals, no suggestion that they died other than natural deaths.

Four remain: Cardinals Giovanni Borgia (Giuniore), Gianbattista Ferrari
(Cardinal of Modena), Gianbattista Orsini, and Giovanni Michieli, all of
whom the Pope and Cesare have, more or less persistently, been accused
of poisoning.

Giovanni Borgia’s death at Fossombrone has been dealt with at length
in its proper place, and it has been shown how utterly malicious and
groundless was the accusation.

Giovanni Michieli’s is the case that has just been reviewed, and
touching which you may form your own conclusions.

Gianbattista Orsini’s also has been examined. It rests upon rumour; but
even if that rumour be true, it is unfair to consider the deed in any
but the light of a political execution.

There remains the case of the Cardinal of Modena, a man who had amassed
enormous wealth in the most questionable manner, and who was universally
execrated. The epigrams upon his death, in the form of epitaphs, dealt
most terribly with “his ignominious memory”--as Burchard has it. Of
these the Master of Ceremonies collected upwards of a score, which he
gives in his Diarium. Let one suffice here as a fair example of the
rest, the one that has it that the earth has the cardinal’s body, the
bull (i.e. the Borgia) his wealth, and hell his soul.

     “Hac Janus Baptista jacet Ferrarius urna,
     Terra habuit corpus, Bos bona, Styx animam.”

The only absolutely contemporary suggestion of his having been poisoned
emanated from the pen of that same Giustiniani. He wrote to the Venetian
Senate to announce the cardinal’s death on July 20. In his letter he
relates how his benefices were immediately distributed, and how the
lion’s share fell to the cardinal’s secretary, Sebastiano Pinzone, and
that it was said (“é fama”) that this man had received them as the price
of blood (“in premium sanguinis”), “since it is held, from many evident
signs, that the cardinal died from poison” (“ex veneno”).

Already on the 11th he had written: “The Cardinal of Modena lies ill,
with little hope of recovery. Poison is suspected” (“si dubita di
veleno”).

That was penned on the eighth day of the cardinal’s sickness, for he was
taken ill on the 3rd--as Burchard shows. Burchard, further, lays before
us the whole course of the illness; tells us how, from the beginning,
the cardinal refused to be bled or to take medicine of any kind, tells
us explicitly and positively that the cardinal was suffering from a
certain fever--so prevalent and deadly in Rome during the months of
July and August; he informs us that, on the 11th (the day on which
Giustiniani wrote the above-cited dispatch), the fever abated, to
return on the 16th. He was attended (Burchard continues) by many able
physicians, who strove to induce him to take their medicines; but he
refused persistently until the following day, when he accepted a small
proportion of the doses proposed. On July 20--after an illness of
seventeen days--he finally expired.

Those entries in the diary of the Master of Ceremonies constitute an
incontrovertible document, an irrefutable testimony against the charges
of poisoning when taken in conjunction with the evidence of fact
afforded by the length of the illness.

It is true that, under date of November 20, 1504 (under the pontificate
of Julius II), there is the following entry:

“Sentence was pronounced in the ‘Ruota’ against Sebastiano Pinzone,
apostolic scribe, contumaciously absent, and he was deprived of all
benefices and offices in that he had caused the death of the Cardinal of
Modena, his patron, who had raised him from the dust.”

But not even that can shake the conviction that must leap to every
honest mind from following the entries in the diary contemporary with
the cardinal’s decease. They are too circumstantial and conclusive to
be overthrown by this recorded sentence of the Ruota two years later
against a man who was not even present to defend himself. Besides, it is
necessary to discriminate. Burchard is not stating opinions of his own
when he writes “in that he caused the death of the Cardinal of Modena,”
 etc.; he is simply--and obviously--recording the finding of the Tribunal
of the Ruota, without comment of his own. Lastly, it is as well to
observe that in that verdict against Pinzone--of doubtful justice as it
is--there is no mention made of the Borgias.

The proceedings instituted against Sebastiano Pinzone were of a piece
with those instituted against Asquino de Colloredo and others yet to
be considered; they were set on foot by Giuliano della Rovere--that
implacable enemy of the House of Borgia--when he became Pope, for the
purpose of heaping ignominy upon the family of his predecessor. But that
shall be further dealt with presently.

Another instance of the unceasing growth of Borgia history is afforded
in connection with this Sebastiano Pinzone by Dr. Jacob Burckhardt (in
Der Cultur der Renaissance in Italien) who, in the course of the usual
sweeping diatribe against Cesare, mentions “Michele da Corella, his
strangler, and Sebastiano Pinzone, his poisoner.” It is an amazing
statement; for, whilst obviously leaning upon Giustiniani’s dispatch
for the presumption that Pinzone was a poisoner at all, he ignores the
statement contained in it that Pinzone was the secretary and favourite
of Cardinal Ferrari, nor troubles to ascertain that the man was never in
Cesare Borgia’s service at all, nor is ever once mentioned anywhere as
connected in any capacity whatever with the duke. Dr. Burckhardt felt,
no doubt, the necessity of linking Pinzone to the Borgias, that the
alleged guilt of the former may recoil upon the latter, and so he
accomplished it in this facile and irresponsible manner.

Now, notwithstanding the full and circumstantial evidence afforded by
Burchard’s Diarium of the Cardinal of Modena’s death of a tertian
fever, the German scholar Gregorovius does not hesitate to write of this
cardinal’s death: “It is certain that it was due to their [the Borgias']
infallible white powders.”

Oh the art of writing history in sweeping statements to support a
preconceived point of view! Oh that white powder of the Borgias!

Giovio tells us all about it. Cantarella, he calls it--Cantharides. Why
Cantarella? Possibly because it is a pleasing, mellifluous word that
will help a sentence hang together smoothly; possibly because the
notorious aphrodisiac properties of that drug suggested it to Giovio as
just the poison to be kept handy by folk addicted to the pursuits which
he and others attribute to the Borgias. Can you surmise any better
reason? For observe that Giovio describes the Cantarella for you--a
blunder of his which gives the lie to his statement. “A white powder of
a faint and not unpleasing savour,” says he; and that, as you know, is
nothing like cantharides, which is green, intensely acrid, and burning.
Yet who cares for such discrepancies? Who will ever question anything
that is uttered against a Borgia? “Cantarella--a white powder of a faint
and not unpleasing savour,” answers excellently the steady purpose of
supporting a defamation and pandering to the tastes of those who like
sensations in their reading--and so, from pen to pen, from book to book
it leaps, as unchallenged as it is impossible.

Whilst Cesare’s troops were engaged in laying siege to Ceri, and, by
engines contrived by Leonardo da Vinci, pressing the defenders so
sorely that at the end of a month’s resistance they surrendered with
safe-conduct, the inimical and ever-jealous Venetians in the north were
stirring up what trouble they could. Chafing under the restraint of
France, they but sought a pretext that should justify them in the eyes
of Louis for making war upon Cesare, and when presently envoys came
to lay before the Pope the grievance of the Republic at the pillage by
Borgian soldiery of the Venetian traders in Sinigaglia, Cesare had no
delusions concerning their disposition towards himself.

Growing uneasy lest they should make this a reason for assailing his
frontiers, he sent orders north recommending vigilance and instructing
his officers to deal severely with all enemies of his State, whilst he
proceeded to complete the provisions for the government of the Romagna.
To replace the Governor-General he appointed four seneschals: Cristoforo
della Torre for Forli, Faenza and Imola; Hieronimo Bonadies for Cesena,
Rimini, and Pesaro; Andrea Cossa for Fano, Sinigaglia, Fossombrone, and
Pergola; and Pedro Ramires for the duchy of Urbino. This last was to
find a deal of work for his hands; for Urbino was not yet submissive,
Majolo and S. Leo still holding for Guidobaldo.

Ramires began by reducing Majolo, and then proceeded to lay siege to
S. Leo. But the Castellan--one Lattanzio--encouraged by the assurances
given him that the Venetians would render Guidobaldo assistance to
reconquer his dominions, resisted stubbornly, and was not brought to
surrender until the end of June, after having held the castle for six
months.

If Venice was jealous and hostile in the north, Florence was scarcely
less so in mid-Italy--though perhaps with rather more justification, for
Cesare’s growing power and boundless ambition kept the latter Republic
in perpetual fear of being absorbed into his dominions--into that
kingdom which it was his ultimate aim to found. There can be little
doubt that Francesco da Narni, who appeared in Tuscany early in the
March of that year, coming from the French Court for the purpose of
arranging a league of Florence, Bologna, Siena, and Lucca--the four
States more or less under French protection--had been besought by
Florence, to the obvious end that these four States, united, might
inter-defend themselves against Valentinois. And Florence even went
so far as to avail herself of this to the extent of restoring Pandolfo
Petrucci to the lordship of Siena--preferring even this avowed enemy to
the fearful Valentinois. Thus came about Petrucci’s restoration towards
the end of March, despite the fact that the Siennese were divided on the
subject of his return.

With the single exception of Camerino, where disturbances still
continued, all was quiet in the States of the Church by that summer of
1503.

This desirable state of things had been achieved by Cesare’s wise and
liberal government, which also sufficed to ensure its continuance.

He had successfully combated the threatened famine by importing grain
from Sicily. To Sinigaglia--his latest conquest--he had accorded, as to
the other subjected States, the privilege of appointing her own native
officials, with, of course, the exception of the Podestà (who never
could be a native of any place where he dispensed justice) and the
Castellan. In Cesena a liberal justice was measured out by the Tribunal
of the Ruota, which Cesare had instituted there, equipping it with the
best jurisconsults of the Romagna.

In Rome he proceeded to a military organization on a new basis, and
with a thoroughness never before seen in Italy--or elsewhere, for that
matter--but which was thereafter the example all sought to copy. We have
seen him issuing an edict that every house in the Romagna should furnish
him one man-at-arms to serve him when necessary. The men so levied were
under obligation to repair to the market-place of their native town when
summoned thither by the ringing of the bells, and it was estimated that
this method of conscription would yield him six or seven thousand men,
who could be mobilized in a couple of days. He increased the number
of arquebusiers, appreciating the power and value of a weapon
which--although invented nearly a century earlier--was still regarded
with suspicion. He was also the inventor of the military uniform,
putting his soldiers into a livery of his own, and causing his
men-at-arms to wear over their armour a smock, quartered red and
yellow with the name CESARE lettered on the breast and back, whilst the
gentlemen of his guard wore surcoats of his colours in gold brocade and
crimson velvet.

He continued to levy troops and to arm them, and it is scarcely
over-stating the case to say that hardly a tyrant of the Romagna would
have dared to do so much for fear of the weapons being turned against
himself. Cesare knew no such fear. He enjoyed a loyalty from the people
he had subjected which was almost unprecedented in Italy. The very
officers he placed in command of the troops of his levying were, for the
most part, natives of the Romagna. Is there no inference concerning him
to be drawn from that!

For every man in his service Cesare ordered a back-and-breast and
headpiece of steel, and the armourers’ shops of Brescia rang busily that
summer with the clang of metal upon metal, as that defensive armour for
Cesare’s troops was being forged. At the same time the foundries were
turning out fresh cannon in that season which saw Cesare at the very
height and zenith of his power, although he himself may not have
accounted that, as yet, he was further than at the beginning.

But the catastrophe that was to hurl him irretrievably from the eminence
to which in three short years he had climbed was approaching with
stealthy, relentless foot, and was even now upon him.




BOOK IV. THE BULL CADENT

“Cesar Borgia che era della gente Per armi e per virtú tenuto un sole,
Mancar dovendo andó dove andar sole Phebo, verso la sera, al Occidente.

“Girolamo Casio--Epitaffi.”




CHAPTER I. THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER VI


Unfortunate Naples was a battle-field once more. France and Spain were
engaged there in a war whose details belong elsewhere.

To the aid of France, which was hard beset and with whose arms things
were going none too well, Cesare was summoned to fulfil the obligations
under which he was placed by virtue of his treaty with King Louis.

Rumours were rife that he was negotiating secretly with Gonzalo de
Cordoba, the Great Captain, and the truth of whether or not he was
guilty of so base a treachery has never been discovered. These rumours
had been abroad since May, and, if not arising out of, they were
certainly stimulated by, an edict published by Valentinois concerning
the papal chamberlain, Francesco Troche. In this edict Cesare enjoined
all subjects of the Holy See to arrest, wherever found, this man who had
fled from Rome, and whose flight “was concerned with something against
the honour of the King of France.”

Francesco Troche had been Alexander’s confidential chamberlain and
secretary; he had been a diligent servant of the House of Borgia, and
when in France had acted as a spy for Valentinois, keeping the duke
supplied with valuable information at a critical time, as we have seen.

Villari says of him that he was “one of the Borgias’ most trusted
assassins.” That he has never been so much as alleged to have murdered
anyone does not signify. He was a servant--a trusted servant--of
the Borgias; therefore the title of “assassin” is, ipso facto, to be
bestowed upon him.

The flight of a man holding such an intimate position as Troche’s was
naturally a subject of much speculation and gossip, but a matter upon
which there was no knowledge. Valentinois was ever secret. In common
with his father--though hardly in so marked a degree, and if we except
the case of the scurrilous Letter to Silvio Savelli--he showed a
contemptuous indifference to public opinion on the whole which is
invested almost with a certain greatness. At least it is rarely other
than with greatness that we find such an indifference associated. It was
not for him to take the world into his confidence in matters with which
the world was not concerned. Let the scandalmongers draw what inferences
they pleased. It was a lofty and dignified procedure, but one that was
fraught with peril; and the Borgias have never ceased to pay the price
of that excessive dignity of reserve. For tongues must be wagging, and,
where knowledge is lacking, speculation will soon usurp its place, and
presently be invested with all the authority of “fact.”

Out of surmises touching that matter “which concerned the honour of the
King of France” grew presently--and contradictorily--the rumour that
Troche was gone to betray to France Valentinois’s intention of going
over to the Spanish side. A motive was certainly required to account for
Troche’s action; but the invention of motives does not appear ever to
have troubled the Cinquecentist.

It was now said that Troche was enraged at having been omitted from the
list of cardinals to be created at the forthcoming Consistory. It is
all mystery, even to the end he made; for, whereas some said that, after
being seized on board a ship that was bound for Corsica, Troche in his
despair threw himself overboard and was drowned, others reported that he
was brought back to Rome and strangled in a prison in Trastevere.

The following questions crave answer:

If it was Troche’s design to betray such a treachery of the Borgias
against France, what was he doing on board a vessel bound for Corsica
a fortnight after his flight from Rome? Would not his proper goal have
been the French camp in Naples, which he could have reached in a quarter
of that time, and where not only could he have vented his desire for
vengeance by betraying Alexander and Valentinois, but he could further
have found complete protection from pursuit?

It is idle and unprofitable to dwell further upon the end of Francesco
Troche. The matter is a complete mystery, and whilst theory is very well
as theory, it is dangerous to cause it to fill the place of fact.

Troche was drowned or was strangled as a consequence of his having fled
out of motives that were “against the honour of the King of France.” And
straightway the rumour spread of Valentinois’s intended treachery, and
the rumour was kept alive and swelled by Venice and Florence in pursuit
of their never-ceasing policy of discrediting Cesare with King Louis, to
the end that they might encompass his expedient ruin.

The lie was given to them to no small extent by the Pope, when, in
the Consistory of July 28, he announced Cesare’s departure to join the
French army in Naples with five hundred horse and two thousand foot
assembled for the purpose.

For this Cesare made now his preparations, and on the eve of departure
he went with his father--on the evening of August 5--to sup at the villa
of Cardinal Adriano Corneto, outside Rome.

Once before we have seen him supping at a villa of the Suburra on the
eve of setting out for Naples, and we know the tragedy that followed--a
tragedy which he has been accused of having brought about. Here again,
in a villa of the Suburra, at a supper on the eve of setting out for
Naples, Death was the unseen guest.

They stayed late at the vineyard of Cardinal Corneto, enjoying
the treacherous cool of the evening, breathing the death that was
omnipresent in Rome that summer, the pestilential fever which had
smitten Cardinal Giovanni Borgia (Seniore) on the 1st of that month, and
of which men were dying every day in the most alarming numbers.

On the morning of Saturday 12, Burchard tells us, the Pope felt ill, and
that evening he was taken with fever. On the 15th Burchard records that
he was bled, thirteen ounces of blood being taken from him. It relieved
him somewhat, and, seeking distraction, he bade some of the cardinals to
come and sit by his bed and play at cards.

Meanwhile, Cesare was also stricken, and in him the fever raged so
fierce and violently that he had himself immersed to the neck in a huge
jar of ice-cold water--a drastic treatment in consequence of which he
came to shed all the skin from his body.

On the 17th the Pope was much worse, and on the 18th, the end being at
hand, he was confessed by the Bishop of Culm, who administered Extreme
Unction, and that evening he died.

That, beyond all manner of question, is the true story of the passing of
Alexander VI, as revealed by the Diarium of Burchard, by the testimony
of the physician who attended him, and by the dispatches of the
Venetian, Ferrarese, and Florentine ambassadors. At this time of day it
is accepted by all serious historians, compelled to it by the burden of
evidence.

The ambassador of Ferrara had written to Duke Ercole, on August 14, that
it was no wonder the Pope and the duke were ill, as nearly everybody in
Rome was ill as a consequence of the bad air (“Per la mala condictione
de aere”).

Cardinal Soderini was also stricken with the fever, whilst Corneto was
taken ill on the day after that supper-party, and, like Cesare, is said
to have shed all the skin of his body before he recovered.

Even Villari and Gregorovius, so unrestrained when writing of the
Borgias, discard the extraordinary and utterly unwarranted stories of
Guicciardini, Giovio, and Bembo, which will presently be considered.
Gregorovius does this with a reluctance that is almost amusing, and
with many a fond, regretful, backward glance--so very apparent in his
manner--at the tale of villainy as told by Guicciardini and the others,
which the German scholar would have adopted but that he dared not for
his credit’s sake. This is not stated on mere assumption. It is obvious
to any one who reads Gregorovius’s histories.

Burchard tells us--as certainly matter for comment--that, during his
last illness, Alexander never once asked for Cesare nor ever once
mentioned the name of Lucrezia. So far as Cesare is concerned, the Pope
knew, no doubt, that he was ill and bedridden, for all that the gravity
of the duke’s condition would, probably, have been concealed from
him. That he should not have mentioned Lucrezia--nor, we suppose,
Giuffredo--is remarkable. Did he, with the hand of Death already upon
him, reproach himself with this paternity which, however usual and
commonplace in priests of all degrees, was none the less a scandal, and
the more scandalous in a measure as the rank of the offender was higher?
It may well be that in those last days that sinful, worldly old man
bethought him of the true scope and meaning of Christ’s Vicarship, which
he had so wantonly abused and dishonoured, and considered that to that
Judge before whom he was summoned to appear the sins of his predecessors
would be no justification or mitigation of his own. It may well be that,
grown introspective upon his bed of death, he tardily sought to thrust
from his mind the worldly things that had so absorbed it until the
spiritual were forgotten, and had given rise to all the scandal
concerning him that was spread through Christendom, to the shame and
dishonour of the Church whose champion he should have been.

Thus may it have come to pass that he summoned none of his children in
his last hours, nor suffered their names to cross his lips.

When the news of his father’s death was brought to Cesare, the duke, all
fever-racked as he was, more dead than living, considered his position
and issued his orders to Michele da Corella, that most faithful of all
his captains, who so richly shared with Cesare the execration of the
latter’s enemies.

Of tears for his father there is no record, just as at no time are we
allowed to see that stern spirit giving way to any emotion, conceiving
any affection, or working ever for the good of any but himself. Besides,
in such an hour as this, the consciousness of the danger in which
he stood by virtue of the Pope’s death and his own most inopportune
sickness, which disabled him from taking action to make his future
secure, must have concerned him to the exclusion of all else.

Meanwhile, however, Rome was quiet, held so in the iron grip of Michele
da Corella and the ducal troops. The Pope’s death was being kept secret
for the moment, and was not announced to the people until nightfall, by
when Corella had carried out his master’s orders, including the seizure
of the Pope’s treasure. And Burchard tells us how some of Valentinois’s
men entered the Vatican--all the gates of which were held by the ducal
troops--and, seizing Cardinal Casanova, they demanded, with a dagger
at his throat and a threat to fling his corpse from the windows if
he refused them, the Pope’s keys. These the cardinal surrendered, and
Corella possessed himself of plate and jewels to the value of some
200,000 ducats, besides two caskets containing about 100,000 ducats in
gold. Thereafter the servants of the palace completed the pillage by
ransacking the wardrobes and taking all they could find, so that nothing
was left in the papal apartments but the chairs, a few cushions, and the
tapestries of the walls.

All his life Alexander had been the victim of the most ribald calumnies.
Stories had ever sprung up and thriven, like ill weeds, about his name
and reputation. His sins, great and scandalous in themselves, were
swelled by popular rumour, under the spur of malice, to monstrous and
incredible proportions. As they had exaggerated and lied about the
manner of his life, so--with a consistency worthy of better scope--they
exaggerated and lied about the manner of his death, and, the age being
a credulous one, the stories were such that writers of more modern
and less credulous times dare not insist upon them, lest they should
discredit--as they do--what else has been alleged against him.

Thus when, in his last delirium, the Pope uttered some such words as: “I
am coming; I am coming. It is just. But wait a little,” and when those
words were repeated, it was straightway asserted that the Devil was the
being he thus addressed in that supreme hour. The story grew in detail;
that is inevitable with such matter. He had bargained with the devil,
it was said, for a pontificate of twelve years, and, the time being
completed, the devil was come for him. And presently, we even have a
description of Messer the Devil as he appeared on that occasion--in the
shape of a baboon. The Marquis Gonzaga of Mantua, in all seriousness,
writes to relate this. The chronicler Sanuto, receiving the now
popularly current story from another source, in all seriousness gives it
place in his Diarii, thus:

“The devil was seen to leap out of the room in the shape of a baboon.
And a cardinal ran to seize him, and, having caught him, would have
presented him to the Pope; but the Pope said, ‘Let him go, let him go.
It is the devil,’ and that night he fell ill and died.”(1)


  1  “Il diavolo sarebbe saltato fuori della camera in forma di babuino, et
un cardinale corso per piarlo, e preso volendolo presentar al papa,
il papa disse lasolo, lasolo ché ii diavolo. E poi la notte si amaló e
morite.”--Marino Sanuto, Diarii.


That story, transcending the things which this more practical age
considers possible, is universally rejected; but it is of vast
importance to the historical student; for it is to be borne in mind that
it finds a place in the pages of those same Diarii upon the authority
of which are accepted many defamatory stories without regard to their
extreme improbability so long as they are within the bounds of bare
possibility.

After Alexander was dead it was said that water boiled in his mouth, and
that steam issued from it as he lay in St. Peter’s, and much else of the
same sort, which the known laws of physiology compel so many of us very
reluctantly to account exaggerations. But, again, remember that the
source of these stories was the same as the source of many other
exaggerations not at issue with physiological laws.

The circumstances of Alexander’s funeral are in the highest degree
scandalous, and reflect the greatest discredit upon his age.

On the morrow, as the clergy were chanting the Libera me, Domine in St.
Peter’s, where the body was exposed on a catafalque in full pontificals,
a riot occurred, set on foot by the soldiers present for reasons which
Burchard--who records the event--does not make clear.

The clerics fled for shelter to the sacristy, the chants were cut short,
and the Pope’s body almost entirely abandoned.

But the most scandalous happening occurred twenty-four hours later. The
Pope’s remains were removed to the Chapel of Santa Maria delle Febbre
by six bearers who laughed and jested at the expense of the poor corpse,
which was in case to provoke the coarse mirth of the lower classes of an
age which, setting no value upon human life, knew no respect for death.
By virtue of the malady that had killed him, of his plethoric habit
of body, and of the sweltering August heat, the corpse was decomposing
rapidly, so that the face had become almost black and assumed an aspect
grotesquely horrible, fully described by Burchard:

“Factus est sicut pannus vel morus nigerrimus, livoris totus plenus,
nasus plenus, os amplissimum, lingua duplex in ore, que labia tota
implebat, os apertum et adeo horribile quod nemo viderit unquam vel esse
tale dixerit.”

Two carpenters waited in the chapel with the coffin which they had
brought; but, either through carelessness it had been made too narrow
and too short, or else the body, owing to its swollen condition, did
not readily fit into this receptable; whereupon, removing the mitre, for
which there was no room, they replaced it by a piece of old carpet, and
set themselves to force and pound the corpse into the coffin. And this
was done “without candle or any light being burned in honour of the
dead, and without the presence of any priest or other person to care
for the Pope’s remains.” No explanation of this is forthcoming; it was
probably due to the panic earlier occasioned the clergy by the ducal
men-at-arms.

The story that he had been poisoned was already spreading like a
conflagration through Rome, arising out of the appearance of the body,
which was such as was popularly associated with venenation.

But a Borgia in the rôle of a victim was altogether too unusual to be
acceptable, and too much opposed to the taste to which the public had
been educated; so the story must be edited and modified until suitable
for popular consumption. The supper-party at Cardinal Corneto’s villa
was remembered, and upon that a tale was founded, and trimmed by degrees
into plausible shape.

Alexander had intended to poison Corneto--so ran this tale--that he
might possess himself of the cardinal’s vast riches; in the main a
well-worn story by now. To this end Cesare had bribed a butler to pour
wine for the cardinal from a flask which he entrusted to him. Exit
Cesare. Exit presently the butler, carelessly leaving the poisoned wine
upon a buffet. (The drama, you will observe, is perfectly mechanical,
full of author’s interventions, and elementary in its “preparations”).
Enter the Pope. He thirsts, and calls for wine. A servant hastens; takes
up, of course, the poisoned flask in ignorance of its true quality, and
pours for his Beatitude. Whilst the Pope drinks re-enters Cesare, also
athirst, and, seating himself, he joins the Pope in the poisoned wine,
all unsuspicious and having taken no precautions to mark the
flask. Poetic justice is done, and down comes the curtain upon that
preposterous tragi-farce.

Such is the story which Guicciardini and Giovio and a host of other more
or less eminent historians have had the audacity to lay before their
readers as being the true circumstances of the death of Alexander VI.

It is a noteworthy matter that in all that concerns the history of the
House of Borgia, and more particularly those incidents in it that are
wrapped in mystery, circumstantial elucidation has a habit of proceeding
from the same quarters.

You will remember, for instance, that the Venetian Paolo Capello (though
not in Rome at the time) was one of those who was best informed in the
matter of the murder of the Duke of Gandia. And it was Capello again who
was possessed of the complete details of the scarcely less mysterious
business of Alfonso of Aragon. Another who on the subject of the murder
of Gandia “had no doubts”--as he himself expressed it--was Pietro
Martire d’Anghiera, in Spain at the time, whence he wrote to inform
Italy of the true circumstances of a case that had happened in Italy.

It is again Pietro Martire d’Anghiera who, on November 10, 1503, writes
from Burgos in Spain to inform Rome of the true facts of Alexander’s
death--for it is in that letter of his that the tale of the flask of
wine, as here set down, finds place for the first time.

It is unprofitable to pursue the matter further, since at this time
of day even the most reluctant to reject anything that tells against
a Borgia have been compelled to admit that the burden of evidence is
altogether too overwhelming in this instance, and that it is proved to
the hilt that Alexander died of the tertian fever then ravaging Rome.

And just as the Pope’s death was the subject of the wildest fictions
which have survived until very recent days, so too, was Cesare’s
recovery.

Again, it was the same Pietro Martire d’Anghiera who from Burgos wrote
to inform Rome of what was taking place in the privacy of the Duke of
Valentinois’s apartments in the Vatican. Under his facile and magic pen,
the jar of ice-cold water into which Cesare was believed to have been
plunged was transmuted into a mule which was ripped open that the
fever-stricken Cesare might be packed into the pulsating entrails, there
to sweat the fever out of him.

But so poor and sexless a beast as this seeming in the popular mind
inadequate to a man of Cesare’s mettle, it presently improved upon and
converted it into a bull--so much more appropriate, too, as being the
emblem of his house.

Nor does it seem that even then the story has gone far enough. Facilis
inventis addere. There comes a French writer with an essay on the
Borgias, than which--submitted as sober fact--nothing more amazingly
lurid has been written. In this, with a suggestive cleverness entirely
Gallic, he causes us to gather an impression of Cesare in the intestinal
sudatorium of that eventrated bull, as of one who is at once the
hierophant and devotee of a monstrous, foul, and unclean rite of some
unspeakable religion--a rite by comparison with which the Black Mass of
the Abbé Gribourg becomes a sweet and wholesome thing.

But hear the man himself:

“Cet homme de meurtres et d’inceste, incarné dans l’animal des
hécatombes et des bestialités antiques en évoque les monstrueuses
images. Je crois entendre le taureau de Phalaris et le taureau de
Pasiphaë répondre, de loin, par d’effrayants mugissements, aux cris
humains de ce bucentaure.”

That is the top note on this subject. Hereafter all must pale to
anti-climax.




CHAPTER II. PIUS III


The fever that racked Cesare Borgia’s body in those days can have been
as nothing to the fever that racked his mind, the despairing rage that
must have whelmed his soul to see the unexpected--the one contingency
against which he had not provided--cutting the very ground from
underneath his feet.

As he afterwards expressed himself to Macchiavelli, and as Macchiavelli
has left on record, Cesare had thought of everything, had provided for
everything that might happen on his father’s death, save that in such a
season--when more than ever he should have need for all his strength of
body and of mind--he should, himself, be lying at the point of death.

Scarce was Alexander’s body cold than the duke’s enemies began to lift
their heads. Already by the 20th of that month--two days after the Pope
had breathed his last--the Orsini were in arms and had led a rising, in
retort to which Michele da Corella fired their palace on Montegiordano.

Venice and Florence bethought them that the protection of France had
been expressly for the Church and not for Cesare personally. So the
Venetians at once supplied Guidobaldo da Montefeltre with troops
wherewith to reconquer his dominions, and by the 24th he was master of
S. Leo. In the city of Urbino itself Ramires, the governor, held out as
long as possible, then beat a retreat to Cesena, whilst Valentinois’s
partisans in Urbino were mercilessly slaughtered and their houses
pillaged.

Florence supported the Baglioni in the conquest of Magione from the
Borgias, and they aided Giacopo d’Appiano to repossess himself of
Piombino, which had so gladly seen him depart out of it eighteen months
ago.

From Magione, Gianpaolo Baglioni marches his Florentine troops to
Camerino to aid the only remaining Varano to regain the tyranny of his
fathers. The Vitelli are back in Città di Castello, carrying a golden
calf in triumph through the streets; and so by the end of August, within
less than a fortnight, all the appendages of the Romagna are lost
to Cesare, whilst at Cesare’s very gates the Orsini men-at-arms are
clamouring with insistent menace.

The Duke’s best friend, in that crisis, was his secretary Agabito
Gherardi. For it is eminently probable--as Alvisi opines--that it was
Gherardi who urged his master to make an alliance with the Colonna,
Gherardi himself being related to that powerful family. The alliance of
these old enemies--Colonna and Borgia--was in their common interests,
that they might stand against their common enemy, Orsini--the old
friends of the Borgias.

On August 22 Prospero Colonna came to Rome, and terms were made and
cemented, in the usual manner, by a betrothal--that of the little
Rodrigo--(Lucrezia’s child)--to a daughter of the House of Colonna.
On the same day the Sacred College confirmed Cesare in his office of
Captain-General and Gonfalonier of the Church, pending the election of a
new Pope.

Meanwhile, sick almost to the point of death, and scarce able to stir
hand or foot, so weak in body had he been left by the heroic treatment
to which he had submitted, Cesare continued mentally a miracle of energy
and self-possession. He issued orders for the fortifying of the Vatican,
and summoned from Romagna 200 horse and 1,000 foot to his aid in Rome,
bidding Remolino, who brought these troops, to quarter himself at
Orvieto, and there await his further orders.

Considering that the Colonna were fighting in Naples under the banner
of Gonzalo de Cordoba, it was naturally enough supposed, from Cesare’s
alliance with the former, that this time he was resolved to go over to
the side of Spain. Of this, M. de Trans came to protest to Valentinois
on behalf of Louis XII, to be answered by the duke’s assurances that the
alliance into which he had entered was strictly confined to the Colonna,
that it entailed no treaty with Spain; nor had he entered into any; that
his loyalty to the King of France continued unimpaired, and that he
was ready to support King Louis with the entire forces he disposed
of, whenever his Majesty should desire him so to do. In reply, he
was assured by the French ambassador and Cardinal Sanseverino of the
continued protection of Louis, and that France would aid him to maintain
his dominions in Italy and reconquer any that might have seceded; and
of this declaration copies were sent to Florence, Venice, and Bologna on
September 1, as a warning to those Powers not to engage in anything to
the hurt of Valentinois.

Thus sped the time of the novendiali--the nine days’ obsequies of the
dead Pope--which were commenced on September 4.

As during the conclave that was immediately to follow it was against
the law for armed men to be in Rome, Cesare was desired by the Sacred
College to withdraw his troops. He did so on September 2, and himself
went with them.

Cardinal Sanseverino and the French ambassador escorted him out of Rome
and saw him take the road to Nepi--a weak, fever-ravaged, emaciated man,
borne in a litter by a dozen of his halberdiers, his youth, his beauty,
his matchless strength of body all sapped from him by the insidious
disease which had but grudgingly spared his very life.

At Nepi he was awaited by his brother Giuffredo, who had preceded him
thither from Rome. A shadowy personage this Giuffredo, whose unimportant
personality is tantalizingly elusive in the pages where mention is made
of him. His incontinent wife, Doña Sancia, had gone to Naples under the
escort of Prospero Colonna, having left the Castle of Sant’ Angelo where
for some time she had been confined by order of her father-in-law, the
Pope, on account of the disorders of her frivolous life.

And now the advices of the fresh treaty between Cesare Borgia and the
King of France were producing their effect upon Venice and Florence, who
were given additional pause by the fierce jealousy of each other, which
was second only to their jealousy of the duke.

From Venice--with or without the sanction of his Government--Bartolomeo
d’Alviano had ridden south into the Romagna with his condotta
immediately upon receiving news of the death of Alexander, and, finding
Pandolfaccio Malatesta at Ravenna, he proceeded to accompany him back
to that Rimini which the tyrant had sold to Cesare. Rimini, however,
refused to receive him back, and showed fight to the forces under
d’Alviano. So that, for the moment, nothing was accomplished. Whereupon
the Republic, which at first had raised a feeble, make-believe protest
at the action of her condottiero, now deemed it as well to find a
pretext for supporting him. So Venice alleged that a courier of hers had
been stripped of a letter, and, with such an overwhelming cause as that
for hostilities, dispatched reinforcements to d’Alviano to the end that
he might restore Pandolfaccio to a dominion in which he was abhorred.
Further, d’Alviano was thereafter to proceed to do the like office for
Giovanni Sforza, who already had taken ship for Pesaro, and who was
restored to his lordship on September 3.

Thence, carrying the war into the Romagna itself, d’Alviano marched upon
Cesena. But the Romagna was staunch and loyal to her duke. The governor
had shut himself up in Cesena with what troops he could muster,
including a thousand veterans under the valiant Dionigio di Naldo,
and there, standing firm and resolute, he awaited the onslaught of the
Venetians.

D’Alviano advanced rapidly and cruelly, a devastator laying waste the
country in his passage, until to check him came suddenly the Borgia
troops, which had ventured upon a sally. The Venetians were routed and
put to flight.

On September 16 the restored tyrants of Rimini, Pesaro, Castello,
Perugia, Camerino, Urbino, and Sinigaglia entered into and signed at
Perugia a league, whose chiefs were Bartolomeo d’Alviano and Gianpaolo
Baglioni, for their common protection.

Florence was invited to join the allies. Intimidated, however, by
France, not only did the Signory refuse to be included, but--in her
usual manner--actually went so far as to advise Cesare Borgia of that
refusal and to offer him her services and help.

On the same date the Sacred College assembled in Rome, at the Mass of
the Holy Spirit, to beseech the grace of inspiration in the election of
the new Pontiff. The part usually played by the divine afflatus in
these matters was so fully understood and appreciated that the Venetian
ambassador received instructions from the Republic(1) to order the
Venetian cardinals to vote for Giuliano della Rovere, whilst the King of
France sent a letter--in his own hand--to the Sacred College desiring it
to elect his friend the Cardinal d’Amboise, and Spain, at the same time,
sought to influence the election of Carvajal.


  1  See Sanuto’s Diarrii.


The chances of the last-named do not appear ever to have amounted
to very much. The three best supported candidates were della Rovere,
d’Amboise, and Ascanio Sforza--who made his reappearance in Rome,
released from his French prison at last, in time to attend this
Conclave.

None of these three factions was strong enough to ensure the election
of its own candidate, but any two were strong enough to prevent the
election of the candidate of the third. Wherefore it happened that, as
a result of so much jealousy and competition, recourse was had to
temporizing by electing the oldest and feeblest cardinal in the College.
Thus there should presently be another election, and meantime the
candidates would improve the time by making their arrangements and
canvassing their supporters so as to control the votes of the College at
that future Conclave. Therefore Francesco Piccolomini, Cardinal of
Siena (nephew of Pius II), a feeble octogenarian, tormented by an ulcer,
which, in conjunction with an incompetent physician, was to cut his life
even shorter than they hoped, was placed upon the throne of St. Peter,
and assumed with the Pontificate the name of Pius III.

The new Pope was entirely favourable to Cesare Borgia, and confirmed him
in all his offices, signifying his displeasure to Venice at her attempt
upon the Romagna, and issuing briefs to the allied tyrants commanding
them to desist from their opposition to the will of the Holy See.

Cesare returned to Rome, still weak on his legs and ghastly to behold,
and on October 6 he received in St. Peter’s his confirmation as
Captain-General and Gonfalonier of the Church.

The Venetians had meanwhile been checked by a letter from Louis from
lending further assistance to the allies. The latter, however, continued
their hostilities in spite of that. They had captured Sinigaglia, and
now they made an attempt on Fano and Fermo, but were repulsed in both
places by Cesare’s loyal subjects. At the same time the Ordelaffi--who
in the old days had been deposed from the Tyranny of Forli to make room
for the Riarii--deemed the opportunity a good one to attempt to regain
their lordship; but their attempt, too, was frustrated.

Cesare sat impotent in Rome, no doubt vexed by his own inaction. He
cannot have lacked the will to go to the Romagna to support the subjects
who showed him such loyalty; but he lacked the means. Owing to the
French and Spanish dispute in Naples, his army had practically melted
away. The terms of his treaty with Louis compelled him to send the
bulk of it to the camp at Garigliano to support the French, who were in
trouble. The force that Remolino had quartered at Orvieto to await the
duke’s orders he had been unable to retain there. Growing uneasy at
their position, and finding it impossible either to advance or to
retreat, being threatened on the one side by the Baglioni and on the
other by the Orsini, these troops had steadily deserted; whilst most
of Cesare’s Spanish captains and their followers had gone to the aid of
their compatriots under Gonzalo de Cordoba in response to that captain’s
summons of every Spaniard in the peninsula.

Thus did it come about that Cesare had no force to afford his Romagna
subjects. His commissioners in the north did what was possible to repair
the damage effected by the allies, and they sent Dionigio di Naldo with
six hundred of his foot, and, further, a condotta of two hundred horse,
against Rimini. This was captured by them in one day and almost without
resistance, Pandolfaccio flying for his life to Pesaro.

Next the allies, by attempting to avenge the rout they had suffered
at Cesena, afforded the ducal troops an opportunity of scoring another
victory. They prepared a second attack against Cesare’s capital, and
with an army of considerable strength they advanced to the very walls of
the stronghold, laying the aqueduct in ruins and dismantling what other
buildings they found in their way. But in Cesena the gallant Pedro
Ramires lay in wait for them. Issuing to meet them, he not only put them
to flight and drove them for shelter into the fortress of Montebello,
but laid siege to them there and broke them utterly, with a loss, as was
reputed, of some three hundred men in slain alone.

The news of this came to cheer Valentinois, who, moreover, had now
the Pope and France to depend upon. Further, and in view of that
same protection, the Orsini were already treating with him for a
reconciliation, despite the fact that the Orsini blood was scarce dry
upon his hands. But he had a resolute, sly, and desperate enemy in
Venice, and on October 10 there arrived in Rome Bartolomeo d’Alviano and
Gianpaolo Baglioni, who repaired to the Venetian ambassador and informed
him that they were come in quest of the person of Valentinois, intending
his death.

To achieve their ends they united themselves to the Orsini, who were
now in arms in Rome, their attempted reconciliation with Cesare having
aborted. Valentinois’s peril became imminent, and from the Vatican he
withdrew for shelter to the Castle of Sant’ Angelo, going by way of the
underground passage built by his father.

Thence he summoned Michele da Corella, who was at Rocca Soriana with his
foot, and Taddeo della Volpe (a valiant captain and a great fighter, who
had already lost an eye in Cesare’s service) and Baldassare Scipione,
who were in the Neapolitan territory with their men-at-arms. He was
gathering his sinews for a spring, when suddenly the entire face of
affairs was altered and all plans were checked by the death of Pius III
on October 18, after a reign of twenty-six days.

Once more there was an end to Cesare’s credit. No man might say what the
future held in store. Giustiniani, indeed, wrote to his Government
that Cesare was about to withdraw to France, and that he had besought
a safe-conduct of the Orsini--which report is as true as many another
communication from the same Venetian pen, ever ready to write what
it hoped might be true; and it is flatly contradicted by the
better-informed Macchiavelli, who was writing at the same time:

“The duke is in Sant’ Angelo, and is more hopeful than ever of
accomplishing great things, presupposing a Pope according to the wishes
of his friends.”

But the Romagna was stirred once more to the turbulence from which it
had scarcely settled. Forli and Rimini were lost almost at once, the
Ordelaffi succeeding in capturing the former in this their second
attempt, whilst Pandolfaccio once more sat in his palace at Rimini,
having cut his way to it through a sturdy resistance. Against Imola
Bentivogli dispatched a force of two thousand foot; but this was beaten
off.

The authority of France appeared to have lost its weight, and in vain
did Cardinal d’Amboise thunder threats in the name of his friend King
Louis, and send envoys to Florence, Venice, Bologna, and Urbino,
to complain of the injuries that were being done to the Duke of
Valentinois.




CHAPTER III. JULIUS II


Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of S. Pietro in Vincoli, had much in his
character that was reminiscent of his terrible uncle, Sixtus IV.
Like that uncle of his, he had many failings highly unbecoming any
Christian--laic or ecclesiastic--which no one has attempted to screen;
and, incidentally, he cultivated morality in his private life and
observed his priestly vows of chastity as little as did any other
churchman of his day. For you may see him, through the eyes of Paride de
Grassi,(1) unable one Good Friday to remove his shoes for the adoration
of the cross in consequence of his foot’s affliction--ex morbo gallico.
But with one great and splendid virtue was he endowed in the eyes of the
enemies of the House of Borgia--contemporary, and subsequent down to
our times--a most profound, unchristian, and mordacious hatred of all
Borgias.


  1 Burchard’s successor in the office of Master of Ceremonies.


Roderigo Borgia had defeated him in the Conclave of 1492, and for twelve
years had kept him out of the coveted pontificate. You have seen how he
found expression for his furious jealousy at his rival’s success. You
have seen him endeavouring to his utmost to accomplish the deposition of
the Borgia Pope, wielding to that end the lever of simony and seeking a
fulcrum for it, first in the King of France and later in Ferdinand and
Isabella; but failing hopelessly in both instances. You have seen him,
when he realized the failure of an attempt which had made Rome too
dangerous for him and compelled him to remain in exile, suddenly veering
round to fawn and flatter and win the friendship of one whom his enmity
could not touch.

This man who, as Julius II, was presently to succeed Pius III, has
been accounted a shining light of virtue amid the dark turpitude of the
Church in the Renaissance. An ignis fatuus, perhaps; a Jack-o’-lanthorn
begotten of putrescence. Surely no more than that.

Dr. Jacob Burckhardt, in that able work of his to which reference
already has been made, follows the well-worn path of unrestrained
invective against the Borgias, giving to the usual empty assertions
the place which should be assigned to evidence and argument. Like his
predecessors along that path, he causes Giuliano della Rovere to
shine heroically by contrast--a foil to throw into greater relief the
blackness of Alexander. But he carries assertion rather further than do
others when he says of Cardinal della Rovere that “He ascended the steps
of St. Peter’s Chair without simony and amid general applause, and
with him ceased, at all events, the undisguised traffic in the highest
offices of the Church.”

Other writers in plenty have suggested this, but none has quite so
plainly and resoundingly thrown down the gauntlet, which we will make
bold to lift.

That Dr. Burckhardt wrote in other than good faith is not to be
imputed. It must therefore follow that an entry in the Diarium of the
Caerimoniarius under date of October 29, 1503, escaped him utterly in
the course of his researches. For the Diarium informs us that on that
day, in the Apostolic Palace, Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of S.
Pietro in Vincoli, concluded the terms of an agreement with the Duke of
Valentinois and the latter’s following of Spanish cardinals, by which
he undertook that, in consideration of his receiving the votes of these
Spanish cardinals and being elected Pope, he would confirm Cesare in his
office of Gonfalonier and Captain-General, and would preserve him in the
dominion of the Romagna. And, in consideration of that undertaking, the
Spanish cardinals, on their side, promised to give him their suffrages.

Here are the precise words in which Burchard records the transaction:

“Eadem die, 29 Octobris, Rmus. D. S. Petri ad Vincula venit in
palatio apostolico cum duce Valentino et cardinalibus suis Hispanis et
concluserunt capitula eorum per que, inter alia, cardinalis S. Petri ad
Vincula, postquam esset papa, crearet confalonierium Ecclesiae generalem
ducem ac ei faveret et in statibus suis (relinqueret) et vice versa dux
pape; et promiserunt omnes cardinalis Hispani dare votum pro Cardinali
S. Petri ad Vincula ad papatum.”

If that does not entail simony and sacrilege, then such things do
not exist at all. More, you shall hunt in vain for any accusation so
authoritative, formal and complete, regarding the simony practised by
Alexander VI on his election. And this same Julius, moreover, was the
Pope who later was to launch his famous Bull de Simoniaca Electione, to
add another stain to the besmirched escutcheon of the Borgia Pontiff.

His conciliation of Cesare and his obtaining, thus, the support of the
Spanish cardinals, who, being Alexander’s creatures, were now Cesare’s
very faithful servants, ensured the election of della Rovere; for,
whilst those cardinals’ votes did not suffice to place him in St.
Peter’s Chair, they would abundantly have sufficed to have kept him out
of it had Cesare so desired them.

In coming to terms with Cardinal della Rovere, Cesare made the first
great mistake of his career, took the first step towards ruin. He
should have known better than to have trusted such a man. He should have
remembered the ancient bitter rancour; should have recognized, in the
amity of later times, the amity of the self-seeker, and mistrusted it.
But della Rovere had acquired a reputation for honesty and for being
a man of his word. How far he deserved it you may judge from what is
presently to follow. He had acquired it, however, and Cesare, to his
undoing, attached faith to that reputation. He may, to some extent, have
counted upon the fact that, of Cardinal della Rovere’s bastard children,
only a daughter--Felice della Rovere--survived. Raffaele, the last of
his bastard boys, had died a year ago. Thus, Cesare may have concluded
that the cardinal having no sons whose fortunes he must advance, would
lack temptation to break faith with him.

From all this it resulted that, at the Conclave of November 1, Giuliano
della Rovere was elected Pope, and took the name of Julius II; whilst
Valentinois, confident now that his future was assured, left the
Castle of Sant’ Angelo to take up his residence at the Vatican, in the
Belvedere, with forty gentlemen constituting his suite.

On November 3 Julius II issued briefs to the Romagna, ordering obedience
to Cesare, with whom he was now in daily and friendliest intercourse.

In the Romagna, meanwhile, the disturbances had not only continued, but
they had taken a fresh turn. Venice, having reseated Malatesta on the
throne, now vented at last the covetousness she had ever, herself,
manifested of that dominion, and sent a force to drive him out again and
conquer Rimini for the Republic.

Florence, in a spasm of jealous anger at this, inquired was the Pope to
become the chaplain of Venice, and dispatched Macchiavelli to bear the
tale of these doings to Julius.

Under so much perpetual strife the strength of the Romagna was gradually
crumbling, and Cesare, angry with Florence for never going beyond
lip-service, expressed that anger to Macchiavelli, informing the
ambassador that the Signory could have saved the Romagna for him with a
hundred men-at-arms.

The duke sent for Giustiniani, the ambassador of Venice, who, however,
excused himself and did not go. This within a week of the new Pope’s
election, showing already how men discerned what was in store for
Valentinois. Giustiniani wrote to his Government that he had not gone
lest his going should give the duke importance in the eyes of others.(1)
The pettiness and meanness of the man, revealed in that dispatch, will
enable you to attach to Giustiniani the label that belongs to him.


  1  “Per non dar materia ad altri che fazino un po di lui mazor estimazion
di quel che fanno quando lo vedessero in parte alcuna
favorito.”--Giustiniani, Dispatch of November 6, 1503.


To cheer Valentinois in those days of depression came news that his
subjects of Imola had successfully resisted an attack on the part of the
Venetians. So stimulated was he that he prepared at once to go, himself,
into the Romagna, and obtained from the Pope, from d’Amboise, and
from Soderini, letters to Florence desiring the Signory to afford him
safe-conduct through Tuscany for himself and his army.

The Pope expressed himself, in his letter, that he would count such
safe-conduct as a great favour to himself, and urged the granting of it
out of his “love for Cesare,” owing to the latter’s “great virtues and
shining merits.”(2) Yet on the morrow of dispatching that brief, this
man, who was accounted honest, straightforward, and imbued with a
love of truth, informed Giustiniani--or else Giustiniani lied in his
dispatches--that he understood that the Venetians were assailing the
Romagna, not out of enmity to the Church, but to punish the demerits of
Cesare, and he made it plain to Giustiniani that, if he complained
of the conduct of the Venetians, it was on his own behalf and not on
Cesare’s, as his aim was to preserve the Romagna, not for the duke, but
for the Church.


  2  “In quo nobis rem gratissimam facietis ducis enim ipsum propter ejus
insignes virtutes et praeclara merita praecipuo affectur et caritate
praecipua complectimur.”--Archivio di Stato, Firenze. (See Alvisi, Doct.
96.)


With the aim we have no quarrel. It was laudable enough in a Pontiff.
But it foreshadows Cesare’s ruin, in spite of the love-protesting letter
to Florence, in spite of the bargain struck by virtue of which Julius
had obtained the pontificate. Whether the Pope went further in his
treachery, whether, having dispatched that brief to Florence, he sent
other communications to the Signory, is not ascertainable; but the
suspicion of some such secret action is inspired by what ensued.

On November 13 Cesare was ready to leave Rome; but no safe-conduct
had arrived. Out of all patience at this, he begged the Pope that the
captain of the pontifical navy should prepare him five galleons at
Ostia, by which he could take his foot to Genoa, and thence proceed into
Romagna by way of Ferrara.

Macchiavelli, at the same time, was frenziedly importuning Florence to
grant the duke the desired safe-conduct lest in despair Cesare should
make a treaty with Venice--“or with the devil”--and should go to Pisa,
employing all his money, strength, and influence to vent his wrath upon
the Signory. But the Signory knew more, perhaps, than did Macchiavelli,
for no attention was paid to his urgent advice.

On the 19th Cesare left Rome to set out for Genoa by way of Ostia, and
his departure threw Giustiniani into alarm--fearing that the duke would
now escape.

But there was no occasion for his fears. On the very day of Cesare’s
departure Julius sent fresh briefs to the Romagna, different indeed
from those of November 3. In these he now expressed his disapproval of
Alexander’s having conferred the vicarship of the Romagna upon Cesare
Borgia, and he exhorted all to range themselves under the banner of the
Church, under whose protection he intended to keep them.

Events followed quickly upon that. Two days later news reached the Pope
that the Venetians had captured Faenza, whereupon he sent a messenger
after Valentinois to suggest to the latter that he should surrender
Forli and the other fiefs into pontifical hands. With this Cesare
refused to comply, and, as a result, he was detained by the captain of
the navy, in obedience to the instructions from Julius. At the same time
the Pope broke the last link of the treaty with Cesare by appointing
a new Governor of Romagna in the person of Giovanni Sacchi, Bishop of
Ragusa. He commanded the latter to take possession of the Romagna in the
name of the Church, and he issued another brief--the third within three
weeks--demanding the State’s obedience to the new governor.

On November 26, Remolino, who had been at Ostia with Cesar; came to
Rome, and, throwing himself at the feet of the Pontiff, begged for mercy
for his lord, whom he now accounted lost. He promised Julius that Cesare
should give him the countersigns of the strongholds, together with
security for their surrender. This being all that the Pope could desire,
he issued orders that Cesare be brought back to Rome, and in Consistory
advised the Sacred College--by way, no doubt, of exculpating himself
to men who knew that he was refusing to pay the price at which he had
bought the Papacy--that the Venetians in the Romagna were not moving
against the Church, but against Cesare himself--wherefore he had
demanded of Cesare the surrender of the towns he held, that thus there
might be an end to the war.

It was specious--which is the best that can be said for it.

As for putting an end to the war, the papal brief was far indeed from
achieving any such thing, as was instantly plain from the reception it
met with in the Romagna, which persisted in its loyalty to Cesare in
despite of the very Pope himself. When that brief was read in Cesena a
wild tumult ensued, and the people ran through the streets clamouring
angrily for their duke.

It was very plain what short work would have been made of such men as
the Ordelaffi and the Malatesta had Cesare gone north. But Cesare was
fast at the Vatican, treated by the Pope with all outward friendliness
and consideration, but virtually a prisoner none the less. Julius
continued to press for the surrender of the Romagna strongholds,
which Remolino had promised in his master’s name; but Cesare persisted
obstinately to refuse, until the news reached him that Michele da
Corella and della Volpe, who had gone north with seven hundred horse to
support his Romagnuoli, had been cut to pieces in Tuscany by the army of
Gianpaolo Baglioni.

Cesare bore his burning grievance to the Pope. The Pope sympathized with
him most deeply; then went to write a letter to the Florentines to
thank them for what had befallen and to beg them to send him Michele
da Corella under a strong escort--that redoubtable captain having been
taken prisoner together with della Volpe.

Corella was known to be fully in the duke’s confidence, and there were
rumours that he was accused of many things perpetrated on the duke’s
behalf. Julius, bent now on Cesare’s ruin, desired to possess himself
of this man in the hope of being able to put him upon his trial under
charges which should reflect discredit upon Cesare.

At last the duke realized that he was betrayed, and that all was
lost, and so he submitted to the inevitable, and gave the Pope the
countersigns he craved. With these Julius at once dispatched an envoy
into the Romagna, and, knowing the temper of Cesare’s captains, he
insisted that this envoy should be accompanied by Piero d’Orvieto, as
Cesare’s own commissioner, to demand that surrender.

But the intrepid Pedro Ramires, who held Cesena, knowing the true facts
of the case, and conceiving how his duke had been constrained, instead
of making ready to yield, proceeded further to fortify for resistance.
When the commissioners appeared before his gates he ordered the
admission of Piero d’Orvieto. That done, he declared that he desired to
see his duke at liberty before he would surrender the citadel which he
held for him, and, taking d’Orvieto, he hanged him from the battlements
as a traitor and a bad servant who did a thing which the duke, had he
been at liberty, would never have had him do.

Moncalieri, the papal envoy, returned to Rome with the news, and this
so inflamed the Pope that the Cardinals Lodovico Borgia and Francesco
Remolino, together with other Borgia partisans, instantly fled from
Rome, where they no longer accounted themselves safe, and sought refuge
with Gonzalo de Cordoba in the Spanish camp at Naples, imploring his
protection at the same time for Cesare.

The Pope’s anger first vented itself in the confiscation of the Duke of
Valentinois’s property wherever possible, to satisfy the claims of the
Riarii (the Pope’s nephews) who demanded an indemnity of 50,000 ducats,
of Guidobaldo, who demanded 200,000 ducats, and of the Florentine
Republic, which claimed the same. The duke’s ruin was by now--within six
weeks of the election of Julius II--an accomplished fact; and many
were those who chose to fall with him rather than abandon him in his
extremity. They afford a spectacle of honour and loyalty that was
exceedingly rare in the Italy of the Renaissance; clinging to their
duke, even when the last ray of hope was quenched, they lightened for
him the tedium of those last days at the Vatican during which he was no
better than a prisoner of state.

Suddenly came news of Gonzalo de Cordoba’s splendid victory at
Garigliano--a victory which definitely broke the French and gave the
throne of Naples to Spain. Naturally this set Spanish influence once
more, and mightily, in the ascendant, and the Spanish cardinals,
together with the ambassador of Spain, came to exert with the Pope an
influence suddenly grown weighty.

As a consequence, Cesare, escorted by Carvajal, Cardinal of Santa Croce,
was permitted to depart to Ostia, whence he was to take ship for France.
Leastways, such was the understanding upon which he left the Vatican.
But the Pope was not minded, even now, to part with him so easily, and
his instructions to Carvajal were that at Ostia he should await further
orders before sailing.

But on December 26, news reaching the Spanish cardinal that the Romagna
fortresses--persuaded that Cesare had been liberated--had finally
surrendered, Carvajal took it upon himself to allow Cesare to depart,
upon receiving from him a written undertaking never to bear arms against
Pope Julius II.

So the Duke of Valentinois at last regained his freedom. Whether, in
repairing straight to Naples, as he did, he put a preconceived plan
into execution, or whether, even now, he mistrusted his enlargement, and
thought thus to make himself secure, cannot be ascertained. But
straight to Gonzalo de Cordoba’s Spanish camp he went, equipped with
a safe-conduct from the Great Captain, obtained for Cesare by Cardinal
Remolino.

There he found a court of friends already awaiting him, among whom were
his brother Giuffredo and the Cardinal Lodovico Borgia, and he received
from Gonzalo a very cordial welcome.

Spain was considering the invasion of Tuscany with the ultimate
object of assailing Milan and driving the French out of the peninsula
altogether. Piero de’Medici--killed at Garigliano--had no doubt been
serving Spain with some such end in view as the conquest of Florence,
and, though Piero was dead, there was no reason why the plan should be
abandoned; rather, all the more reason to carry it forward, since now
Spain would more directly profit by it. Bartolomeo d’Alviano was to have
commanded the army destined for that campaign; but Cesare, by virtue
of his friends and influence in Pisa, Siena, and Piombino, was so
preferable a captain for such an expedition that Gonzalo gave him charge
of it within a few days of his arrival at the Spanish camp.

To Cesare this would have been the thin end of a mighty edge. Here was
a chance to begin all over again, and, beginning thus, backed by Spanish
arms, there was no saying how far he might have gone. Meanwhile, what a
beginning! To avenge himself thus upon that Florentine Republic which,
under the protection of France, had dared at every turn to flout him and
had been the instrument of his ultimate ruin! Sweet to him would have
been the poetic justice he would have administered--as sweet to him
as it would have been terrible to Florence, upon which he would have
descended like another scourge of God.

Briskly and with high-running hopes he set about his preparations during
that spring of 1504 what time the Pope’s Holiness in Rome was seeking to
justify his treachery by heaping odium upon the Borgias. Thus he thought
to show that if he had broken faith, he had broken faith with knaves
deserving none. It was in pursuit of this that Michele da Corella was
now pressed with questions, which, however, yielded nothing, and that
Asquino de Colloredo (the sometime servant of Cardinal Michaeli)
was tortured into confessing that he had poisoned his master at the
instigation of Alexander and Cesare--as has been seen--which confession
Pope Julius was very quick to publish.

But in Naples, it may well be that Cesare cared nought for these
matters, busy and hopeful as he was just then. He dispatched Baldassare
da Scipione to Rome to enlist what lances he could find, and Scipione
put it about that his lord would soon be returning to his own and giving
his enemies something to think about.

And then, suddenly, out of clearest heavens, fell a thunderbolt to
shiver this last hope.

On the night of May 26, as Cesare was leaving Gonzalo’s quarters, where
he had supped, an officer stepped forward to demand his sword. He was
under arrest.

Julius II had out-manoeuvred him. He had written to Spain setting
forth what was his agreement with Valentinois in the matter of the
Romagna--the original agreement which was the price of the Pontificate,
had, of course, been conveniently effaced from the pontifical memory. He
addressed passionate complaints to Ferdinand and Isabella that Gonzalo
de Cordoba and Cardinal Carvajal between them were affording Valentinois
the means to break that agreement, and to undertake matters that were
hostile to the Holy See. And Ferdinand and Isabella had put it upon
Gonzalo de Cordoba, that most honourable and gallant captain, to do
this thing in gross violation of his safe-conduct and plighted word to
Valentinois. It was a deed under the shame of which the Great Captain
confessedly laboured to the end of his days, as his memory has laboured
under it ever since. For great captains are not afforded the immunity
enjoyed by priests and popes jointly with other wearers of the petticoat
from the consequences of falsehood and violated trust.

Fierce and bitter were Valentinois’s reproaches of the Great Captain for
this treachery--as fierce and bitter as they were unavailing. On August
20, 1504, Cesare Borgia took ship for Spain--a prisoner bound for a
Spanish dungeon. Thus, at the early age of twenty-nine, he passed from
Italy and the deeds that well might have filled a lifetime.

Conspicuous amid those he left behind him who remained loyal to their
duke was Baldassare Scipione, who published throughout Christendom a
cartel, wherein he challenged to trial by combat any Spaniard who dared
deny that the Duke of Valentinois had been detained a prisoner in Naples
in spite of the safe-conduct granted him in the name of Ferdinand and
Isabella, “with great shame and infamy to their crown.”(1)


  1  Quoted by Alvisi, on the authority of a letter of Luigi da Porto,
March 16, 1510, in Lettere Storiche.


This challenge was never taken up.

Amongst other loyal ones was that fine soldier of fortune, Taddeo della
Volpe, who, in his Florentine prison, refused all offers to enter the
service of the Signory until he had learnt that his lord was gone from
Italy.

Fracassa and Mirafuente had held Forli until they received guarantees
for Cesare’s safety (after he had left Ostia to repair to the Spanish
camp). They then rode out, with the honours of war, lance on thigh.
Dionigio di Naldo, that hardy captain of foot, entered the service of
Venice; but to the end he wore the device of his dear lord, and imposed
the same upon all who served under his banner.

Don Michele da Corella was liberated by Julius II after an interrogatory
which can have revealed nothing defamatory to Cesare or his father; as
it is unthinkable that a Pope who did all that man could do to ruin the
House of Borgia and to befoul its memory, should have preserved silence
touching any such revelations as were hoped for when Corella was put to
torture. That most faithful of all Cesare’s officers--and sharer of the
odium that has been heaped upon Cesare’s name--entered the service of
the Signory of Florence.




CHAPTER IV. ATROPOS


Vain were the exertions put forth by the Spanish cardinals to obtain
Cesare’s enlargement, and vainer still the efforts of his sister
Lucrezia, who wrote letter after letter to Francesco Gonzaga of
Mantua--now Gonfalonier of the Church, and a man of influence at the
Vatican--imploring him to use his interest with the Pope to the same
end.

Julius II remained unmoved, fearing the power of Cesare Borgia, and
resolved that he should trouble Italy no more. On the score of that, no
blame attaches to the Pope. The States which Borgia had conquered in
the name of the Church should remain adherent to the Church. Upon that
Julius was resolved, and the resolve was highly laudable. He would
have no duke who controlled such a following as did Cesare, using those
States as stepping-stones to greater dominions in which, no doubt, he
would later have absorbed them, alienating them, so, from the Holy See.

In all this Julius II was most fully justified. The odious matter in his
conduct, however, is the abominable treachery it entailed, following as
it did upon the undertaking by virtue of which he gained the tiara.

For some months after his arrival in Spain, Cesare was confined in the
prison of Chinchilla, whence--as a result, it is said, of an attempt
on his part to throw the governor bodily over the battlements--he was
removed to the fortress of Medina del Campo, and kept well guarded by
orders of the Pope.

Rumours that he had been liberated by the King of Spain overran the
Romagna more than once, and set the country in a ferment, even reaching
the Vatican and shaking the stout-hearted Julius into alarm.

One chance of regaining his ancient might, and wreaking a sweet and
terrific vengeance upon his betrayers came very close to him, but
passed him by. This chance occurred in 1505, when--Queen Isabella being
dead--King Ferdinand discovered that Gonzalo de Cordoba was playing him
false in Naples. The Spanish king conceived a plan--according to the
chronicles of Zurita--to employ Cesare as a flail for the punishment of
the Great Captain. He proposed to liberate the duke, set him at the
head of an army, and loose him upon Naples, trusting to the formidable
alliance of Cesare’s military talents with his hatred of Gonzalo--who
had betrayed him--to work the will of his Catholic Majesty.

Unfortunately for Cesare, there were difficulties. Ferdinand’s power was
no longer absolute in Castille now that Isabella was dead. He sought to
overcome these difficulties; but the process was a slow one, and in
the course of it, spurred also by increased proofs of his lieutenant’s
perfidy, Ferdinand lost patience, and determined--the case having grown
urgent--to go to Naples in person to deal with Gonzalo.

Plainly, Cesare’s good fortune, which once had been proverbial, had now
utterly deserted him.

He had received news of what was afoot, and his hopes had run high once
more, only to suffer cruel frustration when he learnt that Ferdinand had
sailed, himself, for Naples. In his despair the duke roused himself to a
last effort to win his freedom.

His treatment in prison was fairly liberal, such as is usually measured
out to state prisoners of consideration. He was allowed his own chaplain
and several attendants, and, whilst closely guarded and confined to the
Homenaje Tower of the fortress, yet he was not oppressively restrained.
He was accorded certain privileges and liberties; he enjoyed the faculty
of corresponding with the outer world, and even of receiving visits.
Amongst his visitors was the Count of Benavente--a powerful lord of
the neighbourhood, who, coming under the spell of Cesare’s fascination,
became so attached to him, and so resolved to do his will and effect his
liberation, that--says Zurita--he was prepared even to go the length of
accomplishing it by force of arms should no other way present itself.(1)


  1  Sanuto confirms Zurita, in the main, by letters received by the
Venetian Senate.


Another way, however, did present itself, and Benavente and the duke
hatched a plot of evasion in which they had the collaboration of the
chaplain and a servant of the governor’s, named Garcia.

One September night a cord was let down from the crenels of the tower,
and by this the duke was to descend from his window to the castle ditch,
where Benavente’s men awaited him. Garcia was to go with him since,
naturally, it would not be safe for the servants to remain behind, and
Garcia now let himself down that rope, hand over hand, from the terrible
height of the duke’s window. It was only when he had reached the end of
it that he discovered that the rope was not long enough, and that below
him there was still a chasm that might well have appalled even desperate
men.

To return was impossible. The duke above was growing impatient. Garcia
loosed his hold, and dropped the remainder of the distance, breaking
both his legs in the fall. Groaning, he lay there in the ditch, whilst
hand over hand now came the agile, athletic duke, unconscious of his
predecessor’s fate, and of what awaited him at the end. He reached it,
and was dangling there, perhaps undecided whether or not to take that
daring leap, when suddenly his doubts were resolved for him. His evasion
was already discovered. The castle was in alarm, and some one above him
cut the rope and precipitated him into the ditch.

Benavente’s men--we do not know how many of them were at hand--ran to
him instantly. They found him seriously injured, and that he, too, had
broken bones is beyond doubt. They lifted him up, and bore him with all
speed to the horses. They contrived, somehow, to mount him upon one,
and, holding him in the saddle, they rode off as fast as was possible
under the circumstances. There was no time to go back for the
unfortunate Garcia. The castle was all astir by now to stop the
fugitives, and to have returned would have been to suffer capture
themselves as well as the duke, without availing the servant.

So poor Garcia was left to his fate. He was found by the governor where
he had fallen, and he was immediately put to death.

If the people of Medina organized a pursuit it availed them nothing, for
Cesare was carried safely to Benavente’s stronghold at Villalon.

There he lay for some five or six weeks to recover from the hurts he
had taken in escaping, and to allow his hands--the bones of which were
broken--to become whole again. At last, being in the main recovered,
though with hands still bandaged, he set out with two attendants and
made for Santander. Thence they took ship to Castro Urdiales, Cesare
aiming now at reaching the kingdom of Navarre and the protection of his
brother-in-law the king.

At the inn at Santander, where, weary and famished, they sat down to
dine after one of the grooms had made arrangements for a boat, they had
a near escape of capture. The alcalde, hearing of the presence of these
strangers, and his suspicions being aroused by the recklessly high price
they had agreed to pay the owner of the vessel which they had engaged,
came to examine them. But they had a tale ready that they were
wheat-merchants in great haste to reach Bernico, that a cargo of wheat
awaited them there, and that they would suffer great loss by delay. The
tale was smooth enough to satisfy the alcalde, and they were allowed to
depart. They reached Castro Urdiales safely, but were delayed there for
two days, owing to the total lack of horses; and they were forced, in
the end, to proceed upon mules obtained from a neighbouring convent. On
these they rode to Durango, where they procured two fresh mules and
a horse, and so, after further similar vicissitudes, they arrived at
Pampeluna on December 3, 1506, and Cesare startled the Court of his
brother-in-law, King Jean of Navarre, by suddenly appearing in it--“like
the devil.”

The news of his evasion had already spread to Italy and set it in
a ferment, inspiring actual fear at the Vatican. The Romagna was
encouraged by it to break out into open and armed insurrection against
the harsh rule of Julius II--who seems to have been rendered positively
vindictive towards the Romagnuoli by their fidelity to Valentinois.
Thus had the Romagna fallen again into the old state of insufferable
oppression from which Cesare had once delivered it. The hopes of the
Romagnuoli rose in a measure, as the alarm spread among the enemies of
Cesare--for Florence and Venice shared now the anxiety of the Vatican.
Zurita, commenting upon this state of things, pays Cesare the following
compliment, which the facts confirm as just:

“The duke was such that his very presence was enough to set all Italy
agog; and he was greatly beloved, not only by men of war, but also by
many people of Tuscany and of the States of the Church.”

Cesare’s wife--Charlotte d’Albret--whom he had not seen since that
September of 1499, was at Bourges at the Court of her friend, the
saintly, repudiated first wife of Louis XII. It is to be supposed that
she would be advised of her husband’s presence at her brother’s Court;
but there is no information on this score, nor do we know that they ever
met.

Within four days of reaching Pampeluna Cesare dispatched his secretary
Federico into Italy to bear the news of his escape to his sister
Lucrezia at Ferrara, and a letter to Francesco Gonzaga, of Mantua, which
was little more than one of introduction, the more important matters to
be conveyed to Gonzaga going, no doubt, by word of mouth. Federico was
arrested at Bologna by order of Julius II, after he had discharged his
mission.

France was now Cesare’s only hope, and he wrote to Louis begging his
royal leave to come to take his rank as a prince of that country, and to
serve her.

You may justly have opined, long since, that the story here set down is
one never-ending record of treacheries and betrayals. But you will
find little to surpass the one to come. The behaviour of Louis at this
juncture is contemptible beyond words, obeying as it does the maxim
of that age, which had it that no inconvenient engagement should be
observed if there was opportunity for breaking it.

Following this detestable maxim, Louis XII had actually gone the
length of never paying to Charlotte d’Albret the dot of 100,000 livres
Tournois, to which he had engaged himself by written contract. When
Cesare, in prison at Medina and in straits for money, had solicited
payment through his brother-in-law of Navarre, his claim had been
contemptuously disregarded.

But there was worse to follow. Louis now answered Cesare’s request for
leave to come to France by a letter (quoted in full by M. Yriarte from
the Archives des Basses Pyrénées) in which his Very Christian Majesty
announces that the duchy of Valentinois and the County of Dyois have
been restored to the crown of France, as also the lordship of Issoudun.
And then follows the pretext, of whose basely paltry quality you shall
judge for yourselves. It runs:

“After the decease of the late Pope Alexander, when our people and our
army were seeking the recovery of the kingdom of Naples, he [Cesare]
went over to the side of our enemies, serving, favouring, and assisting
them at arms and otherwise against ourselves and our said people and
army, which resulted to us in great and irrecoverable loss.”

The climax is in the deliberate falsehood contained in the closing
words. Poor Cesare, who had served France at her call--in spite of
what was rumoured of his intentions--as long as he had a man-at-arms
to follow him, had gone to Naples only in the hour of his extreme need.
True, he had gone to offer himself to Spain as a condottiero when naught
else was left to him; but he took no army with him--he went alone, a
servant, not an ally, as that false letter pretends. He had never
come to draw his sword against France, and certainly no loss had been
suffered by France in consequence of any action of his. Louis’s army was
definitely routed at Garigliano, with Cesare’s troops fighting in its
ranks.

But Pope Alexander was dead; Cesare’s might in in Italy was dissipated;
his credit gone. There lay no profit for Louis in keeping faith with
him; there lay some profit in breaking it. Alas, that a king should
stain his honour with base and vulgar lies to minister to his cupidity,
and that he should set them down above his seal and signature to shame
him through centuries still in the womb of Time!

Cesare Borgia, landless, without right to any title, he that had held so
many, betrayed and abandoned on every side, had now nothing to offer in
the world’s market but his stout sword and his glad courage. These went
to the first bidder for them, who happened to be his brother-in-law King
Jean.

Navarre at the time was being snarled and quarrelled over by France and
Spain, both menacing its independence, each pretending to claims upon it
which do not, in themselves, concern us.

In addition, the country itself was torn by two factions--the Beaumontes
and the Agramontes--and it was entrusted to Cesare to restore Navarre
to peace and unity at home before proceeding--with the aid upon which
he depended from the Emperor Maximilian--to deal with the enemies beyond
her frontiers.

The Castle of Viana was being held by Louis de Beaumont--chief of the
faction that bore his name--and refused to surrender to the king.
To reduce it and compel Beaumont to obedience went Cesare as
Captain-General of Navarre, early in February of 1507. He commanded a
considerable force, some 10,000 strong, and with this and his cannon he
laid siege to the citadel.

The natural strength of the place was such as might have defied any
attempt to reduce it by force; but victuals were running low, and there
was every likelihood of its being speedily starved into surrender. To
frustrate this, Beaumont conceived the daring plan of attempting to send
in supplies from Mendavia. The attempt being made secretly, by night and
under a strong escort, was entirely successful; but, in retreating, the
Beaumontese were surprised in the dawn of that February morning by a
troop of reinforcements coming to Cesare’s camp. These, at sight of the
rebels, immediately gave the alarm.

The most hopeless confusion ensued in the town, where it was at once
imagined that a surprise attack was being made upon the Royalists, and
that they had to do with the entire rebel army.

Cesare, being aroused by the din and the blare of trumpets calling men
to arms, sprang for his weapons, armed himself in haste, flung himself
on a horse, and, without pausing so much as to issue a command to his
waiting men-at-arms, rode headlong down the street to the Puerta del
Sol. Under the archway of the gate his horse stumbled and came down with
him. With an oath, Cesare wrenched the animal to its feet again, gave
it the spur, and was away at a mad, furious gallop in pursuit of the
retreating Beaumont rearguard.

The citizens, crowding to the walls of Viana, watched that last reckless
ride of his with amazed, uncomprehending eyes. The peeping sun caught
his glittering armour as he sped, so that of a sudden he must have
seemed to them a thing of fire--meteoric, as had been his whole life’s
trajectory which was now swiftly dipping to its nadir.

Whether he was frenzied with the lust of battle, riding in the reckless
manner that was his wont, confident that his men followed, yet too
self-centred to ascertain, or whether--as seems more likely--it was
simply that his horse had bolted with him, will never be known until all
things are known.

Suddenly he was upon the rearguard of the fleeing rebels. His sword
flashed up and down; again and again they may have caught the gleam
of it from Viana’s walls, as he smote the foe. Irresistible as a
thunderbolt, he clove himself a way through those Beaumontese. He was
alone once more, a flying, dazzling figure of light, away beyond that
rearguard which he left scathed and disordered by his furious passage.
Still his mad career continued, and he bore down upon the main body of
the escort.

Beaumont sat his horse to watch, in such amazement as you may conceive,
the wild approach of this unknown rider.

Seeing him unsupported, some of the count’s men detached themselves
to return and meet this single foe and oblige him with the death he so
obviously appeared to seek.

They hedged him about--we do not know their number--and, engaging him,
they drew him from the road and down into the hollow space of a ravine.

And so, in the thirty-second year of his age, and in all the glory of
his matchless strength, his soul possessed of the lust of combat, sword
in hand, warding off the attack that rains upon him, and dealing death
about him, he meets his end. From the walls of Viana his resplendent
armour renders him still discernible, until, like a sun to its setting,
he passes below the rim of that ravine, and is lost to the watcher’s
view.

Death awaited him amid the shadows of that hollow place.

Unhorsed by now, he fought with no concern for the odds against him,
and did sore execution upon his assailants, ere a sword could find an
opening in his guard to combine with a gap in his armour and so drive
home. That blade had found, maybe, his lungs. Still he swung his sword,
swaying now upon his loosening knees. His mouth was full of blood.
It was growing dark. His hands began to fail him. He reeled like a
drunkard, sapped of strength, and then the end came quickly. Blows
unwarded showered upon him now.

He crashed down in all the glory of his rich armour, which those
brigand-soldiers already coveted. And thus he died--mercifully,
maybe happily, for he had no time in which to taste the bitterness of
death--that awful draught which he had forced upon so many.

Within a few moments of his falling, this man who had been a living
force, whose word had carried law from the Campagna to the Bolognese,
was so much naked, blood-smeared carrion--for those human vultures
stripped him to the skin; his very shirt must they have. And there,
a stark, livid corpse, of no more account than any dog that died
last Saturday, they left Cesare Borgia of France, Duke of Romagna and
Valentinois, Prince of Andria, and Lord of a dozen Tyrannies.

The body was found there anon by those who so tardily rode after their
leader, and his dismayed troopers bore those poor remains to Viana.
The king, arriving there that very day, horror-stricken at the news and
sight that awaited him, ordered Cesare a magnificent funeral, and so he
was laid to rest before the High Altar of Sainte Marie de Viane.

To rest? May the soul of him rest at least, for men--Christian men--have
refused to vouchsafe that privilege to his poor ashes.

Nearly two hundred years later--at the close of the seventeenth century,
a priest of God and a bishop, one who preached a gospel of love and
mercy so infinite that he dared believe by its lights no man to have
been damned, came to disturb the dust of Cesare Borgia. This Bishop
of Calahorra--lineal descendant in soul of that Pharisee who exalted
himself in God’s House, thrilled with titillations of delicious horror
at the desecrating presence of the base publican--had his pietist’s eyes
offended by the slab that marked Cesare Borgia’s resting-place.(1)


  1  It bore the following legend:

     AQUI YACE EN POCA TIERRA
     AL QUE TODO LE TEMIA
     EL QUE LA PAZ Y LA GUERRA
     EN LA SUA MANO TENIA.
     OH TU QUE VAS A BUSCAR
     COSAS DIGNAS DE LOAR
     SI TU LOAS LO MAS DIGNO
     AQUI PARE TU CAMINO
     NO CURES DE MAS ANDAR.

which, more or less literally may be Englished as follows: “Here in a
little earth, lies one whom all did fear; one whose hands dispensed both
peace and war. Oh, you that go in search of things deserving praise,
if you would praise the worthiest, then let your journey end here, nor
trouble to go farther.”

The pious, Christian bishop had read of this man--perhaps that life
of him published by the apostate Gregorio Leti under the pen-name of
Tommaso Tommasi, which had lately seen the light--and he ordered the
tomb’s removal from that holy place. And thus it befell that the ashes
of Cesare Borgia were scattered and lost.

Charlotte d’Albret was bereft of her one friend, Queen Jeanne, in that
same year of Cesare’s death. The Duchess of Valentinois withdrew to La
Motte­Feuilly, and for the seven years remaining of her life was never
seen other than in mourning; her very house was equipped with sombre,
funereal furniture, and so maintained until her end, which supports the
view that she had conceived affection and respect for the husband of
whom she had seen so little.

On March 14, 1514, that poor lady passed from a life which appears to
have offered her few joys.

Louise de Valentinois--a handsome damsel of the age of
fourteen--remained for three years under the tutelage of the Duchess of
Angoulême--the mother of King Francis I--to whom Charlotte d’Albret had
entrusted her child. Louise married, at the age of seventeen, Louis de
la Trémouille, Prince de Talmont and Vicomte de Thouars, known as the
Knight Sans Peur et Sans Reproche. She maintained some correspondence
with her aunt, Lucrezia Borgia, whom she had never seen, and ever signed
herself “Louise de Valentinois.” At the age of thirty--Trémouille having
been killed at Pavia--she married, in second nuptials, Philippe de
Bourbon-Busset.

Lucrezia died in 1519, one year after her mother, Vanozza de’Catanei,
with whom she corresponded to the end.



REQUIESCANT!





End of Project Gutenberg’s The Life of Cesare Borgia, by Raphael Sabatini

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CESARE BORGIA ***

***** This file should be named 3467-0.txt or 3467-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/6/3467/

Produced by John Stuart Middleton

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lucretia Borgia, by Ferdinand Gregorovius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lucretia Borgia
       According to Original Documents and Correspondence of Her Day

Author: Ferdinand Gregorovius

Translator: John Leslie Garner

Release Date: March 13, 2007 [EBook #20804]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LUCRETIA BORGIA ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  LUCRETIA BORGIA


  [Illustration: LUCRETIA BORGIA.

  From a portrait attributed to Dosso Dossi, in the possession of
  Mr. Henry Doetsch, London.]


  FERDINAND GREGOROVIUS

  LUCRETIA BORGIA

  ACCORDING TO ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS
  AND CORRESPONDENCE OF HER DAY

  TRANSLATED FROM THE THIRD GERMAN EDITION
  BY JOHN LESLIE GARNER

  BENJAMIN BLOM    New York/London




  TO

  DON MICHELANGELO GAETANI

  DUKE OF SERMONETA


  First published New York 1904
  Reissued 1968 by
  Benjamin Blom, Inc. 10452

  Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 68-20226

  Manufactured in the United States of America




TO DON MICHELANGELO GAETANI DUKE OF SERMONETA


MY HONORED DUKE: I am induced to dedicate this work to you by
the historical circumstances of which it treats and also by personal
considerations.

In it you will behold the founders of your ancient and illustrious
family. The Borgias were mortal enemies of the Gaetani, who narrowly
escaped the fate prepared for them by Alexander VI and his terrible son.
Beautiful Sermoneta and all the great fiefs in the Maremma fell into the
maw of the Borgias, and your ancestors either found death at their hands
or were driven into exile. Donna Lucretia became mistress of Sermoneta,
and eventually her son, Rodrigo of Aragon, inherited the estates of the
Gaetani.

Centuries have passed, and a beautiful and unfortunate woman may be
forgiven for this confiscation of the appanages of your house. Moreover,
it was not long before your family was reinstated in its rights by a
bull of Julius II, which is now preserved--a precious jewel--in your
family archives. To your house has descended the fame of its founders,
but to yourself is due the position which the Gaetani now again enjoy.

The survival of historical tradition in things and men exercises an
indescribable charm on every student of civilization. To recognize in
the ancient and still nourishing families of modern Rome the descendants
of the great personalities of other times, and to enjoy daily
intercourse with them, made a profound impression on me. The Colonna,
the Orsini, and the Gaetani are my friends, and all afforded me the
greatest assistance. These families long ago vanished from the stage of
Roman history, but the day came, illustrious Duke, when you were to make
a place again for your ancient race in the history of the Imperial City;
the day when--the temporal power of the popes having passed away, a
power which had endured a thousand years--you carried to King Victor
Emmanuel in Florence the declaration of allegiance of the Roman
populace. This episode, marking the beginning of a new era for the city,
will live, together with your name, in the annals of the Gaetani, and
will preserve it forever in the memory of the Romans.

  GREGOROVIUS.

  ROME, _March 9, 1874_.




CONTENTS


  BOOK THE FIRST--LUCRETIA BORGIA IN ROME


  CHAPTER I                                             PAGE

  LUCRETIA'S FATHER                                        3

  CHAPTER II

  LUCRETIA'S MOTHER                                       10

  CHAPTER III

  LUCRETIA'S FIRST HOME                                   15

  CHAPTER IV

  LUCRETIA'S EDUCATION                                    20

  CHAPTER V

  NEPOTISM--GIULIA FARNESE--LUCRETIA'S BETROTHALS         34

  CHAPTER VI

  HER FATHER BECOMES POPE--GIOVANNI SFORZA                44

  CHAPTER VII

  LUCRETIA'S FIRST MARRIAGE                               53

  CHAPTER VIII

  FAMILY AFFAIRS                                          62

  CHAPTER IX

  LUCRETIA LEAVES ROME                                    71

  CHAPTER X

  HISTORY AND DESCRIPTION OF PESARO                       76

  CHAPTER XI

  THE INVASION OF ITALY--THE PROFLIGATE WORLD             87

  CHAPTER XII

  THE DIVORCE AND SECOND MARRIAGE                        102

  CHAPTER XIII

  A REGENT AND A MOTHER                                  113

  CHAPTER XIV

  SOCIAL LIFE OF THE BORGIAS                             125

  CHAPTER XV

  MISFORTUNES OF CATARINA SFORZA                         137

  CHAPTER XVI

  MURDER OF ALFONSO OF ARAGON                            145

  CHAPTER XVII

  LUCRETIA AT NEPI                                       152

  CHAPTER XVIII

  CÆSAR AT PESARO                                        159

  CHAPTER XIX

  ANOTHER MARRIAGE PLANNED FOR LUCRETIA                  167

  CHAPTER XX

  NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE HOUSE OF ESTE                    182

  CHAPTER XXI

  THE EVE OF THE WEDDING                                 196

  CHAPTER XXII

  ARRIVAL AND RETURN OF THE BRIDAL ESCORT                207


  BOOK THE SECOND--LUCRETIA IN FERRARA


  CHAPTER I

  LUCRETIA'S JOURNEY TO FERRARA                          229

  CHAPTER II

  FORMAL ENTRY INTO FERRARA                              239

  CHAPTER III

  FÊTES GIVEN IN LUCRETIA'S HONOR                        250

  CHAPTER IV

  THE ESTE DYNASTY--DESCRIPTION OF FERRARA               266

  CHAPTER V

  DEATH OF ALEXANDER VI                                  279

  CHAPTER VI

  EVENTS FOLLOWING THE POPE'S DEATH                      293

  CHAPTER VII

  COURT POETS--GIULIA BELLA AND JULIUS II--THE ESTE DYNASTY
  ENDANGERED                                             303

  CHAPTER VIII

  ESCAPE AND DEATH OF CÆSAR                              317

  CHAPTER IX

  MURDER OF ERCOLE STROZZI--DEATH OF GIOVANNI SFORZA AND
  OF LUCRETIA'S ELDEST SON                               326

  CHAPTER X

  EFFECTS OF THE WAR--THE ROMAN INFANTE                  338

  CHAPTER XI

  LAST YEARS AND DEATH OF VANNOZZA                       345

  CHAPTER XII

  DEATH OF LUCRETIA BORGIA--CONCLUSION                   355




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  Lucretia Borgia, from a portrait attributed to Dosso Dossi
                                                          _Frontispiece_

  Trajan's Forum, Rome                                           16

  Church of S. Maria del Popolo, Rome                            20

  Vittoria Colonna                                               30

  The Farnese Palace, Rome                                       36

  Alexander VI                                                   44

  Church of Ara Coeli, Rome                                      58

  Tasso                                                          82

  Charles VIII                                                   88

  Savonarola                                                     94

  Macchiavelli                                                  100

  Cæsar Borgia                                                  148

  Guicciardini                                                  176

  Ercole d'Este, Duke of Ferrara                                206

  Castle of S. Angelo, Rome                                     210

  Ariosto                                                       248

  Castle Vecchio, Ferrara                                       270

  Benvenuto Garofalo                                            278

  Facsimile of a letter from Alexander VI to Lucretia           281

  Cardinal Bembo                                                290

  Julius II                                                     298

  Facsimile of a letter from Lucretia to Marquis Gonzaga        301

  Alfonso d'Este, Duke of Ferrara                               304

  Aldo Manuzio                                                  328

  Leo X                                                         338

  Lucretia Borgia, after a painting in the Musée de
  Nîmes                                                         360




INTRODUCTION


Lucretia Borgia is the most unfortunate woman in modern history. Is this
because she was guilty of the most hideous crimes, or is it simply
because she has been unjustly condemned by the world to bear its curse?
The question has never been answered. Mankind is ever ready to discover
the personification of human virtues and human vices in certain typical
characters found in history and fable.

The Borgias will never cease to fascinate the historian and the
psychologist. An intelligent friend of mine once asked me why it was
that everything about Alexander VI, Cæsar, and Lucretia Borgia, every
little fact regarding their lives, every newly discovered letter of any
of them, aroused our interest much more than did anything similar
concerning other and vastly more important historic characters. I know
of no better explanation than the following: the Borgias had for
background the Christian Church; they made their first appearance
issuing from it; they used it for their advancement; and the sharp
contrast of their conduct with the holy state makes them appear
altogether fiendish. The Borgias are a satire on a great form or phase
of religion, debasing and destroying it. They stand on high pedestals,
and from their presence radiates the light of the Christian ideal. In
this form we behold and recognize them. We view their acts through a
medium which is permeated with religious ideas. Without this, and
placed on a purely secular stage, the Borgias would have fallen into a
position much less conspicuous than that of many other men, and would
soon have ceased to be anything more than representatives of a large
species.

We possess the history of Alexander VI and Cæsar, but of Lucretia Borgia
we have little more than a legend, according to which she is a fury, the
poison in one hand, the poignard in the other; and yet this baneful
personality possessed all the charms and graces.

Victor Hugo painted her as a moral monster, in which form she still
treads the operatic stage, and this is the conception which mankind in
general have of her. The lover of real poetry regards this romanticist's
terrible drama of Lucretia Borgia as a grotesque manifestation of the
art, while the historian laughs at it; the poet, however, may excuse
himself on the ground of his ignorance, and of his belief in a myth
which had been current since the publication of Guicciardini's history.

Roscoe, doubting the truth of this legend, endeavored to disprove it,
and his apology for Lucretia was highly gratifying to the patriotic
Italians. To it is due the reaction which has recently set in against
this conception of her. The Lucretia legend may be analyzed most
satisfactorily and scientifically where documents and mementos of her
are most numerous; namely, in Rome, Ferrara, and Modena, where the
archives of the Este family are kept, and in Mantua, where those of the
Gonzaga are preserved. Occasional publications show that the interesting
question still lives and remains unanswered.

The history of the Borgias was taken up again by Domenico Cerri in his
work, _Borgia ossia Alessandro VI, Papa e suoi contemporanei_, Turin,
1858. The following year Bernardo Gatti, of Milan, published Lucretia's
letters to Bembo. In 1866 Marquis G. Campori, of Modena, printed an
essay entitled _Una vittima della storia Lucrezia Borgia_, in the _Nuova
Antologia_ of August 31st of that year. A year later Monsignor
Antonelli, of Ferrara, published _Lucrezia Borgia in Ferrara, Sposa a
Don Alfonso d'Este, Memorie storiche_, Ferrara, 1867. Giovanni
Zucchetti, of Mantua, immediately followed with a similar opuscule:
_Lucrezia Borgia Duchessa di Ferrara_, Milano, 1869. All these writers
endeavored, with the aid of history, to clear up the Lucretia legend,
and to rehabilitate the honor of the unfortunate woman.

Other writers, not Italians, among them certain French and English
authors, also took part in this effort. M. Armand Baschet, to whom we
are indebted for several valuable publications in the field of
diplomacy, announced in his work, _Aldo Manuzio, Lettres et Documents,
1494-1515_, Venice, 1867, that he had been engaged for years on a
biography of Madonna Lucretia Borgia, and had collected for the purpose
a large mass of original documents.

In the meantime, in 1869, there was published in London the first
exhaustive work on the subject: _Lucrezia Borgia, Duchess of Ferrara, a
Biography, illustrated by rare and unpublished documents_, by William
Gilbert. The absence of scientific method, unfortunately, detracts from
the value of this otherwise excellent production, which, as a sequel to
Roscoe's works, attracted no little attention.

The swarm of apologies for the Borgias called forth in France one of the
most wonderful books to which history has ever given birth. Ollivier, a
Dominican, published, in 1870, the first part of a work entitled _Le
Pape Alexandre VI et les Borgia_. This production is the fantastic
antithesis of Victor Hugo's drama. For, while the latter distorted
history for the purpose of producing a moral monster for stage effect,
the former did exactly the same thing, intending to create the very
opposite. Monks, however, now are no longer able to compel the world to
accept their fables as history, and Ollivier's absurd romance was
renounced even by the strongest organs of the Church; first by Matagne,
in the _Revue des questions historiques_, Paris, April, 1871, and
January, 1872, and subsequently by the _Civiltà Cattolica_, the organ of
the Jesuits, in an article dated March 15, 1873, whose author made no
effort to defend Alexander's character, simply because, in the light of
absolutely authentic historical documents, it was no longer possible to
save it.

This article was based upon the _Saggio di Albero Genealogico e di
Memorie su la familia Borgia specialmente in relazione a Ferrara_, by L.
N. Cittadella, director of the public library of that city, published in
Turin in 1872. The work, although not free from errors, is a
conscientious effort to clear up the family history of the Borgias.

At the close of 1872 I likewise entered into the discussion by
publishing a note on the history of the Borgias. This followed the
appearance of the volume of the _Geschichte der Stadt Rom im
Mittelalter_, which embraced the epoch of Alexander VI. My researches in
the archives of Italy had placed me in possession of a large amount of
original information concerning the Borgias, and as it was impossible
for me to avail myself of this mass of valuable details in that work, I
decided to use it for a monograph to be devoted either to Cæsar Borgia
or to his sister, as protagonist.

I decided on Madonna Lucretia for various reasons, among which was the
following: in the spring of 1872 I found in the archives of the notary
of the Capitol in Rome the protocol-book of Camillo Beneimbene, who for
years was the trusted legal adviser of Alexander VI. This great
manuscript proved to be an unexpected treasure; it furnished me with a
long series of authentic and hitherto unknown documents. It contained
all the marriage contracts of Donna Lucretia as well as numerous other
legal records relating to the most intimate affairs of the Borgias. In
November, 1872, I delivered a lecture on the subject before the class in
history at the Royal Bavarian Academy of Sciences in Munich, which was
published in the account of the proceedings. These records cast new
light on the history of the Borgias, whose genealogy had only just been
published by Cittadella.

There were other reasons which induced me to write a book on Donna
Lucretia. I had treated the political history of Alexander VI and Cæsar
at length, and had elucidated some of its obscure phases, but to
Lucretia Borgia I had devoted no special attention. Her personality
appeared to me to be something full of mystery, made up of
contradictions which remained to be deciphered, and I was fascinated by
it.

I began my task without any preconceived intention. I purposed to write,
not an apology, but a history of Lucretia, broadly sketched, the
materials for which, in so far as the most important period of her life,
her residence in Rome, was concerned, were already in my possession. I
desired to ascertain what manner of personality would be discovered by
treating Lucretia Borgia in a way entirely different from that in which
she had hitherto been examined, but at the same time scientifically, and
in accordance with the original records.

I completed my data; I visited the places where she had lived. I
repeatedly went to Modena and Mantua, whose archives are inexhaustible
sources of information regarding the Renaissance, and from them I
obtained most of my material. My friends there, as usual, were of great
help to me, especially Signor Zucchetti, of Mantua, late keeper of the
Gonzaga archives, and Signor Stefano Davari, the secretary.

The state archives of the Este family of Modena, however, yielded me the
greatest store of information. The custodian was Signor Cesare Foucard.
As might have been expected of Muratori's successor, this distinguished
gentleman displayed the greatest willingness to assist me in my task. In
every way he lightened my labors; he had one of his young assistants,
Signor Ognibene, arrange a great mass of letters and despatches which
promised to be of use to me, lent me the index, and supplied me with
copies. Therefore, if this work has any merit, no small part of it is
due to Signor Foucard's obligingness.

I also met with unfailing courtesy and assistance in other places--Nepi,
Pesaro, and Ferrara. To Signor Cesare Guasti, of the state archives of
Florence, I am indebted for careful copies of important letters of
Lorenzo Pucci, which he had made for me.

The material of which I finally found myself in possession is not
complete, but it is abundant and new.

The original records will serve as defense against those who endeavor to
discover a malicious motive in this work. No such interpretation is
worthy of further notice, because the book itself will make my intention
perfectly clear, which was simply that of the conscientious writer of
history. I have substituted history for romance.

In the work I have attached more importance to the period during which
Lucretia lived in Rome than to the time she spent in Ferrara, because
the latter has already been described, though not in detail, while the
former has remained purely legendary. As I had to base my work entirely
on original information, I endeavored to treat the subject in such a way
as to present a picture truly characteristic of the age, and animated by
concrete descriptions of its striking personalities.




BOOK THE FIRST

LUCRETIA BORGIA IN ROME




CHAPTER I

LUCRETIA'S FATHER


The Spanish house of Borja (or Borgia as the name is generally written)
was rich in extraordinary men. Nature endowed them generously; they were
distinguished by sensuous beauty, physical strength, intellect, and that
force of will which compels success, and which was the source of the
greatness of Cortez and Pizarro, and of the other Spanish adventurers.

Like the Aragonese, the Borgias also played the part of conquerors in
Italy, winning for themselves honors and power, and deeply affecting the
destiny of the whole peninsula, where they extended the influence of
Spain and established numerous branches of their family. From the old
kings of Aragon they claimed descent, but so little is known of their
origin that their history begins with the real founder of the house,
Alfonso Borgia, whose father's name is stated by some to have been Juan,
and by others Domenico; while the family name of his mother, Francesca,
is not even known.

Alfonso Borgia was born in the year 1378 at Xativa, near Valencia. He
served King Alfonso of Aragon as privy secretary, and was made Bishop of
Valencia. He came to Naples with this genial prince when he ascended its
throne, and in the year 1444 he was made a cardinal.

Spain, owing to her religious wars, was advancing toward national unity,
and was fast assuming a position of European importance. She now, by
taking a hand in the affairs of Italy, endeavored to grasp what she had
hitherto let slip by,--namely, the opportunity of becoming the head of
the Latin world and, above all, the center of gravity of European
politics and civilization. She soon forced herself into the Papacy and
into the Empire. From Spain the Borgias first came to the Holy See, and
from there later came Charles V to ascend the imperial throne. From
Spain came also Ignatius Loyola, the founder of the most powerful
politico-religious order history has ever known.

Alfonso Borgia, one of the most active opponents of the Council of Basle
and of the Reformation in Germany, was elected pope in 1455, assuming
the name Calixtus III. Innumerable were his kinsmen, many of whom he had
found settled in Rome when he, as cardinal, had taken up his residence
there. His nearest kin were members of the three connected Valencian
families of Borgia, Mila (or Mella), and Lanzol. One of the sisters of
Calixtus, Catarina Borgia, was married to Juan Mila, Baron of Mazalanes,
and was the mother of the youthful Juan Luis. Isabella, the wife of
Jofrè Lanzol, a wealthy nobleman of Xativa, was the mother of Pedro Luis
and Rodrigo, and of several daughters. The uncle adopted these two
nephews and gave them his family name,--thus the Lanzols became Borgias.

In 1456 Calixtus III bestowed the purple upon two members of the Mila
family: the Bishop Juan of Zamora, who died in 1467, in Rome, where his
tomb may still be seen in S. Maria di Monserrato, and on the youthful
Juan Luis. Rodrigo Borgia also received the purple in the same year.
Among other members of the house of Mila settled in Rome was Don Pedro,
whose daughter, Adriana Mila, we shall later find in most intimate
relations with the family of her uncle Rodrigo.

Of the sisters of this same Rodrigo, Beatrice was married to Don Ximenez
Perez de Arenos, Tecla to Don Vidal de Villanova, and Juana to Don Pedro
Guillen Lanzol.[1] All these remained in Spain. There is a letter
extant, written by Beatrice from Valencia to her brother shortly after
he became pope.

Rodrigo Borgia was twenty-six when the dignity of cardinal was conferred
upon him, and to this honor, a year later, was added the great office of
vice-chancellor of the Church of Rome. His brother, Don Pedro Luis, was
only one year older; and Calixtus bestowed upon this young Valencian the
highest honors which can fall to the lot of a prince's favorite. Later
we behold in him a papal nepot-prince in whom the Pope endeavored to
embody all mundane power and honor; he made him his condottiere, his
warder, his body-guard, and, finally, his worldly heir. Calixtus allowed
him to usurp every position of authority in the Church domain and, like
a destroying angel, to overrun and devastate the republics and the
tyrannies, for the purpose of founding a family dynasty, the Papacy
being of only momentary tenure, and not transmittable to an heir.

Calixtus made Pedro Luis generalissimo of the Church, prefect of the
city, Duke of Spoleto, and finally, vicar of Terracina and Benevento.
Thus in this first Spanish nepot was foreshadowed the career which Cæsar
Borgia later followed.

During the life of Calixtus the Spaniards were all-powerful in Rome. In
great numbers they poured into Italy from the kingdom of Valencia to
make their fortune at the papal court as monsignori and clerks, as
captains and castellans, and in any other way that suggested itself.
Calixtus III died on the sixth of August, 1458, and a few days later Don
Pedro Luis was driven from Rome by the oppressed nobility of the
country, the Colonna and the Orsini, who rose against the hated
foreigner. Soon afterwards, in December the same year, death suddenly
terminated the career of this young and brilliant upstart, then in
Civitavecchia. It is not known whether Don Pedro Luis Borgia was married
or whether he left any descendants.[2]

Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia lamented the loss of his beloved and, probably,
only brother, and inherited his property, while his own high position in
the Curia was not affected by the change in the papacy. As
vice-chancellor, he occupied a house in the Ponte quarter, which had
formerly been the Mint, and which he converted into one of the most
showy of the palaces of Rome. The building encloses two courts, where
may still be seen the original open colonnades of the lower story; it
was constructed as a stronghold, like the Palazzo di Venizia, which was
almost contemporaneous with it. The Borgia palace, however, does not
compare in architectural beauty or size with that built by Paul II. In
the course of the years it has undergone many changes, and for a long
time has belonged to the Sforza-Cesarini.

Nothing is known of Rodrigo's private life during the pontificate of the
four popes who followed Calixtus--Pius II, Paul II, Sixtus IV, and
Innocent VIII--for the records of that period are very incomplete.

Insatiable sensuality ruled this Borgia, a man of unusual beauty and
strength, until his last years. Never was he able to cast out this
demon. He angered Pius II by his excesses, and the first ray of light
thrown upon Rodrigo's private life is an admonitory letter written by
that pope, the eleventh of June, 1460, from the baths of Petriolo.
Borgia was then twenty-nine years old. He was in beautiful and
captivating Siena, where Piccolomini had passed his unholy youth. There
he had arranged a bacchanalian orgy of which the Pope's letter gives a
picture.

     DEAR SON: We have learned that your Worthiness, forgetful
     of the high office with which you are invested, was present from
     the seventeenth to the twenty-second hour, four days ago, in the
     gardens of John de Bichis, where there were several women of Siena,
     women wholly given over to worldly vanities. Your companion was one
     of your colleagues whom his years, if not the dignity of his
     office, ought to have reminded of his duty. We have heard that the
     dance was indulged in in all wantonness; none of the allurements of
     love were lacking, and you conducted yourself in a wholly worldly
     manner. Shame forbids mention of all that took place, for not only
     the things themselves but their very names are unworthy of your
     rank. In order that your lust might be all the more unrestrained,
     the husbands, fathers, brothers, and kinsmen of the young women and
     girls were not invited to be present. You and a few servants were
     the leaders and inspirers of this orgy. It is said that nothing is
     now talked of in Siena but your vanity, which is the subject of
     universal ridicule. Certain it is that here at the baths, where
     Churchmen and the laity are very numerous, your name is on every
     one's tongue. Our displeasure is beyond words, for your conduct has
     brought the holy state and office into disgrace; the people will
     say that they make us rich and great, not that we may live a
     blameless life, but that we may have means to gratify our passions.
     This is the reason the princes and the powers despise us and the
     laity mock us; this is why our own mode of living is thrown in our
     face when we reprove others. Contempt is the lot of Christ's vicar
     because he seems to tolerate these actions. You, dear son, have
     charge of the bishopric of Valencia, the most important in Spain;
     you are a chancellor of the Church, and what renders your conduct
     all the more reprehensible is the fact that you have a seat among
     the cardinals, with the Pope, as advisors of the Holy See. We leave
     it to you whether it is becoming to your dignity to court young
     women, and to send those whom you love fruits and wine, and during
     the whole day to give no thought to anything but sensual pleasures.
     People blame us on your account, and the memory of your blessed
     uncle, Calixtus, likewise suffers, and many say he did wrong in
     heaping honors upon you. If you try to excuse yourself on the
     ground of your youth, I say to you: you are no longer so young as
     not to see what duties your offices impose upon you. A cardinal
     should be above reproach and an example of right living before the
     eyes of all men, and then we should have just grounds for anger
     when temporal princes bestow uncomplimentary epithets upon us; when
     they dispute with us the possession of our property and force us to
     submit ourselves to their will. Of a truth we inflict these wounds
     upon ourselves, and we ourselves are the cause of these troubles,
     since we by our conduct are daily diminishing the authority of the
     Church. Our punishment for it in this world is dishonor, and in the
     world to come well deserved torment. May, therefore, your good
     sense place a restraint on these frivolities, and may you never
     lose sight of your dignity; then people will not call you a vain
     gallant among men. If this occurs again we shall be compelled to
     show that it was contrary to our exhortation, and that it caused us
     great pain; and our censure will not pass over you without causing
     you to blush. We have always loved you and thought you worthy of
     our protection as a man of an earnest and modest character.
     Therefore, conduct yourself henceforth so that we may retain this
     our opinion of you, and may behold in you only the example of a
     well ordered life. Your years, which are not such as to preclude
     improvement, permit us to admonish you paternally.

  PETRIOLO, _June 11, 1460_.[3]

A few years later, when Paul II occupied the papal throne, the historian
Gasparino of Verona described Cardinal Borgia as follows: "He is
handsome; of a most glad countenance and joyous aspect, gifted with
honeyed and choice eloquence. The beautiful women on whom his eyes are
cast he lures to love him, and moves them in a wondrous way, more
powerfully than the magnet influences iron."

There are such organizations as Gasparino describes; they are men of the
physical and moral nature of Casanova and the Regent of Orleans.
Rodrigo's beauty was noted by many of his contemporaries even when he
was pope. In 1493 Hieronymus Portius described him as follows:
"Alexander is tall and neither light nor dark; his eyes are black and
his lips somewhat full. His health is robust, and he is able to bear any
pain or fatigue; he is wonderfully eloquent and a thorough man of the
world."[4]

The force of this happy organization lay, apparently, in the perfect
balance of all its powers. From it radiated the serene brightness of his
being, for nothing is more incorrect than the picture usually drawn of
this Borgia, showing him as a sinister monster. The celebrated Jason
Mainus, of Milan, calls attention to his "elegance of figure, his serene
brow, his kingly forehead, his countenance with its expression of
generosity and majesty, his genius, and the heroic beauty of his whole
presence."


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Zurita, Anales de Aragon, v. 36.

[2] Zurita (iv, 55) says he died _sin dexar ninguna sucesion_.
Notwithstanding this, Cittadella, in his _Saggio di Albero Genealogico e
di memorie su la Familia Borgia_ (Turin, 1872), ascribes two children to
this Pedro Luis, Silvia and Cardinal Giovanni Borgia, the younger.

[3] Raynaldus, 1460. No. 31.

[4] Statura procerus, colore medio, nigris oculis, ore paululum
pleniore. Hieron. Portius, Commentarius, a rare publication of 1493, in
the Casanatense in Rome.




CHAPTER II

LUCRETIA'S MOTHER


About 1466 or 1467 Cardinal Rodrigo's magnetism attracted a woman of
Rome, Vannozza Catanei. We know that she was born in July, 1442, but of
her family we are wholly ignorant. Writers of that day also call her
Rosa and Catarina, although she named herself, in well authenticated
documents, Vannozza Catanei. Paolo Giovio states that Vanotti was her
patronymic, and although there was a clan of that name in Rome, he is
wrong. Vannozza was probably the nickname for Giovanna--thus we find in
the early records of that age: Vannozza di Nardis, Vannozza di Zanobeis,
di Pontianis, and others.

There was a Catanei family in Rome, as there was in Ferrara, Genoa, and
elsewhere. The name was derived from the title, _capitaneus_. In a
notarial document of 1502 the name of Alexander's mistress is given in
its ancient form, Vanotia de Captaneis.

Litta, to whom Italy is indebted for the great work on her
illustrious families--a wonderful work in spite of its errors and
omissions--ventures the opinion that Vannozza was a member of the
Farnese family and a daughter of Ranuccio. There is, however, no ground
for this theory. In written instruments of that time she is explicitly
called Madonna Vannozza de casa Catanei.

None of Vannozza's contemporaries have stated what were the
characteristics which enabled her to hold the pleasure-loving cardinal
so surely and to secure her recognition as the mother of several of his
acknowledged children. We may imagine her to have been a strong and
voluptuous woman like those still seen about the streets of Rome. They
possess none of the grace of the ideal woman of the Umbrian school, but
they have something of the magnificence of the Imperial City--Juno and
Venus are united in them. They would resemble the ideals of Titian and
Paul Veronese but for their black hair and dark complexion,--blond and
red hair have always been rare among the Romans.

Vannozza doubtless was of great beauty and ardent passions; for if not,
how could she have inflamed a Rodrigo Borgia? Her intellect too,
although uncultivated, must have been vigorous; for if not, how could
she have maintained her relations with the cardinal?

The date given above was the beginning of this liaison, if we may
believe the Spanish historian Mariana, who says that Vannozza was the
mother of Don Pedro Luis, Rodrigo's eldest son. In a notarial instrument
of 1482 this son of the cardinal is called a youth (_adolescens_), which
signified a person fourteen or fifteen years of age. In what
circumstances Vannozza was living when Cardinal Borgia made her
acquaintance we do not know. It is not likely that she was one of the
innumerable courtesans who, thanks to the liberality of their retainers,
led most brilliant lives in Rome at that period; for had she been, the
novelists and epigrammatists of the day would have made her famous.

The chronicler Infessura, who must have been acquainted with Vannozza,
relates that Alexander VI, wishing to make his natural son Cæsar a
cardinal, caused it to appear, by false testimony, that he was the
legitimate son of a certain Domenico of Arignano, and he adds that he
had even married Vannozza to this man. The testimony of a contemporary
and a Roman should have weight; but no other writer, except Mariana--who
evidently bases his statement on Infessura--mentions this Domenico, and
we shall soon see that there could have been no legal, acknowledged
marriage of Vannozza and this unknown man. She was the cardinal's
mistress for a much longer time before he himself, for the purpose of
cloaking his relations with her and for lightening his burden, gave her
a husband. His relations with her continued for a long time after she
had a recognized consort.

The first acknowledged husband of Vannozza was Giorgio di Croce, a
Milanese, for whom Cardinal Rodrigo had obtained from Sixtus IV a
position as apostolic secretary. It is uncertain at just what time she
allied herself with this man, but she was living with him as his wife in
1480 in a house on the Piazzo Pizzo di Merlo, which is now called
Sforza-Cesarini, near which was Cardinal Borgia's palace.

Even as early as this, Vannozza was the mother of several children
acknowledged by the cardinal: Giovanni, Cæsar, and Lucretia. There is no
doubt whatever about these, although the descent of the eldest of the
children, Pedro Luis, from the same mother, is only highly probable.
Thus far the date of the birth of this Borgia bastard has not been
established, and authorities differ. In absolutely authentic records I
discovered the dates of birth of Cæsar and Lucretia, which clear up
forever many errors regarding the genealogy and even the history of the
house. Cæsar was born in the month of April, 1476--the day is not
given--and Lucretia on the eighteenth of April, 1480. Their father, when
he was pope, gave their ages in accordance with these dates. In October,
1501, he mentioned the subject to the ambassador of Ferrara, and the
latter, writing to the Duke Ercole, said, "The Pope gave me to
understand that the Duchess (Lucretia) was in her twenty-second year,
which she will complete next April, in which month also the most
illustrious Duke of Romagna (Cæsar) will be twenty-six."

If the correctness of the father's statement of the age of his own
children is questioned, it may be confirmed by other reports and
records. In despatches which a Ferrarese ambassador sent to the same
duke from Rome much earlier, namely, in February and March, 1483, the
age of Cæsar at that time is given as sixteen to seventeen years, which
agrees with the subsequent statement of his father.[5] The son of
Alexander VI was, therefore, a few years younger than has hitherto been
supposed, and this fact has an important bearing upon his short and
terrible life. Mariana, therefore, and other authors who follow him, err
in stating that Cæsar, Rodrigo's second son, was older than his brother
Giovanni. In reality, Giovanni must have been two years older than
Cæsar. Venetian letters from Rome, written in October, 1496, describe
him as a young man of twenty-two; he accordingly must have been born in
1474.[6]

Lucretia herself came into the world April 18, 1480. This exact date is
given in a Valencian document. Her father was then forty-nine and her
mother thirty-eight years of age. The Roman or Spanish astrologers cast
the horoscope of the child according to the constellation which was in
the ascendancy, and congratulated Cardinal Rodrigo on the brilliant
career foretold for his daughter by the stars.

Easter had just passed; magnificent festivities had been held in honor
of the Elector Ernst of Saxony, who, together with the Duke of Brunswick
and Wilhelm von Henneberg had arrived in Rome March 22d. These gentlemen
were accompanied by a retinue of two hundred knights, and a house in the
Parione quarter had been placed at their disposal. Pope Sixtus IV loaded
them with honors, and great astonishment was caused by a magnificent
hunt which Girolamo Riario, the all-powerful nepot, gave for them, at
Magliana on the Tiber. These princes departed from Rome on the
fourteenth of April.

The papacy was at that time changing to a political despotism, and
nepotism was assuming the character which later was to give Cæsar Borgia
all his ferocity. Sixtus IV, a mighty being and a character of a much
more powerful cast than even Alexander VI, was at war with Florence,
where he had countenanced the Pazzi conspiracy for the murder of the
Medici. He had made Girolamo Riario a great prince in Romagna, and later
Alexander VI planned a similar career for his son Cæsar.

Lucretia was indeed born at a terrible period in the world's history;
the papacy was stripped of all holiness, religion was altogether
material, and immorality was boundless. The bitterest family feuds raged
in the city, in the Ponte, Parione, and Regola quarters, where kinsmen
incited by murder daily met in deadly combat. In this very year, 1480,
there was a new uprising of the old factions of Guelph and Ghibbeline in
Rome; there the Savelli and Colonna were against the Pope, and here the
Orsini for him; while the Valle, Margana, and Santa Croce families,
inflamed by a desire for revenge for blood which had been shed, allied
themselves with one or the other faction.


FOOTNOTES:

[5] Gianandrea Boccaccio to the duke, Rome, February 25 and March 11,
1493. State archives of Modena.

[6] Sanuto, Diar. v. i, 258.




CHAPTER III

LUCRETIA'S FIRST HOME


Lucretia passed the first years of her childhood in her mother's house,
which was on the Piazza Pizzo di Merlo, only a few steps from the
cardinal's palace. The Ponte quarter, to which it belonged, was one of
the most populous of Rome, since it led to the Bridge of S. Angelo and
the Vatican. In it were to be found many merchants and the bankers from
Florence, Genoa, and Siena, while numerous papal office-holders, as well
as the most famous courtesans dwelt there. On the other hand, the number
of old, noble families in Ponte was not large, perhaps because the
Orsini faction did not permit them to thrive there. These powerful
barons had resided in this quarter for a long time in their vast palace
on Monte Giordano. Not far distant stood their old castle, the Torre di
Nona, which had originally been part of the city walls on the Tiber. At
this time it was a dungeon for prisoners of state and other
unfortunates.

It is not difficult to imagine what Vannozza's house was, for the Roman
dwelling of the Renaissance did not greatly differ from the ordinary
house of the present day, which generally is gloomy and dark. Massive
steps of cement led to the dwelling proper, which consisted of a
principal salon and adjoining rooms with bare flagstone floors, and
ceilings of beams and painted wooden paneling. The walls of the rooms
were whitewashed, and only in the wealthiest houses were they covered
with tapestries, and in these only on festal occasions. In the fifteenth
century the walls of few houses were adorned with pictures, and these
usually consisted of only a few family portraits. If Vannozza decorated
her salon with any likenesses, that of Cardinal Rodrigo certainly must
have been among the number. There was likewise a shrine with relics and
pictures of the saints and one of the Madonna, the lamp constantly
burning before it.

Heavy furniture,--great wide beds with canopies; high, brown wooden
chairs, elaborately carved, upon which cushions were placed; and massive
tables, with tops made of marble or bits of colored wood,--was ranged
around the walls. Among the great chests there was one which stood out
conspicuously in the salon, and which contained the dowry of linen. It
was in such a chest--the chest of his sister--that the unfortunate
Stefano Porcaro concealed himself when he endeavored to escape after his
unsuccessful attempt to excite an uprising on the fifth of January,
1453. His sister and another woman sat on the chest, better to protect
him, but the officers pulled him out.

Although we can only state what was then the fashion, if Vannozza had
any taste for antiquities her salon must have been adorned with them. At
that time they were being collected with the greatest eagerness. It was
the period of the first excavations; the soil of Rome was daily giving
up its treasures, and from Ostia, Tivoli, and Hadrian's Villa, from
Porto d'Anzio and Palestrina, quantities of antiquities were being
brought to the city. If Vannozza and her husband did not share this
passion with the other Romans, one would certainly not have looked in
vain in her house for the cherished productions of modern art--cups and
vases of marble and porphyry, and the gold ornaments of the jewelers.
The most essential thing in every well ordered Roman house was above all
else the _credenza_, a great chest containing gold and silver table
and drinking vessels and beautiful majolica; and care was taken always
to display these articles at banquets and on other ceremonious
occasions.

[Illustration: TRAJAN'S FORUM, ROME.]

It is not likely that Rodrigo's mistress possessed a library, for
private collections of books were at that time exceedingly rare in
bourgeois houses. A short time after this they were first made possible
in Rome by the invention of printing, which was there carried on by
Germans.

Vannozza's household doubtless was rich but not magnificent. She must
occasionally have entertained the cardinal, as well as the friends of
the family, and especially the confidants of the Borgias: the Spaniards,
Juan Lopez, Caranza, and Marades; and among the Romans, the Orsini,
Porcari, Cesarini, and Barberini. The cardinal himself was an
exceedingly abstemious man, but magnificent in everything which
concerned the pomp and ceremonial of his position. The chief requirement
of a cardinal of that day was to own a princely residence and to have a
numerous household.

Rodrigo Borgia was one of the wealthiest princes of the Church, and he
maintained the palace and pomp of a great noble. His contemporary Jacopo
of Volterra, gave the following description of him about 1486: "He is a
man of an intellect capable of everything and of great sense; he is a
ready speaker; he is of an astute nature, and has wonderful skill in
conducting affairs. He is enormously wealthy, and the favor accorded him
by numerous kings and princes lends him renown. He occupies a beautiful
and comfortable palace which he built between the Bridge of S. Angelo
and the Campo dei Fiore. His papal offices, his numerous abbeys in Italy
and Spain, and his three bishoprics of Valencia, Portus, and Carthage
yield him a vast income, and it is said that the office of
vice-chancellor alone brings him in eight thousand gold florins. His
plate, his pearls, his stuffs embroidered with silk and gold, and his
books in every department of learning are very numerous, and all are of
a magnificence worthy of a king or pope. I need not mention the
innumerable bed hangings, the trappings for his horses, and similar
things of gold, silver, and silk, nor his magnificent wardrobe, nor the
vast amount of gold coin in his possession. In fact it was believed that
he possessed more gold and riches of every sort than all the cardinals
together, with the exception of one, Estouteville."

Cardinal Rodrigo, therefore, was able to give his children the most
brilliant education, while he modestly maintained them as his nephews.
Not until he himself had attained greatness could he bring them forth
into the full light of day.

In 1482 he did not occupy his house in the Ponte quarter, perhaps
because he was having it enlarged. He spent more of his time in the
palace which Stefano Nardini had finished in 1475 in the Parione
quarter, which is now known as the Palazzo del Governo Vecchio. Rodrigo
was living here in January, 1482, as we learn from an instrument of the
notary Beneimbene,--the marriage contract of Gianandrea Cesarini and
Girolama Borgia, a natural daughter of the same Cardinal Rodrigo. This
marriage was performed in the presence of the bride's father, Cardinals
Stefano Nardini and Gianbattista Savelli, and the Roman nobles Virginius
Orsini, Giuliano Cesarini, and Antonio Porcaro.

The instrument of January, 1482, is the earliest authentic document we
possess regarding the family life of Cardinal Borgia. In it he
acknowledges himself to be the father of the "noble demoiselle
Hieronyma," and she is described as the sister of the "noble youth
Petrus Lodovicus de Borgia, and of the infant Johannes de Borgia." As
these two, plainly mentioned as the eldest sons, were natural children,
it would have been improper to name their mother. Cæsar also was passed
by, as he was a child of only six years.

Girolama was still a minor, being only thirteen years of age, and her
betrothed, Giovanni Andrea, had scarcely reached manhood. He was a son
of Gabriello Cesarini and Godina Colonna. By this marriage the noble
house of Cesarini was brought into close relations with the Borgia, and
later it derived great profit from the alliance. Their mutual friendship
dated from the time of Calixtus, for it was the prothonotary Giorgio
Cesarini who, on the death of that pope, had helped Rodrigo's brother
Don Pedro Luis when he was forced to flee from Rome. Both Girolama and
her youthful spouse died in 1483. Was she also a child of the mother of
Lucretia and Cæsar? We know not, but it is regarded as unlikely. Let us
anticipate by saying that there is only a single authentic record which
mentions Rodrigo's children and their mother together. This is the
inscription on Vannozza's tomb in S. Maria del Popolo in Rome, in which
she is named as the mother of Cæsar, Giovanni, Giuffrè, and Lucretia,
while no mention is made of their older brother, Don Pedro Luis, nor of
their sister Girolama.

Rodrigo, moreover, had a third daughter, named Isabella, who could not
have been a child of Vannozza. April 1, 1483, he married her to a Roman
nobleman, Piergiovanni Mattuzi of the Parione quarter.[7]


FOOTNOTES:

[7] Abstract of the marriage contract in the archives of the Capitol.
Cred. xiv, T. 72. From an instrument of the notary Agostino Martini.




CHAPTER IV

LUCRETIA'S EDUCATION


The cardinal's relations with Vannozza continued until about 1482, for
after the birth of Lucretia she presented him with another son, Giuffrè,
who was born in 1481 or 1482.

After that, Borgia's passion for this woman, who was now about forty,
died out, but he continued to honor her as the mother of his children
and as the confidant of many of his secrets.

Vannozza had borne her husband, a certain Giorgio di Croce, a son, who
was named Octavian--at least this child passed as his. With the
cardinal's help she increased her revenues; in old official records she
appears as the lessee of several taverns in Rome, and she also bought a
vineyard and a country house near S. Lucia in Selci in the Subura,
apparently from the Cesarini. Even to-day the picturesque building with
the arched passageway over the stairs which lead up from the Subura to
S. Pietro in Vincoli is pointed out to travelers as the palace of
Vannozza or of Lucretia Borgia. Giorgio di Croce had become rich, and he
built a chapel for himself and his family in S. Maria del Popolo. Both
he and his son Octavian died in the year 1486.[8]

His death caused a change in Vannozza's circumstances, the cardinal
hastening to marry the mother of his children a second time, so that she
might have a protector and a respectable household. The new husband was
Carlo Canale, of Mantua.

[Illustration: CHURCH OF S. MARIA DEL POPOLO, ROME.]

Before he came to Rome he had by his attainments acquired some
reputation among the humanists of Mantua. There is still extant a letter
to Canale, written by the young poet Angelo Poliziano regarding his
_Orfeo_; the manuscript of this, the first attempt in the field of the
drama which marked the renaissance of the Italian theater, was in the
hands of Canale, who, appreciating the work of the faint-hearted poet,
was endeavoring to encourage him.[9] At the suggestion of Cardinal
Francesco Gonzaga, a great patron of letters, Poliziano had written the
poem in the short space of two days. Carlo Canale was the cardinal's
chamberlain. The _Orfeo_ saw the light in 1472. When Gonzaga died, in
1483, Canale went to Rome, where he entered the service of Cardinal
Sclafetano, of Parma. As a confidant and dependent of the Gonzaga he
retained his connection with this princely house.[10] In his new
position he assisted Ludovico Gonzaga, a brother of Francesco when he
came to Rome in 1484 to receive the purple on his election as Bishop of
Mantua.

Borgia was acquainted with Canale while he was in the service of the
Gonzaga, and later he met him in the house of Sclafetano. He selected
him to be the husband of his widowed mistress, doubtless because
Canale's talents and connections would be useful to him.

Canale, on the other hand, could have acquiesced in the suggestion to
marry Vannozza only from avarice, and his willingness proves that he had
not grown rich in his former places at the courts of cardinals.

The new marriage contract was drawn up June 8, 1486, by the notary of
the Borgia house, Camillo Beneimbene, and was witnessed by Francesco
Maffei, apostolic secretary and canon of S. Peter's; Lorenzo Barberini
de Catellinis; a citizen, Giuliano Gallo, a considerable merchant of
Rome; Burcardo Barberini de Carnariis, and other gentlemen. As dowry
Vannozza brought her husband, among other things, one thousand gold
florins and an appointment as _sollicitator bullarum_. The contract
clearly referred to this as Vannozza's second marriage. Would it not
have been set down as the third, or in more general terms as new, if the
alleged first marriage with Domenico d'Arignano had really been
acknowledged?

In this instrument Vannozza's house on the Piazza de Branchis, in the
Regola quarter, where the marriage took place, is described as her
domicile. The piazza still bears this name, which is derived from the
extinct Branca family. After the death of her former husband she must,
therefore, have moved from the house on the Piazza Pizzo di Merlo and
taken up her abode in the one on the Piazza Branca. This house may have
belonged to her, for her second husband seems to have been a man without
means, who hoped to make his fortune by his marriage and with the
protection of the powerful cardinal.

From a letter of Ludovico Gonzaga, dated February 19, 1488, we learn
that this new marriage of Vannozza's was not childless. In this epistle,
the Bishop of Mantua asks his agent in Rome to act as godfather in his
stead, Carlo Canale having chosen him for this honor. The letter gives
no further particulars, but it can mean nothing else.[11]

We do not know at just what time Lucretia, in accordance with the
cardinal's provision, left her mother's house and passed under the
protection of a woman who exercised great influence upon him and upon
the entire Borgia family.

This woman was Adriana, of the house of Mila, a daughter of Don Pedro,
who was a nephew of Calixtus III, and first cousin of Rodrigo. What
position he held in Rome we do not know.

He married his daughter Adriana to Ludovico, a member of the noble house
of Orsini, and lord of Bassanello, near Civita Castellana. As the
offspring of this union, Orsino Orsini, married in 1489, it is evident
that his mother must have entered into wedlock at least sixteen years
before. Ludovico Orsini died in 1489 or earlier. As his wife, and later
as his widow, Adriana occupied one of the Orsini palaces in Rome,
probably the one on Monte Giordano, near the Bridge of S. Angelo, this
palace having subsequently been described as part of the estate which
her son Orsino inherited.

Cardinal Rodrigo maintained the closest relations with Adriana. She was
more than his kinswoman; she was the confidant of his sins, of his
intrigues and plans, and such she remained until the day of his death.

To her he entrusted the education of his daughter Lucretia during her
childhood, as we learn from a letter written by the Ferrarese ambassador
to Rome, Gianandrea Boccaccio, Bishop of Modena, to the Duke Ercole in
1493, in which he remarks of Madonna Adriana Ursina, "that she had
educated Lucretia in her own house."[12] This doubtless was the Orsini
palace on Monte Giordano, which was close to Cardinal Borgia's
residence.

According to the Italian custom, which has survived to the present day,
the education of the daughters was entrusted to women in convents, where
the young girls were required to pass a few years, afterwards to come
forth into the world to be married. If, however, Infessura's picture of
the convents of Rome is a faithful one, the cardinal was wise in
hesitating to entrust his daughter to these saints. Nevertheless there
certainly were convents which were free from immorality, such, for
example, as S. Silvestre in Capite, where many of the daughters of the
Colonna were educated, and S. Maria Nuova and S. Sisto on the Appian
Way. On one occasion during the papacy of Alexander, Lucretia chose the
last named convent as an asylum, perhaps because she had there received
her early spiritual education.

Religious instruction was always the basis of the education of the women
of Italy. It, however, consisted not in the cultivation of heart and
soul, but in a strict observance of the forms of religion. Sin made no
woman repulsive, and the condition of even the most degraded female did
not prevent her from performing all her church duties, and appearing to
be a well-trained Christian. There were no women skeptics or
freethinkers; they would have been impossible in the society of that
day. The godless tyrant Sigismondo Malatesta of Rimini built a
magnificent church, and in it a chapel in honor of his beloved Isotta,
who was a regular attendant at church. Vannozza built and embellished a
chapel in S. Maria del Popolo. She had a reputation for piety, even
during the life of Alexander VI. Her greatest maternal solicitude, like
that of Adriana, was to inculcate a Christian deportment in her
daughter, and this Lucretia possessed in such perfection that
subsequently a Ferrarese ambassador lauded her for her 'saintly
demeanor.'

It is wrong to regard this bearing simply as a mask; for that would
presuppose an independent consideration of religious questions or a
moral process which was altogether foreign to the women of that age, and
is still unknown among the women of Italy. There religion was, and still
is, a part of education; it consisted in a high respect for form and was
of small ethical worth.

The daughters of the well-to-do families did not receive instruction in
the humanities in the convents, but probably from the same teachers to
whom the education of the sons was entrusted. It is no exaggeration to
say that the women of the better classes during the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries were as well educated as are the women of to-day.
Their education was not broad; it was limited to a few branches; for
then they did not have the almost inexhaustible means of improvement
which, thanks to the evolution of the human mind during the last three
hundred years, we now enjoy. The education of the women of the
Renaissance was based upon classical antiquity, in comparison with which
everything which could then be termed modern was insignificant. They
might, therefore, have been described as scholarly. Feminine education
is now entirely different, as it is derived wholly from modern sources
of culture. It is precisely its many-sidedness to which is due the
superficiality of the education of contemporary woman when compared with
that of her sister of the Renaissance.

The education of women at the present time, generally,--even in Germany,
which is famous for its schools,--is without solid foundation, and
altogether superficial and of no real worth. It consists usually in
acquiring a smattering of two modern tongues and learning to play the
piano, to which a wholly unreasonable amount of time is devoted.

During the Renaissance the piano was unknown, but every educated woman
performed upon the lute, which had the advantage that, in the hands of
the lady playing it, it presented an agreeable picture to the eyes,
while the piano is only a machine which compels the man or the woman who
is playing it to go through motions which are always unpleasant and
often ridiculous. During the Renaissance the novel showed only its first
beginnings; and even to-day Italy is the country which produces and
reads the fewest romances. There were stories from the time of
Boccaccio, but very few. Vast numbers of poems were written, but half of
them in Latin. Printing and the book trade were in their infancy. The
theater likewise was in its childhood, and, as a rule, dramatic
performances were given only once a year, during the carnival, and then
only on private stages. What we now call universal literature or culture
consisted at that time in the passionate study of the classics. Latin
and Greek held the place then which the study of foreign languages now
occupies in the education of women. The Italians of the Renaissance did
not think that an acquaintance with the classics, that scientific
knowledge destroyed the charm of womanliness, nor that the education of
women should be less advanced than that of men. This opinion, like so
many others prevalent in society is of Teutonic origin. The loving
dominion of the mother in the family circle has always seemed to the
Germanic races to be the realization of the ideal of womanliness. For a
long time German women avoided publicity owing to modesty or a feeling
of decorum. Their talents remained hidden except in cases where peculiar
circumstances--sometimes connected with affairs of court or of
state--compelled them to come forth. Until recently the history of
German civilization has shown a much smaller number of famous female
characters than Italy, the land of strong personalities, produced during
the Renaissance. The influence which gifted women in the Italian salons
of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and later in those of France,
exercised upon the intellectual development of society was completely
unknown in England and Germany.

Later, however, there was a change in the relative degree of feminine
culture in Teutonic and Latin countries. In the former it rose, while in
Italy it declined. The Italian woman who, during the Renaissance,
occupied a place by man's side, contended with him for intellectual
prizes, and took part in every spiritual movement, fell into the
background. During the last two hundred years she has taken little or no
part in the higher life of the nation, for long ago she became a mere
tool in the hands of the priests. The Reformation gave the German woman
greater personal freedom. Especially since the beginning of the
eighteenth century have Germany and England produced numbers of highly
cultivated and even learned women. The superficiality of the education
of woman in general in Germany is not the fault of the Church, but of
the fashion, of society, and also of lack of means in our families.

A learned woman, whom men are more apt to fear than respect, is called,
when she writes books, a blue-stocking. During the Renaissance she was
called a _virago_, a title which was perfectly complimentary. Jacopo da
Bergamo constantly uses it as a term of respect in his work, _Concerning
Celebrated Women_, which he wrote in 1496.[13] Rarely do we find this
word used by Italians in the sense in which we now employ it,--namely,
termigant or amazon. At that time a _virago_ was a woman who, by her
courage, understanding, and attainments, raised herself above the masses
of her sex. And she was still more admired if in addition to these
qualities she possessed beauty and grace. Profound classic learning
among the Italians was not opposed to feminine charm; on the contrary,
it enhanced it. Jacopo da Bergamo specially praises it in this or that
woman, saying that whenever she appeared in public as a poet or an
orator, it was above all else her modesty and reserve which charmed her
hearers. In this vein he eulogizes Cassandra Fedeli, while he lauds
Ginevra Sforza for her elegance of form, her wonderful grace in every
motion, her calm and queenly bearing, and her chaste beauty. He
discovers the same in the wife of Alfonso of Aragon, Ippolita Sforza,
who possessed the highest attainments, the most brilliant eloquence, a
rare beauty, and extreme feminine modesty. What was then called modesty
(_pudor_) was the natural grace of a gifted woman increased by education
and association. This modesty Lucretia Borgia possessed in a high
degree. In woman it corresponded with that which in man was the mark of
the perfect cavalier. It may cause the reader some astonishment to learn
that the contemporaries of the infamous Cæsar spoke of his 'moderation'
as one of his most characteristic traits. By this term, however, we must
understand the cultivation of the personality in which moderation in man
and modesty in woman were part and manifestations of a liberal
education.

It is true that in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries emancipated
women did not sit on the benches of the lecture halls of Bologna,
Ferrara, and Padua, as they now do in many universities, to pursue
professional studies; but the same humane sciences to which youths and
men devoted themselves were a requirement in the higher education of
women. Little girls in the Middle Ages were entrusted to the saints of
the convents to be made nuns; during the Renaissance parents consecrated
gifted children to the Muses. Jacopo da Bergamo, speaking of Trivulzia
of Milan, a contemporary of Lucretia, who excited great amazement as an
orator when she was only fourteen years of age, says, "When her parents
noticed the child's extraordinary gifts they dedicated her to the
Muses--this was in her seventh year--for her education."

The course of study followed by women at that time included the classic
languages and their literature, oratory, poetry, or the art of
versifying, and music. Dilettanteism in the graphic and plastic arts of
course followed, and the vast number of paintings and statues produced
during the Renaissance inspired every cultivated woman in Italy with a
desire to become a connoisseur.

Even philosophy and theology were cultivated by women. Debates on
questions in these fields of inquiry were the order of the day at the
courts and in the halls of the universities, and women endeavored to
acquire renown by taking part in them. At the end of the fifteenth
century the Venetian, Cassandra Fedeli, the wonder of her age, was as
well versed in philosophy and theology as a learned man. She once
engaged in a public disputation before the Doge Agostino Barbarigo, and
also several times in the audience hall of Padua, and always showed the
utmost modesty in spite of the applause of her hearers. The beautiful
wife of Alessandro Sforza of Pesaro, Costanza Varano, was a poet, an
orator, and a philosopher; she wrote a number of learned dissertations.
"The writings of Augustinus, Ambrosius, Jerome, and Gregory, of Seneca,
Cicero, and Lactantius were always in her hands." Her daughter, Battista
Sforza, the noble spouse of the cultivated Federico of Urbino, was
equally learned. So, too, it was related that the celebrated Isotta
Nugarola of Verona was thoroughly at home in the writings of the fathers
and of the philosophers. Isabella Gonzaga and Elisabetta of Urbino were
likewise acquainted with them, as were numerous other celebrated women,
such as Vittoria Colonna and Veronica Gambara.

These and other names show to what heights the education of woman during
the Renaissance attained, and even if the accomplishments of these women
were exceptional, the studies which they so earnestly pursued were part
of the curriculum of all the daughters of the best families. These
studies were followed only for the purpose of perfecting and beautifying
the personality. Conversation in the modern salon is so excessively dull
that it is necessary to fill in the emptiness with singing and piano
playing. Still the symposiums of Plato were not always the order of the
day in the drawing-rooms of the Renaissance, and it must be admitted
that their social disputations would cause us intolerable weariness;
however, tastes were different at that time. In a circle of
distinguished and gifted persons, to carry on a conversation gracefully
and intelligently, and to give it a classic cast by introducing
quotations from the ancients, or to engage in a discussion in dialogue
on a chosen theme, afforded the keenest enjoyment. It was the
conversation of the Renaissance which attained later to such æsthetic
perfection in France. Talleyrand called this form of human intercourse
man's greatest and most beautiful blessing. The classic dialogue was
revived, with only the difference that cultivated women also took part
in it. As samples of the refined social intercourse of that age, we have
Castiglione's _Cortegiano_ and Bembo's _Asolani_, which was dedicated to
Lucretia Borgia.

[Illustration: VITTORIA COLONNA.

From an engraving by P. Caronni.]

Alexander's daughter did not occupy a preeminent place among the Italian
women renowned for classical attainments, her own acquirements not being
such as to distinguish her from the majority; but, considering the
times, her education was thorough. She had received instruction in the
languages, in music, and in drawing, and later the people of Ferrara
were amazed at the skill and taste which she displayed in embroidering
in silk and gold. "She spoke Spanish, Greek, Italian, and French, and a
little Latin, very correctly, and she wrote and composed poems in all
these tongues," said the biographer Bayard in 1512. Lucretia must have
perfected her education later, during the quiet years of her life, under
the influence of Bembo and Strozzi, although she doubtless had laid its
foundation in Rome. She was both a Spaniard and an Italian, and a
perfect master of these two languages. Among her letters to Bembo there
are two written in Spanish; the remainder, of which we possess several
hundred, are composed in the Italian of that day, and are spontaneous
and graceful in style. The contents of none of them are of importance;
they display soul and feeling, but no depth of mind. Her handwriting is
not uniform; sometimes it has strong lines which remind us of the
striking, energetic writing of her father; at others it is sharp and
fine like that of Vittoria Colonna.

None of Lucretia's letters indicate that she fully understood Latin, and
her father once stated that she had not mastered that language. She
must, however, have been able to read it when written, for otherwise
Alexander could not have made her his representative in the Vatican,
with authority to open letters received. Nor were her Hellenic studies
very profound; still she was not wholly ignorant of Greek. In her
childhood, schools for the study of Hellenic literature still flourished
in Rome, where they had been established by Chrysoleras and Bessarion.
In the city were many Greeks, some of whom were fugitives from their
country, while others had come to Italy with Queen Carlotta of Cyprus.
Until her death, in 1487, this royal adventuress lived in a palace in
the Borgo of the Vatican, where she held court, and where she doubtless
gathered about her the cultivated people of Rome, just as the learned
Queen Christina of Sweden did later. It was in her house that Cardinal
Rodrigo made the acquaintance, besides that of other noble natives of
Cyprus, of Ludovico Podocatharo, a highly cultivated man, afterwards his
secretary. He it was, probably, who instructed Borgia's children in
Greek.

In the cardinal's palace there was also a humanist of German birth,
Lorenz Behaim, of Nurenburg, who managed his household for twenty years.
As he was a Latinist and a member of the Roman Academy of Pomponius
Laetus, he must have exercised some influence on the education of his
master's children. Generally there was no lack of professors of the
humane sciences in Rome, where they were in a nourishing condition, and
the Academy as well as the University attracted thither many talented
men. In the papal city there were numerous teachers who conducted
schools, and swarms of young scholars, ambitious academicians, sought
their fortune at the courts of the cardinals in the capacity of
companions or secretaries, or as preceptors to their illegitimate
children. Lucretia, also, received instruction in classic literature
from these masters. Among the poets who lived in Rome she found teachers
to instruct her in Italian versification and in writing sonnets, an art
which was everywhere cultivated by women as well as men. She doubtless
learned to compose verses, although the writers on the history of
Italian literature, Quadrio and Crescimbeni, do not place her among the
poets of the peninsula. Nowhere do Bembo, Aldus, or the Strozzi speak of
her as a poet, nor are there any verses by her in existence. It is not
certain that even the Spanish canzoni which are found in some of her
letters to Bembo were composed by her.


FOOTNOTES:

[8] See Adinolfi's notice quoted by the author in his Geschichte der
Stadt Rom im Mittelalter. 2d Aufl. vii, 312.

[9] The letter, with the inscription "A Messer Carlo Canale," is printed
in the edition of Milan, 1808. Angelo Poliziano, Le Stanze e l'Orfeo ed
altre poesie.

[10] In the archives of Mantua there is a letter from the Marchesa
Isabella to Carlo Canale, dated December 4, 1499.

[11] Lodovico Gonzaga to Bartolomeo Erba, Siamo contenti contrahi in
nome nro. compaternità cum M. Carolo Canale, et cussi per questa nostra
ti commettiamo et constituimo nostro Procuratore. Note by Affò in his
introduction to the Orfeo, p. 113.

[12] Ma Adriana Ursina, la quale è socera de la dicta madona Julia
(Farnese), che ha sempre governata essa sposa (Lucrezia) in casa propria
per esser in loco de nepote del Pontifice, la fu figliola de messer
Piedro de Mila, noto a V. Ema Sigria, cusino carnale del Papa. Despatch
from the above named to Ercole, Rome, June 13, 1493, in the state
archives of Modena. And again she is mentioned in a despatch of May 6,
1493, as madona Adriana Ursina soa governatrice figliola che fu del
quondam messer Pietro del Mila.

[13] Jacobus Burgomensis _de claris mulieribus_, Paris, 1521.




CHAPTER V

NEPOTISM--GIULIA FARNESE--LUCRETIA'S BETROTHALS


It is not difficult to imagine what emotions were aroused in Lucretia
when she first became aware of the real condition of her family. Her
mother's husband was not her father; she discovered that she and her
brothers were the children of a cardinal, and the awakening of her
conscience was accompanied by a realization of circumstances
which--frowned on by the Church--it was necessary to conceal from the
world. She herself had always hitherto been treated as a niece of the
cardinal, and she now beheld in her father one of the most prominent
princes of the Church of Rome, whom she heard mentioned as a future
pope.

The knowledge of the great advantages to be derived from these
circumstances certainly must have affected Lucretia's fancy much more
actively than the conception of their immorality. The world in which she
lived concerned itself but little with moral scruples, and rarely in the
history of mankind has there been a time in which the theory that it is
proper to obtain the greatest possible profit from existing conditions
has been so generally accepted. She soon learned how common were these
relations in Rome. She heard that most of the cardinals lived with their
mistresses, and provided in a princely way for their children. They told
her about those of Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere and those of
Piccolomini; she saw with her own eyes the sons and daughters of
Estouteville, and heard of the baronies which their wealthy father had
acquired for them in the Alban mountains. She saw the children of Pope
Innocent raised to the highest honors; to her were pointed out his son
Franceschetto Cibò and his illustrious spouse Maddalena Medici. She knew
that the Vatican was the home of other children and grandchildren of the
Pope, and she frequently saw his daughter Madonna Teodorina, the consort
of the Genoese Uso di Mare, going and coming. She was eight years old
when his daughter Donna Peretta was married in the Vatican to the
Marchese Alfonso del Carretto with such magnificent pomp that it set all
Rome to talking.

Lucretia first became conscious of the position to which she and her
brothers might be called by their birth when she learned that her eldest
brother, Don Pedro Luis, was a Spanish duke. We do not know when the
young Borgia was raised to this dignity, but it was some time after
1482. The strong ties which existed between the cardinal and the Spanish
court doubtless enabled him to have his son created Duke of Gandia in
the kingdom of Valencia. As Mariana remarks, he bought this dukedom for
his son.

Don Pedro Luis, however, when still a young man, died in Spain, for a
document of the year 1491 speaks of him as deceased, and mentions a
legacy left by his will to his sister Lucretia. The duchy of Gandia
passed to Rodrigo's second son, Don Giovanni, who hastened to Valencia
to take possession of it.

Meanwhile the fancy of the licentious cardinal had turned to other
women. In May, 1489, when Lucretia was nine years old, appears for the
first time the most celebrated of his mistresses, Giulia Farnese, a
young woman of extraordinary beauty, to whose charms the cardinal and
future pope, who was growing old, yielded with all the ardor of a young
man.

It was the adulterous love of this Giulia which first brought the
Farnese house into the history of Rome, and subsequently into that of
the world; for Rodrigo Borgia laid the foundation of the greatness of
this family when he made Giulia's brother Alessandro a cardinal. In this
manner he prepared the way to the papacy for the future Paul III, the
founder of the house of Farnese of Parma, a distinguished family which
died out in 1758 in the person of Queen Elisabeth, who occupied the
throne of Spain.

The Farnese, up to the time of the Borgias, were of no importance in
Rome, where two of the most beautiful buildings of the Renaissance have
since helped to make their name immortal. They did not even live in
Rome, but in Roman Etruria, where they owned a few towns--Farneto, from
which, doubtless, their name was derived, Ischia, Capracola, and
Capodimonte. Some time later, though just when is not known, they were
temporarily in possession of Isola Farnese, an ancient castle in the
ruins of Veii, which from the fourteenth century had belonged to the
Orsini.

[Illustration: FARNESE PALACE, ROME.]

The origin of the Farnese family is uncertain, but the tradition,
according to which they were descended from the Lombards or the Franks,
appears to be true. It is supported by the fact that the name Ranuccio,
which is the Italian form of Rainer, is of frequent occurrence in the
family. The Farnese became prominent in Etruria as a small dynasty of
robber barons, without, however, being able to attain to the power of
their neighbors, the Orsini of Anguillara and Bracciano, and the famous
Counts of Vico, who were of German descent and who ruled over the
Tuscan prefecture for more than a hundred years, until that country
was swallowed up by Eugene IV. While these prefects were the most active
Ghibellines and the bitterest enemies of the popes, the Farnese, like
the Este, always stood by the Guelphs. From the eleventh century they
were consuls and podestas in Orvieto, and they appeared later in various
places as captains of the Church in the numerous little wars with the
cities and barons in Umbria and in the domain of S. Peter. Ranuccio,
Giulia's grandfather, was one of the ablest of the generals of Eugene
IV, and he had been a comrade of the great tyrant-conqueror Vitelleschi,
and through him his house had won great renown. His son, Pierluigi,
married Donna Giovanella of the Gaetani family of Sermoneta. His
children were Alessandro, Bartolomeo, Angiolo, Girolama, and Giulia.

Alessandro Farnese, born February 28, 1468, was a young man of intellect
and culture, but notorious for his unbridled passions. He had his own
mother committed to prison in 1487 under the gravest charges, whereupon
he himself was confined in the castle of S. Angelo by Innocent VIII. He
escaped from prison, and the matter was allowed to drop. He was a
prothonotary of the Church. His elder sister was married to Puccio
Pucci, one of the most illustrious statesmen of Florence, a member of a
large family which was on terms of close friendship with the Medici.

On the twentieth of May, 1489, the youthful Giulia Farnese, together
with the equally youthful Orsino Orsini, appeared in the "Star Chamber"
of the Borgia palace to sign their marriage contract. It is worthy of
note that this occurred in the house of Cardinal Rodrigo. His name
appears as the first of the witnesses to this document, as if he had
constituted himself the protector of the couple and had brought about
their marriage. This union, however, had been arranged when the
betrothed were minors, by their parents, Ludovico Orsini, lord of
Bassanello, and Pierluigi Farnese, both of whom had died before 1489. In
those days little children were often legally betrothed, and the
marriage was consummated later, as was the custom in ancient Rome, where
frequently boys and girls only thirteen years of age were affianced.
Giulia was barely fifteen, May 20, 1489, and she was still under the
guardianship of her brothers and her uncles of the house of Gaetani;
while the young Orsini was under the control of his mother, Adriana, who
was Adriana de Mila, the kinswoman of Cardinal Rodrigo, and Lucretia's
governess. This, therefore, sufficiently explains the part, personal and
official, which the cardinal took in the ceremony of Giulia's betrothal.

The witnesses to the marriage contract, which was drawn up by the notary
Beneimbene, were, in addition to the cardinal, Bishop Martini of
Segovia, the Spanish Canons Garcetto and Caranza, and a Roman nobleman
named Giovanni Astalli. The bride's brothers should have supported her,
but only the younger, Angiolo, was present, Alessandro remaining away.
His failure to attend such an important family function in the Borgia
palace is strange, although it may have been occasioned by some
accident. The bride's uncles, the prothonotary Giacomo, and his brother
Don Nicola Gaetani were present. Giulia's dowry consisted of three
thousand gold florins, a large amount for that time.

The civil marriage of the young couple took place the following day, May
21st, in this same palace of the Borgias. Many great nobles were
present, among whom were specially mentioned the kinsmen of the groom,
Cardinal Gianbattista Orsini and Raynaldo Orsini, Archbishop of
Florence. The young couple, as the season was charming, may have gone to
Castle Bassanello, or, if not, may have taken up their abode in the
Orsini palace on Monte Giordano.

Before her marriage Cardinal Rodrigo must have known, and often seen
Giulia Farnese in the palace of Madonna Adriana, the mother of the young
Orsini. There, likewise, Lucretia, who was several years younger, made
her acquaintance. Like Lucretia, Giulia had golden hair, and her beauty
won for her the name La Bella. It was in Adriana's house that this
tender, lovely child became ensnared in the coils of the libertine
Rodrigo. She succumbed to his seductions either shortly before or soon
after her marriage to the young Orsini. Perhaps she first aroused the
passion of the cardinal, a man at that time fifty-eight years old, when
she stood before him in his palace a bride in the full bloom of youth.
Be that as it may, it is certain that two years after her marriage
Giulia was the cardinal's acknowledged mistress. When Madonna Adriana
discovered the liason she winked at it, and was an accessory to the
shame of her daughter-in-law. By so doing she became the most powerful
and the most influential person in the house of Borgia.

Two of the three sons of the cardinal, Giovanni and Cæsar, had in the
meantime reached manhood. In 1490 neither of them was in Rome; the
former was in Spain, and the latter was studying at the University of
Perugia, which he later left for Pisa. As early as 1488 Cæsar must have
attended one of these institutions, probably the University of Perugia,
for in that year Paolo Pompilio dedicated to him his _Syllabica_, a work
on the art of versification. In it he lauded the budding genius of
Cæsar, who was the hope and ornament of the house of Borgia, his
progress in the sciences, and his maturity of intellect--astonishing in
one so young--and he predicted his future fame.[14]

His father had intended him for the Church, although Cæsar himself felt
for it nothing but aversion. From Innocent VIII he had secured his son's
appointment as prothonotary of the Church and even as Bishop of
Pamplona. He appears as a prothonotary in a document of February, 1491,
and at the same time the youngest of Rodrigo's sons, Giuffrè, a boy of
about nine years, was made Canon and Archdeacon of Valencia.

Cæsar went to Pisa, probably in 1491. Its university attracted a great
many of the sons of the prominent Italian families, chiefly on account
of the fame of its professor of jurisprudence, Philippo Decio of Milan.
At the university the young Borgia had two Spanish companions, who were
favorites of his father, Francesco Romolini of Ilerda and Juan Vera of
Arcilla in the kingdom of Valencia. The latter was master of his
household, as Cæsar himself states in a letter written in October, 1492,
in which he also calls Romolini his "most faithful comrade."[15]
Francesco Romolini was more than thirty years of age in 1491. He was a
diligent student of law, and became deeply learned in it. He is the same
Romolini who afterwards conducted the prosecution of Savonarola in
Florence. In 1503 Alexander made him a cardinal, to which dignity Vera
had been raised in 1500. His father's wealth enabled the youthful Cæsar
to live in Pisa in princely style, and his connections brought him into
friendly relations with the Medici.

The cardinal was still making special exertions to further the fortunes
of his children in Spain. Even for his daughter Lucretia he could see no
future more brilliant than a Spanish marriage; and he must indeed have
regarded it as a special act of condescension for the son of an old and
noble house to consent to become the husband of the illegitimate
daughter of a cardinal. The noble concerned was Don Cherubino Juan de
Centelles, lord of Val d'Ayora in the kingdom of Valencia, and brother
of the Count of Oliva.

The nuptial contract was drawn up in the Valencian dialect in Rome,
February 26 and June 16, 1491. The youthful groom was in Valencia, the
young bride in Rome, and her father had appointed the Roman nobleman
Antonio Porcaro her proxy. In the marriage contract it was specified
that Lucretia's portion should be three hundred thousand timbres or sous
in Valencian money, which she was to bring Don Cherubino as dowry, part
in coin and part in jewels and other valuables. It was specially stated
that of this sum eleven thousand timbres should consist of the amount
bequeathed by the will of the deceased Don Pedro Luis de Borgia, Duke of
Gandia, to his sister for her marriage portion, while eight thousand
were given her by her other brothers, Cæsar and Giuffrè, for the same
purpose, presumably also from the estate left by the brother. It was
provided that Donna Lucretia should be taken to Valencia at the
cardinal's expense within one year from the signing of the contract, and
that the church ceremony should be performed within six months after
her arrival in Spain.[16]

Thus Lucretia, when only a child eleven years of age, found her hand and
life happiness subjected to the will of another, and from that time she
was no longer the shaper of her own destiny. This was the usual fate of
the daughters of the great houses, and even of the lesser ones. Shortly
before her father became pope it seemed as if her life was to be spent
in Spain, and she would have found no place in the history of the papacy
and of Italy if she and Don Cherubino had been married. However, the
marriage was never performed. Obstacles of which we are ignorant, or
changes in the plans of her father, caused the betrothal of Lucretia to
Don Cherubino to be annulled. At the very moment this was being done for
her by proxy, her father was planning another alliance for his daughter.

The husband he had selected, Don Gasparo, was also a young Spaniard, son
of Don Juan Francesco of Procida, Count of Aversa. This family had
probably removed to Naples with the house of Aragon. Don Juan
Francesco's mother was Donna Leonora de Procida y Castelleta, Countess
of Aversa. Gasparo's father lived in Aversa, but in 1491 the son was in
Valencia, where, probably, he was being educated under the care of some
of his kinsmen, for he was still a boy of less than fifteen years. In an
instrument drawn by the notary Beneimbene, dated November 9, 1492, it is
explicitly stated that on the thirtieth of April of the preceding year,
1491, the marriage contract of Lucretia and Gasparo had been executed by
proxy with all due form, and that in it Cardinal Rodrigo had bound
himself to send his daughter to the city of Valencia at his expense,
where the church ceremony was to be performed. However, since the
marriage contract between Lucretia and the young Centelles had been
legally executed on the twenty-sixth of February of the same year, 1491,
and was recognized as late as the following June, there is room for
doubt regarding the correctness of the date; but both the instrument in
Beneimbene's protocol-book, and an abstract of the same in the archives
of the Hospital Sancta Sanctorum in Rome, give the last of April as the
date of the marriage contract of Lucretia and Don Gasparo. In these
proceedings her proxies were, not Antonio Porcaro, but Don Giuffrè
Borgia, Baron of Villa Longa, the Canon Jacopo Serra of Valencia, and
the vicar-general of the same place, Mateo Cucia. Hence follows the
curious fact that Lucretia was the betrothed at one and the same time of
two young Spaniards.

In spite of the rejection of her first affianced, the Centelles family
appears to have remained on good terms with the Borgias, for, later,
when Rodrigo became Pope, a certain Gulielmus de Centelles is to be
found among his most trusted chamberlains, while Raymondo of the same
house was prothonotary and treasurer of Perugia.


FOOTNOTES:

[14] Accedit studium illud tuum et perquam fertile bonarum litterarum in
quo hac in aetate seris.... Non deerit surgenti tuæ virtuti commodus
aliquando et idoneus praeco.--At tu Cæsar profecto non parum laudandus
es; qui in hac aetate tam facile senem agis. Perge nostri temporis
Borgiæ familiæ spes et decus. Introduction to the Syllabica. Rome, 1488.
Gennarelli's Edition of Burchard's Diary.

[15] Regarding Cæsar's studies at Pisa, see Angelo Fabroni, Hist. Acad.
Pisan. i, 160, 201.

[16] On June 16, 1491, some changes were made in this contract, which
Beneimbene has noted in the same protocol-book.




CHAPTER VI

HER FATHER BECOMES POPE--GIOVANNI SFORZA


On July 25, 1492, occurred the event to which the Borgias had long
eagerly looked forward, the death of Innocent VIII. Above all the other
candidates for the Papacy were four cardinals: Rafael Riario and
Giuliano della Rovere--both powerful nephews of Sixtus IV--Ascanio
Sforza, and Rodrigo Borgia.

Before the election was decided there were days of feverish expectation
for the cardinal's family. Of his children only Lucretia and Giuffrè
were in Rome at the time, and both were living with Madonna Adriana.
Vannozza was occupying her own house with her husband, Canale, who for
some time had held the office of secretary of the penitentiary court.
She was now fifty years old, and there was but one event to which she
looked forward, and upon it depended the gratification of her greatest
wish; namely, to see her children's father ascend the papal throne. What
prayers and vows she and Madonna Adriana, Lucretia, and Giulia Farnese
must have made to the saints for the fulfilment of that wish!

Early on the morning of August 11th breathless messengers brought these
women the news from the Vatican--Rodrigo Borgia had won the great prize.
To him, the highest bidder, the papacy had been sold. In the election,
Cardinal Ascanio Sforza had turned the scale, and for his reward he
received the city of Nepi; the office of vice-chancellor, and the
Borgia palace, which ever since has borne the name Sforza-Cesarini.

[Illustration: ALEXANDER VI.

From an engraving published in 1580.]

On the morning of this momentous day, when Alexander VI was carried from
the conclave hall to S. Peter's there to receive the first expressions
of homage, his joyful glance discovered many of his kinsmen in the dense
crowd, for thither they had hastened to celebrate his great triumph. It
was a long time since Rome had beheld a pope of such majesty, of such
beauty of person. His conduct was notorious throughout the city, and no
one knew him better in that hour than that woman, Vannozza Catanei, who
was kneeling in S. Peter's during the mass, her soul filled with the
memories of a sinful past.

Borgia's election did not cause all the Powers anxiety. In Milan,
Ludovico il Moro celebrated the event with public festivals; he now
hoped to become, through the influence of his brother Ascanio, a "half
pope." While the Medici expected much from Alexander, the Aragonese of
Naples looked for little. Bitterly did Venice express herself. Her
ambassador in Milan publicly declared in August that the papacy had been
sold by simony and a thousand deceptions, and that the signory of Venice
was convinced that France and Spain would refuse to obey the Pope when
they learned of these enormities.[17]

In the meantime, Alexander VI had received the professions of loyalty of
all the Italian States, together with their profuse expressions of
homage. The festival of his coronation was celebrated with unparalleled
pomp, August 26th. The Borgia arms, a grazing steer, was displayed so
generally in the decorations, and was the subject of so many epigrams,
that a satirist remarked that Rome was celebrating the discovery of the
Sacred Apis. Subsequently the Borgia bull was frequently the object of
the keenest satire; but at the beginning of Alexander's reign it was,
naïvely enough, the pictorial embodiment of the Pope's magnificence.
To-day such symbolism would excite only derision and mirth, but the
plastic taste of the Italian of that day was not offended by it.

When Alexander, on his triumphal journey to the Lateran, passed the
palace of his fanatical adherents, the Porcari, one of the boys of the
family declaimed with much pathos some stanzas which concluded with the
verses:

  Vive diu bos, vive diu celebrande per annos,
  Inter Pontificum gloria prima choros.[18]

The statements of Michele Ferno and of Hieronymus Porcius regarding the
coronation festivities and the professions of loyalty of the ambassadors
from the various Italian Powers must be read to see to what extremes
flattery was carried in those days. It is difficult for us to imagine
how imposing was the entrance of this brilliant pope upon the
spectacular stage of Rome at the time when the papacy was at the zenith
of its power--a height it had attained, not through love of the Church,
nor by devotion to religion, which had long been debased, but by
dazzling the luxury-loving people of the age and by modern politics; in
addition to this, the Church had preserved since the Middle Ages a
traditional and mystic character which held the respect of the faithful.

Ferno remarks that the history of the world offered nothing to compare
with the grandeur of the Pope's appearance and the charm of his
person,--and this author was not a bigoted papist, but a diligent
student of Pomponius Laetus. Like all the romanticists of the classic
revival, however, he was highly susceptible to theatrical effects. Words
failed him when he tried to describe the passage of Alexander to
S. Maria del Popolo: "These holiday swarms of richly clad people, the seven
hundred priests and cardinals with their retinues, these knights and
grandees of Rome in dazzling cavalcades, these troops of archers and
Turkish horsemen, the palace guards with long lances and glittering
shields, the twelve riderless white horses with golden bridles, which
were led along, and all the other pomp and parade!" Weeks would be
required for arranging a pageant like this at the present time; but the
Pope could improvise it in the twinkling of an eye, for the actors and
their costumes were always ready. He set it in motion for the sole
purpose of showing himself to the Romans, and in order that his majesty
might lend additional brilliancy to a popular holiday.

Ferno depicted the Pope himself as a demi-god coming forth to his
people. "Upon a snow-white horse he sat, serene of countenance and of
surpassing dignity; thus he showed himself to the people, and blessed
them; thus he was seen of all. His glance fell upon them and filled
every heart with joy. And so his appearance was of good augury for
everyone. How wonderful is his tranquil bearing! And how noble his
faultless face! His glance, how frank! How greatly does the honor which
we feel for him increase when we behold his beauty and vigor of body!"
Alexander the Great would have been described in just such terms by
Ferno. This was the idolatry which was always accorded the papacy, and
no one asked what was the inner and personal life of the glittering
idol.

On the occasion of his coronation Alexander appointed his son Cæsar, a
youth of sixteen, Bishop of Valencia. This he did without being sure of
the sanction of Ferdinand the Catholic, who, in fact, for a long time
did endeavor to withhold it; but he finally yielded, and the Borgias
consequently got the first bishopric in Spain into their hereditary
possession. Cæsar was not in Rome at the time his father received the
tiara. On the twenty-second of August, eleven days after Alexander's
election, Manfredi, ambassador from Ferrara to Florence, wrote the
Duchess Eleonora d'Este: "The Pope's son, the Bishop of Pamplona, who
has been attending the University of Pisa, left there by the Pope's
orders yesterday morning, and has gone to the castle of Spoleto."

The fifth of October Cæsar was still there, for on that date he wrote a
letter to Piero de' Medici from that place. This epistle to Lorenzo's
son, the brother of Cardinal Giovanni, shows that the greatest
confidence existed between him and Cæsar, who says in it that, on
account of his sudden departure from Pisa, he had been unable to
communicate orally with him, and that his preceptor, Juan Vera, would
have to represent him. He recommended his trusted familiar, Francesco
Romolini, to Piero for appointment as professor of canon law in Pisa.
The letter is signed, "Your brother, Cesar de Borja, Elector of
Valencia."[19]

By not allowing his son to come to Rome immediately, Alexander wished to
give public proof of what he had declared at the time of his election;
namely, that he would hold himself above all nepotism. Perhaps there was
a moment when the warning afforded by the examples of Calixtus, Sixtus,
and Innocent caused him to hesitate, and to resolve to moderate his love
for his offspring. However, the nomination of his son to a bishopric on
the day of his coronation shows that his resolution was not very
earnest. In October Cæsar appeared in the Vatican, where the Borgias now
occupied the place which the pitiable Cibòs had left.

On September 1st the Pope made the elder Giovanni Borgia, who was Bishop
of Monreale, a cardinal; he was the son of Alexander's sister Giovanna.
The Vatican was filled with Spaniards, kinsmen, or friends of the now
all-powerful house, who had eagerly hurried thither in quest of fortune
and honors. "Ten papacies would not be sufficient to satisfy this swarm
of relatives," wrote Gianandrea Boccaccio in November, 1492, to the Duke
of Ferrara. Of the close friends of Alexander, Juan Lopez was made his
chancellor; Pedro Caranza and Juan Marades his privy chamberlains;
Rodrigo Borgia, a nephew of the Pope, was made captain of the palace
guard, which hitherto had been commanded by a Doria.

Alexander immediately began to lay the plans for a more brilliant future
for his daughter. He would no longer listen to her marrying a Spanish
nobleman; nothing less than a prince should receive her hand. Ludovico
and Ascanio suggested their kinsman, Giovanni Sforza. The Pope accepted
him as son-in-law, for, although he was only Count of Cotognola and
vicar of Pesaro, he was an independent sovereign, and he belonged to the
illustrious house of Sforza. Alexander had entered early into such close
relations with the Sforza that Cardinal Ascanio became all-powerful in
Rome. Giovanni, an illegitimate son of Costanzo of Pesaro, and only by
the indulgence of Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII his hereditary heir, was a
man of twenty-six, well formed and carefully educated, like most of the
lesser Italian despots. He had married Maddalena, the beautiful sister
of Elisabetta Gonzaga, in 1489, on the very day upon which the latter
was joined in wedlock to Duke Guidobaldo of Urbino. He had, however,
been a widower since August 8, 1490, on which date his wife died in
childbirth.

Sforza hastened to accept the offered hand of the young Lucretia before
any of her other numerous suitors could win it. On leaving Pesaro he
first went to the castle of Nepi, which Alexander VI had given to
Cardinal Ascanio. There he remained a few days and then came quietly to
Rome, October 31, 1492. Here he took up his residence in the cardinal's
palace of S. Clement, erected by Domenico della Rovere in the Borgo. It
is still standing, and in good preservation, opposite the Palazzo
Giraud. The Ferrarese ambassador announced Sforza's arrival to his
master, remarking, "He will be a great man as long as this pope rules."
He explained the retirement in which Sforza lived by stating that the
man to whom Lucretia had been legally betrothed was also in Rome.[20]

The young Count Gasparo had come to Rome with his father to make good
his claim to Lucretia, through whom he hoped to obtain great favor. Here
he found another suitor of whom he had hitherto heard nothing, but whose
presence had become known, and he fell into a rage when the Pope
demanded from him a formal renunciation. Lucretia, at that time a child
of only twelve and a half years, thus became the innocent cause of a
contest between two suitors, and likewise the subject of public gossip
for the first time. November 5th the plenipotentiary of Ferrara wrote
his master, "There is much gossip about Pesaro's marriage; the first
bridegroom is still here, raising a great hue and cry, as a Catalan,
saying he will protest to all the princes and potentates of Christendom;
but will he, will he, he will have to submit." On the ninth of November
the same ambassador wrote, "Heaven prevent this marriage of Pesaro from
bringing calamities. It seems that the King (of Naples) is angry on
account of it, judging by what Giacomo, Pontano's nephew told the Pope
the day before yesterday. The matter is still undecided. Both the
suitors are given fair words; both are here. However, it is believed
that Pesaro will carry the day, especially as Cardinal Ascanio, who is
powerful in deeds as well as in words, is looking after his interests."

In the meantime, November 8th, the marriage contract between Don Gasparo
and Lucretia was formally dissolved. The groom and his father merely
expressed the hope that the new alliance would reach a favorable
consummation, and Gasparo bound himself not to marry within one year.
Giovanni Sforza, however, was not yet certain of his victory; December
9th the Mantuan agent Fioravante Brognolo, wrote the Marchese Gonzaga,
"The affairs of the illustrious nobleman, Giovanni of Pesaro, are still
undecided; it looks to me as if the Spanish nobleman to whom his
Highness's niece was promised would not give her up. He has a great
following in Spain, consequently the Pope is inclined to let things take
their own course for a time, and not force them to a conclusion."[21]
Even as late as February, 1493, there was talk of a marriage of Lucretia
with the Spanish Conde de Prada, and not until this project was
relinquished was she betrothed to Giovanni Sforza.[22]

In the meantime Sforza had returned to Pesaro, whence he sent his proxy,
Nicolo de Savano, to Rome to conclude the marriage contract. The Count
of Aversa surrendered his advantage and suffered his grief to be
assuaged by the payment to him of three thousand ducats. Thereupon,
February 2, 1493, the betrothal of Sforza and Lucretia was formally
ratified in the Vatican, in the presence of the Milanese ambassador and
the intimate friends and servants of Alexander, Juan Lopez, Juan
Casanova, Pedro Caranza, and Juan Marades. The Pope's daughter, who was
to be taken home by her husband within one year, received a dowry of
thirty-one thousand ducats.

When the news of this event reached Pesaro, the fortunate Sforza gave a
grand celebration in his palace. "They danced in the great hall, and the
couples, hand in hand, issued from the castle, led by Monsignor Scaltes,
the Pope's plenipotentiary, and the people in their joy joined in and
danced away the hours in the streets of the city."[23]


FOOTNOTES:

[17] Cum simonia et mille ribalderie et inhonestate si è venduto il
Pontificato che è cose ignominiosa et detestabile. Despatch of Giacomo
Trotti, Ambassador of Ferrara in Milan, to the Duke Ercole, August 28,
1492, in the archives of Modena.

[18] These stanzas were written by Hieronymus Porcius, who printed them
in Hieronym. Porcius Patritius Romanus Rotæ Primarius Auditor....
Commentarius; a rare publication of Eucharius Silber, Rome, September
18, 1493. The stanzas of Michele Ferno of Milan conclude:

  Borgia stirps: bos: atque Ceres transcendit Olympo,
  Cantabunt nomen sæcula cuncta suum;

which turned out to be a true prophecy. See Michæl Fernus Historia nova
Alexandri VI ab Innocentii obitu VIII; an equally rare publication of
the same Eucharius Silber, A. 1493.

[19] Ex arce Spoletina, die v. Oct. (Di propria mano). Vr. vti fr. Cesar
de Borja Elect. Valentin. Published by Reumont in Archiv. Stor. Ital.
Serie 3, T. xvii, 1873. 3 Dispensa.

[20] Era venuto il primo marito de la dicta nepote, qual fu rimesso a
Napoli, non visto da niuno.... Despatch of Gianandrea Boccaccio, Bishop
of Modena, Rome, November 2, 1492, and November 5 and 9. Archives of
Modena.

[21] Despatch of that date in the archives of Mantua. Lucretia was still
sometimes designated as the Pope's niece.

[22] Gianandrea Boccaccio to Duke Ercole, Rome, February 25, 1493.

[23] Ms. Memoirs of Pesaro, by Pietro Marzetti and Ludovico Zacconi, in
the Bibl. Oliveriana of Pesaro.




CHAPTER VII

LUCRETIA'S FIRST MARRIAGE


Alexander had a residence furnished for Lucretia close to the Vatican;
it was a house which Cardinal Battista Zeno had built in 1483, and was
known after his church as the Palace of S. Maria in Portico. It was on
the left side of the steps of S. Peter's, almost opposite the Palace of
the Inquisition. The building of Bernini's Colonnade has, however,
changed the appearance of the neighborhood so that it is no longer
recognizable.

The youthful Lucretia held court in her own palace, which was under the
management of her maid of honor and governess, Adriana Orsini. Alexander
had induced this kinswoman of his to leave the Orsini palace and to take
up her abode with Lucretia in the palace of S. Maria in Portico, where
we shall frequently see them and another woman who was only too close to
the Pope.

Vannozza remained in her own house in the Regola quarter. Her husband
had been made commandant or captain of the Torre di Nona, of which
Alexander shortly made him warden, a position of great trust, and Canale
gave himself up eagerly to his important and profitable duties. From
this time Vannozza and her children saw each other but little, although
they were not completely separated. They continued to communicate with
each other, but the mother profited only indirectly by the good fortune
and greatness of her offspring. Vannozza never allowed herself, nor did
Alexander permit her, to have any influence in the Vatican, and her name
seldom appears in the records of the time.

Donna Lucretia was now beginning to maintain the state of a great
princess. She received the numerous connections of her house, as well as
the friends and flatterers of the now all-powerful Borgia. Strange it is
that the very man who, after the stormy period of her life, was to take
her to a haven of rest should appear there about the time of her
betrothal to Sforza, and while the contract was being contested by Don
Gasparo.

Among the Italian princes who at that period either sent ambassadors or
came in person to Rome to render homage to the new Pope was the
hereditary prince of Ferrara. In all Italy there was no other court so
brilliant as that of Ercole d'Este and his spouse Eleonora of Aragon, a
daughter of King Ferdinand of Naples. She, however, died about this
time; namely, October 11, 1493. One of her children, Beatrice, had been
married in December, 1490, to Ludovico il Moro, the brilliant monster
who was Regent of Milan in place of his nephew Giangaleazzo; her other
daughter, Isabella, one of the most beautiful and magnificent women of
her day, was married in 1490, when she was only sixteen years of age, to
the Marchese Francesco Gonzaga of Mantua. Alfonso was heir to the title,
and on February 12, 1491, when he was only fifteen years old, he married
Anna Sforza, a sister of the same Giangaleazzo.

In November, 1492, his father sent him to Rome to recommend his state to
the favor of the Pope, who received the youthful scion of the house of
Sforza,--into which his own daughter was to marry,--with the highest
honors. Don Alfonso lived in the Vatican, and during his visit, which
lasted for several weeks, he not only had an opportunity, but it was his
duty to call on Donna Lucretia. He was filled with amazement when he
first beheld the beautiful child with her golden hair and intelligent
blue eyes, and nothing was farther from his mind than the idea that the
Sforza's betrothed would enter the castle of the Este family at Ferrara,
as his own wife, nine years later.

The letter of thanks which the prince's father wrote to the Pope shows
how great were the honors with which the son had been received. The duke
says:

     MOST HOLY FATHER AND LORD, MY HONORED MASTER: I kiss your
     Holiness's feet and commend myself to you in all humility. What
     honor and praise was due your Holiness I have long known, and now
     the letters of the Bishop of Modena, my ambassador, and also of
     others, not alone those of my dearly beloved first born, Alfonso,
     but of all the members of his suite, show how much I owe you. They
     tell me how your Highness included us all, me and mine, within the
     measure of your love, and overwhelmed all with presents, favors,
     mercy, and benevolence on my son's arrival in Rome and during his
     stay there. Therefore I acknowledge that I have for a long time
     been indebted to your Holiness, and now am still more so on account
     of this. My obligation is more than I can ever repay, and I promise
     that my gratitude shall be eternal and measureless like the world.
     As your most dutiful servant I shall always be ready to perform
     anything which may be acceptable to your Holiness, to whom I
     recommend myself and mine in all humility. Your Holiness's son and
     servant,

  ERCOLE,
  Duke of Ferrara.
  [FERRARA, _January 3, 1493_.]

The letter shows how great was the duke's anxiety to remain on good
terms with the Pope.

He was a vassal in Ferrara of the Roman Church, which was endeavoring
to transform itself into a monarchy. The princes, as well as the
republicans of Italy,--at least those whose possessions were close to
the sphere of action of the Holy See or were its vassals,--studied every
new pope with suspicion and fear, and also with curiosity to see in what
direction nepotism would develop under him. How easily Alexander VI
might have again taken up the plans of the house of Borgia where they
had been interrupted by the death of his uncle Calixtus, and have
followed in the footsteps of Sixtus IV!

Moreover, it was only ten years since the last named pope had, in
conjunction with Venice, waged war on Ferrara.

Ercole had maintained friendly relations with Alexander VI when he was
only a cardinal; Rodrigo Borgia had even been godfather to his son
Alfonso when he was baptized. For his other son, Ippolito, the duke,
through his ambassador in Rome, Gianandrea Boccaccio, endeavored to
secure a cardinal's cap. The ambassador applied to the most influential
of Alexander's confidants, Ascanio Sforza, the chamberlain Marades, and
Madonna Adriana. The Pope desired to make his son Cæsar a cardinal, and
Boccaccio hoped that the youthful Ippolito would be his companion in
good fortune. The ambassador gave Marades to understand that the two
young men, one of whom was Archbishop of Valencia, the other of Gran,
would make a good pair. "Their ages are about the same; I believe that
Valencia is not more than sixteen years old, while our Strigonia (Gran)
is near that age." Marades replied that this was not quite correct, as
Ippolito was not yet fourteen, and the Archbishop of Valencia was in his
eighteenth year.[24]

The youthful Cæsar was stirred by other desires than those for spiritual
honors. He assumed the hated garb of the priest only on his father's
command. Although he was an archbishop he had only the first tonsure.
His life was wholly worldly. It was even said that the King of Naples
wanted him to marry one of his natural daughters and that if he did so
he would relinquish the priesthood. The Ferrarese ambassador called upon
him March 17, 1493, in his house in Trastevere, by which was probably
meant the Borgo. The picture which Boccaccio on this occasion gave Duke
Ercole of this young man of seventeen years is an important and
significant portrait, and the first we have of him.

"I met Cæsar yesterday in the house in Trastevere; he was just on his
way to the chase, dressed in a costume altogether worldly; that is, in
silk,--and armed. He had only a little tonsure like a simple priest. I
conversed with him for a while as we rode along. I am on intimate terms
with him. He possesses marked genius and a charming personality; he
bears himself like a great prince; he is especially lively and merry,
and fond of society. Being very modest, he presents a much better and
more distinguished appearance than his brother, the Duke of Gandia,
although the latter is also highly endowed. The archbishop never had any
inclination for the priesthood. His benefices, however, bring him in
more than sixteen thousand ducats annually. If the projected marriage
takes place, his benefices will fall to another brother (Giuffrè), who
is about thirteen years old."[25]

It will be seen that the ambassador specially mentions Cæsar's buoyant
nature. This was one of Alexander's most characteristic traits, and both
Cæsar and Lucretia who was noted for it later, had inherited it from
him. So far as his prudence was concerned, it was proclaimed six years
later by a no less distinguished man than Giuliano della Rovere, who
afterwards became pope under the name of Julius II.

The Duke of Gandia was in Rome at this time, but it was his intention to
set out for Spain to see his spouse immediately after the celebration of
the marriage of Sforza and Lucretia. Lucretia's wedding was to take
place on S. George's day, but was postponed, as it was found impossible
for the bridegroom to arrive in time. Alexander took the greatest
pleasure in making the arrangements for setting up his daughter's
establishment. Her happiness--or, what to him was the same thing, her
greatness--meant much to him. He loved her passionately, superlatively,
as the Ferrarese ambassador wrote his master.[26] On the ambassador's
suggestion the Duke of Ferrara sent as a wedding gift a pair of large
silver hand basins with the accompanying vessels, all of the finest
workmanship. Two residences were proposed for the young pair; the palace
of S. Maria in Portico and the one near the castle of S. Angelo, which
had belonged to the Cardinal Domenicus Porta of Aleria, who died
February 4, 1493. The former, in which Lucretia was already living, was
chosen.

At last Sforza arrived. June 9th he made his entry by way of the
Porta del Popolo, and was received by the whole senate, his
brothers-in-law, and the ambassadors of the Powers. Lucretia, attended
by several maids of honor, had taken a position in a loggia of her
palace to see her bridegroom and his suite on their way to the Vatican.
As he rode by, Sforza greeted her right gallantly, and his bride
returned his salutation. He was most graciously received by his
father-in-law.

[Illustration: CHURCH OF ARA COELI, ROME.]

Sforza was a man of attractive appearance, as we may readily discover
from a medal which he had struck ten years later, which represents him
with long, flowing locks and a full beard. The mouth is sensitive, the
under lip slightly drawn; the nose is somewhat aquiline; the forehead
smooth and lofty. The proportions of his features are noble, but lacking
in character.

Three days after his arrival, that is, June 12th, the nuptials were
celebrated in the Vatican with ostentatious publicity. Alexander had
invited the nobility, the officials of Rome, and the foreign ambassadors
to be present. There was a banquet, followed by a licentious comedy,
which is described by Infessura.

To corroborate the short account given by this Roman, and at the same
time to render the picture more complete, we reproduce, word for word,
the description which the Ferrarese ambassador, Boccaccio, sent his
master in a communication dated June 13th:

     Yesterday, the twelfth of the present month, the union was publicly
     celebrated in the palace, with the greatest pomp and extravagance.
     All the Roman matrons were invited, also the most influential
     citizens, and many cardinals, twelve in number, stood near her, the
     Pope occupying the throne in their midst. The palace and all the
     apartments were filled with people, who were overcome with
     amazement. The lord of Pesaro celebrated his betrothal to his wife,
     and the Bishop of Concordia delivered a sermon. The only
     ambassadors present, however, were the Venetian, the Milanese and
     myself, and one from the King of France.

     Cardinal Ascanio thought that I ought to present the gift during
     the ceremony, so I had some one ask the Pope, to whom I remarked
     that I did not think it proper, and that it seemed better to me to
     wait a little while. All agreed with me, whereupon the Pope called
     to me and said, "It seems to me to be best as you say";
     consequently it was arranged that I should bring the present to the
     palace late in the evening. His Holiness gave a small dinner in
     honor of the bride and groom, and there were present the Cardinals
     Ascanio, S. Anastasia, and Colonna; the bride and groom, and next
     to him the Count of Pitigliano, captain of the Church; Giuliano
     Orsini; Madonna Giulia Farnese, of whom there is so much talk (de
     qua est tantus sermo); Madonna Teodorina and her daughter, the
     Marchesa of Gerazo; a daughter of the above named captain, wife of
     Angelo Farnese, Madonna Giulia's brother. Then came a younger
     brother of Cardinal Colonna and Madonna Adriana Ursina. The last is
     mother-in-law of the above mentioned Madonna Giulia. She had the
     bride educated in her own home, where she was treated as a niece of
     the Pope. Adriana is the daughter of the Pope's cousin, Pedro de
     Mila, deceased, with whom your Excellency was acquainted.

     When the table was cleared, which was between three and four
     o'clock in the morning, the bride was presented with the gift sent
     by the illustrious Duke of Milan; it consisted of five different
     pieces of gold brocade and two rings, a diamond and a ruby, the
     whole worth a thousand ducats. Thereupon I presented your
     Highness's gift with suitable words of congratulation on the
     marriage and good wishes for the future, together with the offer of
     your services. The present greatly pleased the Pope. To the thanks
     of the bride and groom he added his own expressions of unbounded
     gratitude. Then Ascanio offered his present, which consisted of a
     complete drinking service of silver washed with gold, worth about a
     thousand ducats. Cardinal Monreale gave two rings, a sapphire and a
     diamond--very beautiful--and worth three thousand ducats; the
     prothonotary Cesarini gave a bowl and cup worth eight hundred
     ducats; the Duke of Gandia a vessel worth seventy ducats; the
     prothonotary Lunate a vase of a certain composition like jasper,
     ornamented with silver, gilded, which was worth seventy to eighty
     ducats. These were all the gifts presented at this time; the other
     cardinals, ambassadors, etc., will bring their presents when the
     marriage is celebrated, and I will do whatever is necessary. It
     will, I think, be performed next Sunday, but this is not certain.

     In conclusion, the women danced, and, as an interlude, a good
     comedy was given, with songs and music. The Pope and all the others
     were present. What shall I add? There would be no end to my letter.
     Thus we passed the whole night, and whether it was good or bad your
     Highness may decide.


FOOTNOTES:

[24] Boccaccio's despatches, Rome, February 25, March 11, 1493.

[25] Magni et excellentis ingenii et preclare indolis; præ se fert
speciem fillii magni Principis, et super omnia ilaris et jocundus, e
tutto festa: cum magna siquidem modestia est longe melioris et
prestantioris aspectus, quam sit dux Candie germanus suus. Anchora lue è
dotato di bone parte. Despatch of March 19, 1493.

[26] Mai fù visto il più carnale homo; l'hama questa madona Lucrezia in
superlativo gradu. Boccaccio's Despatch, Rome, April 4, 1493. The word
_carnale_ is to be taken only in the sense of nepotism, as it is plainly
so used elsewhere by the ambassador.




CHAPTER VIII

FAMILY AFFAIRS


Lucretia's marriage with Giovanni Sforza confirmed the political
alliance which Alexander VI had made with Ludovico il Moro. The Regent
of Milan wanted to invite Charles VIII of France into Italy to make war
upon King Ferdinand of Naples, so that he himself might ultimately gain
possession of the duchy, for he was consumed with ambition and
impatience to drive his sickly nephew, Giangaleazzo, from the throne.
The latter, however, was the consort of Isabella of Aragon, a daughter
of Alfonso of Calabria and the grandson of Ferdinand himself.

The alliance of Venice, Ludovico, the Pope, and some of the other
Italian nobles had become known in Rome as early as April 25th. This
league, clearly, was opposed to Naples; and its court, therefore, was
thrown into the greatest consternation.

Nevertheless, King Ferdinand congratulated the Lord of Pesaro upon his
marriage. He looked upon him as a kinsman, and Sforza had likewise been
accepted by the house of Aragon. June 15, 1493, the king wrote to him
from Capua as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS COUSIN AND OUR DEAREST FRIEND: We have
     received your letter of the twenty-second of last month, in which
     you inform us of your marriage with the illustrious Donna Lucretia,
     the niece of his Holiness our Master. We are much pleased, both
     because we always have and still do feel the greatest love for
     yourself and your house, and also because we believe that nothing
     could be of greater advantage to you than this marriage. Therefore
     we wish you the best of fortune, and we pray God, with you, that
     this alliance may increase your own power and fame and that of your
     State.[27]

Eight days earlier the same king had sent his ambassador to Spain a
letter, in which he asked the protection of Ferdinand and Isabella
against the machinations of the Pope, whose ways he described as
"loathsome"; in this he was referring, not to his political actions, but
to his personal conduct. Giulia Farnese, whom Infessura noticed among
the wedding guests and described as "the Pope's concubine," caused
endless gossip about herself and his Holiness. This young woman
surrendered herself to an old man of sixty-two whom she was also
compelled to honor as the head of the Church. There is no doubt whatever
about her years of adultery, but we can not understand the cause of her
passion; for however powerful the demoniac nature of Alexander VI may
have been, it must by this time have lost much of its magnetic strength.
Perhaps this young and empty-headed creature, after she had once
transgressed and the feeling of shame had passed, was fascinated by the
spectacle of the sacred master of the world, before whom all men
prostrated themselves, lying at her feet--the feet of a weak child.

There is also the suspicion that the cupidity of the Farnese was the
cause of the criminal relations, for Giulia's sins were rewarded by
nothing less than the bestowal of the cardinal's purple on her brother
Alessandro. The Pope had already designated him, among others, for the
honor, but the nomination was delayed by the opposition of the Sacred
College, over which Giuliano della Rovere presided. King Ferdinand also
encouraged this opposition, and on the very day on which Lucretia's
marriage to Pesaro was celebrated he placed his army at the disposal of
the cardinals who refused to sanction the appointment.

Her consort, Sforza, was now a great man in Rome, and intimate with all
the Borgias. June 16th he was seen by the side of the Duke of Gandia,
decked in costly robes glittering with precious stones, as if "they were
two kings," riding out to meet the Spanish ambassador. Gandia was
preparing for his journey to Spain. He had been betrothed to Doña Maria
Enriquez, a beautiful lady of Valencia, shortly before his father
ascended the papal throne; there is a brief of Alexander's dated October
6, 1492, in which he grants his son and his spouse the right to obtain
absolution from any confessor whatsoever. The high birth of Doña Maria
shows what brilliant connections the bastard Giovanni Borgia was able to
make as a grandee of Spain, for she was the daughter of Don Enrigo
Enriquez, High-Treasurer of Leon, and Doña Maria de Luna, who was
closely connected with the royal house of Aragon. Don Giovanni left
Rome, August 4, 1493, to board a Spanish galley in Civitavecchia.
According to the report of the Ferrarese agent, he took with him an
incredible number of trinkets, with whose manufacture the goldsmiths of
Rome had busied themselves for months.

Of Alexander's sons there now remained in Rome, Cæsar, who was to be
made a cardinal, and Giuffrè, who was destined to be a prince in Naples,
for the quarrel between the Pope and King Ferdinand had been settled
through the intermediation of Spain. She caused Alexander to break with
France, and to sever his connection with Ludovico il Moro. This
surprising change was immediately confirmed by the marriage of Don
Giuffrè, a boy of scarcely thirteen, and Donna Sancia, a natural
daughter of Duke Alfonso of Calabria. August 16, 1493, the marriage was
performed by proxy in the Vatican, and the wedding took place later in
Naples.

Cæsar himself became cardinal, September 20, 1493, the stain of his
birth having been removed by the Cardinals Pallavicini and Orsini, who
had been charged with legitimating him. February 25, 1493, Gianandrea
Boccaccio wrote to Ferrara regarding the legitimating of Cæsar,
ironically saying, "They wish to remove the blot of being a natural son,
and very rightly; because he is legitimate, having been born in the
house while the woman's husband was living. This much is certain: the
husband was sometimes in the city and at others traveling about in the
territory of the Church and in her interest." The ambassador, however,
never mentions the name of this man, which, however, Infessura says was
Domenico d'Arignano.

Ippolito d'Este and Alessandro Farnese were made cardinals the same day.
To his sister's adultery this young libertine owed his advancement in
the Church, a fact so notorious that the wits of the Roman populace
called him the "petticoat cardinal." The jubilant kinsmen of Giulia
Farnese saw in her only the instrument of their advancement. Girolama
Farnese, Giulia 's sister, wrote to her husband, Puccio, from Casignano,
October 21, 1493, "You will have received letters from Florence before
mine reaches you and have learned what benefices have fallen to Lorenzo,
and all that Giulia has secured for him, and you will be greatly
pleased."[28]

Even the Republic of Florence sought to profit by Alexander's relations
with Giulia; for Puccio, her brother-in-law, was sent to Rome as
plenipotentiary. The Florentines had despatched this famous jurist to
the papal city immediately after Alexander's accession to the throne, to
swear allegiance, and later he was her agent for a year in Faenza, where
he conducted the government for Astorre Manfredi, who was a minor. At
the beginning of the year 1494 he went as ambassador to Rome, where he
died in August.[29]

His brother, Lorenzo Pucci, subsequently attained to eminence in the
Church under Leo X, becoming a powerful cardinal.

The Farnese and their numerous kin were now in high favor with the Pope
and all the Borgias. In October, 1493, they invited Alexander and Cæsar
to a family reunion at the castle of Capodimonte, where Madonna
Giovanella, Giulia's mother, was to prepare a banquet. Whether or not
this really took place we are ignorant, although we do know that
Alexander was in Viterbo the last of October.

In 1492 Giulia gave birth to a daughter, who was named Laura. The child
officially passed as that of her husband, Orsini, although in reality
the Pope was its father. The Farnese and the Pucci knew the secret and
shamelessly endeavored to profit by it. Giulia cared so little for the
world's opinion that she occupied the palace of S. Maria in Portico, as
if she were a blood relation of Lucretia. Alexander himself had put her
there as a lady of honor to his daughter. Her husband, Orsini,
preferred, or was compelled, to live in his castle of Bassanello, or to
stay on one of the estates which the Pope had presented to him, the
husband of Madonna Giulia, "Christ's bride," as the satirists called
her, instead of remaining in Rome to be a troublesome witness of his
shame.

A remarkable letter of Lorenzo Pucci to his brother Giannozzo, written
the 23d and 24th of December, 1493, from Rome, discloses these and other
family secrets. He shows us the most private scenes in Lucretia's
palace. Lorenzo had been invited by Cardinal Farnese to go with him to
Rome to witness the Christmas festivities. He accompanied him from
Viterbo to Rignano, where the barons of the Savelli house, kinsmen of
the cardinal, formally received them, after which they continued their
journey on horseback to Rome. Lorenzo repeated to his brother the
confidential conversation which he had enjoyed with the cardinal on the
way. Even as early as this there was talk of finding a suitable husband
for Giulia's little daughter. The cardinal unfolded his idea to Lorenzo.
Piero de' Medici wished to give his own daughter to the youthful Astorre
Manfredi of Faenza, but Farnese desired to bring about an alliance
between Astorre and Giulia's daughter. He hoped to be able to convince
Piero that this union would be advantageous for both himself and the
Republic of Florence, and would strengthen his relations with the Holy
See. The affair would be handled so that it would appear that it was
entirely due to the wishes of the Pope and of Piero. In this the
cardinal counted on the consent of both Alexander and Giulia, and on the
influence of Madonna Adriana.

Lorenzo Pucci replied to the cardinal's confidence as follows:
"Monsignor, I certainly think that our Master (the Pope) will give a
daughter to this gentleman (Astorre), for I believe that this child is
the Pope's daughter, just as Lucretia is, and your Highness's
niece."[30] In his letter Lorenzo does not say whether the cardinal
made any reply to this audacious statement, which would have brought a
blush to the face of any honorable man. Probably it only caused
Alessandro Farnese a little smile of assent. The bold Pucci repeated his
opinion in the same letter, saying, "She is the child of the Pope, the
niece of the cardinal, and the putative daughter of Signor Orsini, to
whom our Master intends to give three or four more castles near
Bassanello. In addition, the cardinal says that in case his brother
Angelo remains without heir, this child will inherit his property, as
she is very dear to him, and he is already thinking of this; and by this
means the illustrious Piero will obtain the support of the cardinal, who
will be under everlasting obligations to him." Lorenzo did not overlook
himself in these schemes; he openly expressed the wish that his brother
Puccio would come to Rome--as ambassador of the Republic, which he
did--and that he might secure through the influence of Madonna Adriana
and Giulia a number of good places.

Lorenzo continued his letter December 24th, describing a scene in
Lucretia's palace, and his narrative shows her, and especially Giulia,
as plainly as if they stood before us.

     GIANNOZZO MINE: Yesterday evening I wrote you as above.
     To-day, which is Easter evening, I rode with Monsignor Farnese to
     the papal palace to vespers, and before his Eminence entered the
     chapel I called at the house S. Maria in Portico to see Madonna
     Giulia. She had just finished washing her hair when I entered; she
     was sitting by the fire with Madonna Lucretia, the daughter of our
     Master, and Madonna Adriana, and they all received me with great
     cordiality. Madonna Giulia asked me to sit by her side; she thanked
     me for having taken Jeronima (Girolama) home, and said to me that I
     must, by all means, bring her there again to please her. Madonna
     Adriana asked, 'Is it true that she is not allowed to come here any
     more than she was permitted to go to Capodimonte and Marta?' I
     replied that I knew nothing about that, and it was enough for me if
     I had made Madonna Giulia happy by taking her home, for in her
     letters she had requested me to do so, and now they could do as
     they pleased. I wanted to leave it to Madonna Giulia, who was alive
     to all her opportunities, to meet her as she saw fit, as she wanted
     her to see her magnificence just as much as Jeronima (Girolama)
     herself wanted to see it. Thereupon Madonna Giulia thanked me
     warmly and said I had made her very happy. I then reminded her how
     greatly I was beholden to her Highness by what she had done for me,
     and that I could not show my gratitude better than by taking
     Madonna Jeronima (Girolama) home. She answered that such a trifle
     deserved no thanks. She hopes to be of still greater help to me,
     and says I shall find her so at the right time. Madonna Adriana
     joined in saying I might be certain that it was through neither the
     chancellor, Messer Antonio, nor his deputy, but owing to the favor
     of Madonna Giulia herself, that I had obtained the benefices.

     In order not to contradict, I replied that I knew that, and I again
     thanked her Highness. Thereupon Madonna Giulia asked with much
     interest after Messer Puccio and said, "We will see to it that some
     day he will come here as ambassador; and although, when he was
     here, we, in spite of all our endeavors, were unable to effect it,
     we could now accomplish it without any difficulty." She assured me
     also that the cardinal had mentioned to her the previous evening
     the matter we had discussed on the road, and she urged me to write;
     she thought if the affair were handled by yourself, the illustrious
     Piero would be favorably disposed toward it. Thus far has the
     matter progressed. Giulia also wanted me to see the child; she is
     now well grown, and, it seems to me, resembles the Pope, _adeo ut
     vere ex ejus semine orta dici possit_. Madonna Giulia has grown
     somewhat stouter and is a most beautiful creature. She let down
     her hair before me and had it dressed; it reached down to her feet;
     never have I seen anything like it; she has the most beautiful
     hair. She wore a head-dress of fine linen, and over it a sort of
     net, light as air, with gold threads interwoven in it. In truth it
     shone like the sun! I would have given a great deal if you could
     have been present to have informed yourself concerning that which
     you have often wanted to know. She wore a lined robe in the
     Neapolitan fashion, as did also Madonna Lucretia, who, after a
     little while, went out to remove it. She returned shortly in a gown
     almost entirely of violet velvet. When vespers were over and the
     cardinals were departing, I left them.

The close association with Giulia, to whose adulterous relations with
her father Lucretia was the daily witness, if not a school of vice for
her, at least must have kept her constantly in contact with it. Could a
young creature of only fourteen years remain pure in such an atmosphere?
Must not the immorality in the midst of which she was forced to live
have poisoned her senses, dulled her ideas of morality and virtue, and
finally have penetrated her own character?


FOOTNOTES:

[27] Cod. Aragon, ii, 2.67, ed Trinchera.

[28] Carte Strozziane, filz 343. In the archives of Florence.

[29] Lelia Ursina de Farnesio congratulated him on his appointment,
January 13, 1494. Ibidem.

[30] In the earlier edition of this work I found some difficulty in the
passage: "Chredo che questa puta sia figlia del Papa, como Madonna
Luchretia è nipote di S. R. Signoria." I am now convinced that the è is
an error of the writer or the copyist and should be simply the
conduction e. Lorenzo Pucci's brother Giannozzo was married to Lucrezia
Bini, a Florentine, who is mentioned later in this same letter.




CHAPTER IX

LUCRETIA LEAVES ROME


By the end of the year 1493 Alexander had amply provided for all his
children. Cæsar was a cardinal, Giovanni was a duke in Spain, and
Giuffrè was soon to become a Neapolitan prince. The last, the Pope's
youngest son, was united in marriage, May 7, 1494, in Naples, to Donna
Sancia the same day on which his father-in-law, Alfonso, ascending the
throne as the successor of King Ferdinand, was crowned by the papal
legate, Giovanni Borgia. Don Giuffrè remained in Naples and became
Prince of Squillace. Giovanni also received great fiefs in that kingdom,
where he called himself Duke of Suessa and Prince of Teano.

For some time longer Lucretia's spouse remained in Rome, where the Pope
had taken him into his pay in accordance with an agreement with Ludovico
il Moro under whom Sforza served. His position at Alexander's court,
however, soon became ambiguous. His uncles had married him to Lucretia
to make the Pope a confederate and accomplice in their schemes which
were directed toward the overthrow of the reigning family of Naples.
Alexander, however, clung closely to the Aragonese dynasty; he invested
King Alfonso with the title to the kingdom of Naples, and declared
himself opposed to the expedition of Charles VIII.

Sforza thereby was thrown into no slight perplexity, and early in April,
1494, he informed his uncle Ludovico of his dubious position in the
following letter:

     Yesterday his Holiness said to me in the presence of Monsignor
     (Cardinal Ascanio), "Well, Giovanni Sforza! What have you to say to
     me?" I answered, "Holy Father, every one in Rome believes that your
     Holiness has entered into an agreement with the King of Naples, who
     is an enemy of the State of Milan. If this is so, I am in an
     awkward position, as I am in the pay of your Holiness and also in
     that of the State I have named. If things continue as they are, I
     do not know how I can serve one party without falling out with the
     other, and at the same time I do not wish to offend. I ask that
     your Holiness may be pleased to define my position so that I may
     not become an enemy of my own blood, and not act contrary to the
     obligations into which I have entered by virtue of my agreement
     with your Holiness and the illustrious State of Milan." He replied,
     saying that I took too much interest in his affairs, and that I
     should choose in whose pay I would remain according to my contract.
     And then he commanded the above-named monsignor to write to your
     Excellency what you will learn from his lordship's letter. My lord,
     if I had foreseen in what a position I was to be placed I would
     sooner have eaten the straw under my body than have entered into
     such an agreement. I cast myself in your arms. I beg your
     Excellency not to desert me, but to give me help, favor, and advice
     how to resolve the difficulty in which I am placed, so that I may
     remain a good servant of your Excellency. Preserve for me the
     position and the little nest which, thanks to the mercy of Milan,
     my ancestors left me, and I and my men of war will ever remain at
     the service of your Excellency.

  GIOVANNI SFORZA.
  ROME, _April, 1494_.

The letter plainly discloses other and deeper concerns of the writer;
such, for example, as the future possession of his domain of Pesaro. The
Pope's plans to destroy all the little tyrannies and fiefs in the States
of the Church had already been clearly revealed.[31]

Shortly after this, April 23d, Cardinal della Rovere slipped away from
Ostia and into France to urge Charles VIII to invade Italy, not to
attack Naples, but to bring this simoniacal pope before a council and
depose him.

At the beginning of July Ascanio Sforza, now openly at strife with
Alexander, also left the city. He went to Genazzano and joined the
Colonna, who were in the pay of France. Charles VIII was already
preparing to invade Italy. The Pope and King Alfonso met at Vicovaro
near Tivoli, July 14th.

In the meantime important changes had taken place in Lucretia's palace.
Her husband had hurriedly left Rome, as he could do as a captain of the
Church, in which capacity he had to join the Neapolitan army, now being
formed in Romagna under the command of the Duke Ferrante of Calabria. By
his nuptial contract he was bound to take his bride with him to Pesaro.
She was accompanied by her mother, Vannozza, Giulia Farnese, and Madonna
Adriana. Alexander himself, through fear of the plague, which had
appeared, commanded them to depart. The Mantuan ambassador in Rome
reported this to the Marchese Gonzaga, May 6th, and also wrote him on
the fifteenth as follows: "The illustrious Lord Giovanni will certainly
set out Monday or Tuesday accompanied by all three ladies, who, by the
Pope's order, will remain in Pesaro until August, when they will
return."[32]

Sforza's departure must have taken place early in June, for on the
eleventh of that month a letter from Ascanio was sent to his brother in
Milan informing him that the lord of Pesaro with his wife and Madonna
Giulia, the Pope's mistress, together with the mother of the Duke of
Gandia, and Giuffrè, had set out from Rome for Pesaro, and that his
Holiness had begged Madonna Giulia to come back soon.[33]

Alexander had returned to Rome from Vicovaro, July 18th, and on the 24th
he wrote his daughter the following letter:

     Alexander VI, Pope; by his own hand.

     DONNA LUCRETIA, DEAREST DAUGHTER: For several days we have
     had no letter from you. Your neglect to write us often and tell us
     how you and Don Giovanni, our beloved son, are, causes us great
     surprise. In future be more heedful and more diligent. Madonna
     Adriana and Giulia have reached Capodimonte, where they found the
     latter's brother dead. His death caused the cardinal and Giulia
     such distress that both fell sick of the fever. We have sent Pietro
     Caranza to look after them, and have provided physicians and
     everything necessary. We pray to God and the glorious Madonna that
     they will soon be restored. Of a truth Don Giovanni and yourself
     have displayed very little thought for me in this departure of
     Madonna Adriana and Giulia, since you allowed them to leave without
     our permission; for you should have remembered--it was your
     duty--that such a sudden departure without our knowledge would
     cause us the greatest displeasure. And if you say that they did so
     because Cardinal Farnese commanded it, you ought to have asked
     yourself whether it would please the Pope. However, it is done; but
     another time we will be more careful, and will look about to see
     where our interest lies. We are, thanks to God and the glorious
     Virgin, very well. We have had an interview with the illustrious
     King Alfonso, who showed us no less love and obedience than he
     would have shown had he been our own son. I cannot tell you with
     what satisfaction and contentment we took leave of each other. You
     may be certain that his Majesty stands ready to place his own
     person and every thing he has in the world at our service.

     We hope that all differences and quarrels in regard to the Colonna
     will be completely laid aside in three or four days. At present I
     have nothing more to say than to warn you to be careful of your
     health and constantly to pray to the Madonna. Given in Rome in S.
     Peter's, July 24, 1494.[34]

This letter is the first of the few extant written by Alexander to his
daughter. His reproof was due to the sudden departure of his
mistress--contrary to his original instructions--from Pesaro before
August. From there Giulia went to Capodimonte to look after her sick
brother Angiolo. According to a Venetian letter written by Marino
Sanuto, she had left Rome chiefly for the purpose of attending the
wedding of one of her kinsmen, and the writer describes her in this
place as "the Pope's favorite, a young woman of great beauty and
understanding, gracious and gentle."

Alexander's letter shows us that his mistress remained in communication
with him after her departure from Rome.


FOOTNOTES:

[31] This letter is printed in Atti e Memorie Modenesi, i. 433.

[32] Despatch of Giorgio Brognolo to the Marchese, Rome, May 6 and 15,
1494. Archives of Mantua.

[33] Despatch of Jacomo Trotti to Duke Ercole, Milan, June 11, 1494. May
1st the women were still in Rome, for on that date Madonna Adriana wrote
a letter from there to the Marchesa of Mantua recommending a friend to
her. The letter is in the Mantuan archives.

[34] The letter is published in Ugolino's Storia dei Conti e Duchi
d'Urbino, II. Document No. 13. I saw the original in the state archives
of Florence; only the address is in Alexander's hand, the rest is
written by the Chancellor Juan Lopez, who signs himself Jo. Datarius.




CHAPTER X

HISTORY AND DESCRIPTION OF PESARO


The storm which suddenly broke upon Alexander did not disturb Lucretia,
for on the eighth of June, 1494, she and her spouse entered Pesaro. In a
pouring rain, which interrupted the reception festivities, she took
possession of the palace of the Sforza, which was now to be her home.

The history of Pesaro up to that time is briefly as follows:

Ancient Pisaurum, which was founded by the Siculi, received its name
from the river which empties into the sea not far from the city, and
which is now known as the Foglia. In the year 570 of Rome the city
became a Roman colony. From the time of Augustus it belonged to the
fourth department of Italy, and from the time of Constantine to the
province of Flaminia. After the fall of the Roman Empire it suffered the
fate of all the Italian cities, especially in the great war of the Goths
with the Eastern emperor. Vitiges destroyed it; Belisarius restored it.

After the fall of the Gothic power, Pesaro was incorporated in the
Exarchate, and together with four other cities on the Adriatic--Ancona,
Fano, Sinigaglia, and Rimini--constituted the Pentapolis. When Ravenna
fell into the hands of the Lombard King Aistulf, Pesaro also became
Lombard; but later, by the deed of Pipin and Charles, it passed into the
possession of the Pope.

The subsequent history of the city is interwoven with that of the
Empire, the Church and the March of Ancona. For a long time imperial
counts resided there. Innocent III invested its title in Azzo d'Este,
the Lord of the March. During the struggles of the Hohenstaufen with the
papacy it first was in the possession of the emperor and later in that
of the Pope, who held it until the end of the thirteenth century, when
the Malatesta became podestas, and subsequently lords of the city. This
famous Guelph family from the castle of Verrucchio, which lies between
Rimini and S. Marino, fell heir to the fortress of Gradara, in the
territory of Pesaro, and by degrees extended its power in the direction
of Ancona. In 1285 Gianciotto Malatesta became lord of Pesaro, and on
his death, in 1304, his brother Pandolfo inherited his domain.

From that time the Malatesta, lords of nearby Rimini, controlled not
only Pesaro, but a large part of the March which they appropriated to
themselves when the papacy was removed to Avignon. They secured
themselves in the possession of Rimini, Pesaro, Fano, and Fossombrone by
an agreement made during the life of the famous Gil d'Albornoz,
confirming them in their position there as vicars of the Church. A
branch of this house resided in Pesaro until the time of Galeazzo
Malatesta. Threatened by his kinsman Sigismondo, the tyrant of Rimini,
and unable to hold Pesaro against his attack, he sold the city in 1445
for twenty thousand gold florins to Count Francesco Sforza, and the
latter gave it as a fief to his brother Alessandro, the husband of a
niece of Galeazzo. Sforza was the great condottiere who, after the
departure of the Visconti, ascended the throne of Milan as the first
duke of his house. While he was there establishing the ducal line of
Sforza, his brother Alessandro became the founder of the ruling house of
Pesaro.

This brave captain took possession of Pesaro in March, 1445; two years
later he received the papal investiture of the fief. He was married to
Costanza Varano, one of the most beautiful and intellectual women of the
Italian Renaissance.

To him she bore Costanzo and also a daughter, Battista, who later, as
the wife of Federico of Urbino, won universal admiration by her virtues
and talents. The neighboring courts of Pesaro and Urbino were connected
by marriage, and they vied with each other in fostering the arts and
sciences. Another illegitimate daughter of Alessandro's was Ginevra
Sforza--a woman no less admired in her day--celebrated, first as the
wife of Sante and then as that of Giovanni Bentivoglio, Lord of Bologna.

After the death of his wife, Alessandro Sforza married Sveva
Montefeltre, a daughter of Guidantonio of Urbino. After a happy reign he
died April 3, 1473, leaving his possessions to his son.

A year later Costanzo Sforza married Camilla Marzana d'Aragona, a
beautiful and spirituelle princess of the royal house of Naples. He
himself was brilliant and liberal. He died in 1483, when only
thirty-six, leaving no legitimate heirs, his sons Giovanni and Galeazzo
being natural children. His widow Camilla thenceforth conducted the
government of Pesaro for herself and her stepson Giovanni until
November, 1489, when she compelled him to assume entire control of it.

Such was the history of the Sforza family of Pesaro, into which Lucretia
now entered as the wife of this same Giovanni.

The domain of the Sforza at that time embraced the city of Pesaro and a
number of smaller possessions, called castles or villas; for example, S.
Angelo in Lizzola, Candelara, Montebaroccio, Tomba di Pesaro,
Montelabbate, Gradara, Monte S. Maria, Novilara, Fiorenzuola, Castel di
Mezzo, Ginestreto, Gabicce, Monteciccardo, and Monte Gaudio. In
addition, Fossombrone was taken by the Sforzas from the Malatesta.

The principality belonged, as we have seen, for a long time to the
Church, then to the Malatesta, and later to the Sforza, who, under the
title of vicars, held it as a hereditary fief, paying the Church
annually seven hundred and fifty gold ducats. The daughter of a Roman
pontiff must, therefore, have been the most acceptable consort the
tyrant of Pesaro could have secured under the existing circumstances,
especially as the popes were striving to destroy all the illegitimate
powers in the States of the Church. When Lucretia saw how small and
unimportant was her little kingdom, she must have felt that she did not
rank with the women of Urbino, Ferrara, and Mantua, or with those of
Milan and Bologna; but she, by the authority of the Pope, her own
father, had become an independent princess, and, although her territory
embraced only a few square miles, to Italy it was a costly bit of
ground.

Pesaro lies free and exposed in a wide valley. A chain of green hills
sweeps half around it like the seats in a theater, and the sea forms the
stage. At the ends of the semicircle are two mountains, Monte Accio and
Ardizio. The Foglia River flows through the valley. On its right bank
lies the hospitable little city with its towers and walls, and its
fortress on the white seashore. Northward, in the direction of Rimini,
the mountains approach nearer the water, while to the south the shore is
broader, and there, rising out of the mists of the sea, are the towers
of Fano. A little farther Cape Ancona is visible.

The sunny hills and their smiling valley under the blue canopy of
heaven, and near the shimmering sea, form a picture of entrancing
loveliness. It is the most peaceful spot on the Adriatic. It seems as if
the breezes from sea and land wafted a lyric harmony over the valley,
expanding the heart and filling the soul with visions of beauty and
happiness. Pesaro is the birthplace of Rosini, and also of Terenzio
Mamiani, the brilliant poet and statesman who devoted his great talents
to the regeneration of Italy.

The passions of the tyrants of this city were less ferocious than were
those of the other dynasties of that age, perhaps because their domain
was too small a stage for the dark deeds inspired by inordinate
ambition--although the human spirit does not always develop in harmony
with the influences of nature. One of the most hideous of evil doers was
Sigismondo Malatesta of mild and beautiful Rimini. The Sforzas of
Pesaro, however, seem generous and humane rulers in comparison with
their cousins of Milan. Their court was adorned by a number of noble
women whom Lucretia may have felt it her duty to imitate.

If, when Lucretia entered Pesaro, her soul--young as she was--was not
already dead to all agreeable sensations, she must have enjoyed for the
first time the blessed sense of freedom. To her, gloomy Rome, with the
dismal Vatican and its passions and crimes, must have seemed like a
prison from which she had escaped. It is true everything about her in
Pesaro was small when compared with the greatness of Rome, but here she
was removed from the direct influence of her father and brother, from
whom she was separated by the Apennines and a distance which, in that
age, was great.

The city of Pesaro, which now has more than twelve thousand, and with
its adjacent territory over twenty thousand inhabitants had then about
half as many. It had streets and squares with substantial specimens of
Gothic architecture, interspersed, however, even then, with numerous
palaces in the style of the Renaissance. A number of cloisters and
churches, whose ancient portals are still preserved, such as S.
Domenico, S. Francesco, S. Agostino, and S. Giovanni, rendered the city
imposing if not beautiful.

Pesaro's most important structures were the monuments of the ruling
dynasty, the stronghold on the seashore and the palace facing the public
square. The last was begun by Costanzo Sforza in 1474 and was completed
by his son Giovanni. Even to-day his name may be seen on the marble
tablet over the entrance. The castle with its four low, round towers or
bastions, all in ruin, and surrounded by a moat, stands at the end of
the city wall near the sea, and whatever strength it had was due to its
environment; in spite of its situation it appears so insignificant that
one wonders how, even in those days when the science of gunnery was in
its infancy, it could have had any value as a fortress.

The Sforza palace is still standing on the little public square of which
it occupies one whole side. It is an attractive, but not imposing
structure with two large courts. The Della Rovere, successors of the
Sforza in Pesaro, beautified it during the sixteenth century; they built
the noble façade which rests upon a series of six round arches. The
Sforza arms have disappeared from the palace, but in many places over
the portals and on the ceilings the inscription of Guidobaldus II,
duke, and the Della Rovere arms may be seen. Even in Lucretia's day the
magnificent banquet hall--the most beautiful room in the palace--was in
existence, and its size made it worthy of a great monarch. The lack of
decorations on the walls and of marble casings to the doors, like those
in the castle of Urbino, which fill the beholder with wonder, show how
limited were the means of the ruling dynasty of Pesaro. The rich ceiling
of the salon, made of gilded and painted woodwork, dates from the reign
of Duke Guidobaldo. All mementos of the time when Lucretia occupied the
palace have disappeared; it is animated by other memories--of the
subsequent court life of the Della Rovere family, when Bembo,
Castiglione, and Tasso frequently were guests there. Lucretia and the
suite that accompanied her could not have filled the wide rooms of the
palace; her mother, Madonna Adriana, and Giulia Farnese remained with
her only a short time. A young Spanish woman in her retinue, Doña
Lucretia Lopez, a niece of Juan Lopez, chancellor and afterward
cardinal, was married in Pesaro to Gianfrancesco Ardizio, the physician
and confidant of Giovanni Sforza.

In the palace there were few kinsmen of her husband besides his younger
brother Galeazzo, for the dynasty was not fruitful and was dying out.
Even Camilla d'Aragona, Giovanni's stepmother, was not there, for she
had left Pesaro for good in 1489, taking up her residence in a castle
near Parma.

In summer the beautiful landscape must have afforded the young princess
much delight. She doubtless visited the neighboring castle of Urbino,
where Guidobaldo di Montefetre and his spouse Elisabetta resided, and
which the accomplished Federico had made an asylum for the
cultivated. At that time Raphael, a boy of twelve, was living in Urbino,
a diligent pupil in his father's school.

[Illustration: TASSO.

From an engraving by Raffaelle Morghen.]

In summer Lucretia removed to one of the beautiful villas on a
neighboring hill. Her husband's favorite abode was Gradara, a lofty
castle overlooking the road to Rimini, whose red walls and towers are
still standing in good preservation. The most magnificent country place,
however, was the Villa Imperiale, which is a half hour's journey from
Pesaro, on Monte Accio, whence it looks down far over the land and sea.
It is a splendid summer palace worthy of a great lord and of people of
leisure, capable of enjoying the amenities of life. It was built by
Alessandro Sforza in the year 1464, its corner-stone having been laid by
the Emperor Frederic III when he was returning from his coronation as
Emperor of Rome; hence it received the name Villa Imperiale. It was
enlarged later by Eleonora Gonzaga, the wife of Francesco Maria della
Rovere, the heir of Urbino, and Giovanni Sforza's successor in the
dominion of Pesaro. Famous painters decorated it with allegoric and
historical pictures; Bembo and Bernardo Tasso sang of it in melodious
numbers, and there, in the presence of the Della Rovere court, Torquato
read his pastoral _Aminta_. This villa is now in a deplorable state of
decay. Pesaro offered but little in the way of entertainment for a young
woman accustomed to the society of Rome. The city had no nobility of
importance. The houses of Brizi, of Ondedei, of Giontini, Magistri,
Lana, and Ardizi, in their patriarchal existence, could offer Lucretia
no compensation for the inspiring intercourse with the grandees of Rome.
It is true the wave of culture which, thanks to the humanists, was
sweeping over Italy did reach Pesaro. The manufacture of majolica,
which, in its perfection, was not an unworthy successor of the pottery
of Greece and Etruria, flourished there and in the neighboring cities on
the Adriatic, and as far as Umbria. It had reached a considerable
development in the time of the Sforza. One of the oldest pieces of
majolica in the Correro Museum in Venice, Solomon worshiping the idol,
bears the date 1482. As early as the fourteenth century this art was
cultivated in Pesaro, and it was in a very nourishing condition during
the reign of Camilla d'Aragona. There are still some remains of the
productions of the old craftsmen of the city in the State-house of
Pesaro.

There, too, the intellectual movement manifested itself in other fields,
fostered by the Sforza or their wives, in emulation of Urbino and
Rimini, where Sigismondo Malatesta gathered about him poets and scholars
whom he pensioned during their lives, and for whom, when dead, he built
sarcophagi about the outer wall of the church. Camilla interested
herself especially in the cultivation of the sciences. In 1489 she
invited a noble Greek, Giorgio Diplovatazio, of Corfu, a kinsman of the
Laskaris and the Vatazes, who, fleeing from the Turks, had come to
Italy, and taken up his abode in Pesaro, where were living other Greek
exiles of the Angeli, Komnenen, and Paleologue families. Diplovatazio
had studied in Padua. Giovanni Sforza made him state's advocate of
Pesaro in 1492, and he enjoyed a brilliant reputation as a jurisprudent
until his death in 1541.[35]

Lucretia, consequently, found this illustrious man in Pesaro and might
have continued her studies under him and other natives of Greece if she
was so disposed. A library, which the Sforzas had collected, provided
her with the means for this end. Another scholar, however, no less
famous, Pandolfo Collenuccio, a poet, orator, and philologist, best
known by his history of Naples, had left Pesaro before Lucretia took up
her abode there. He had served the house of Sforza as secretary and in a
diplomatic capacity, and to his eloquence Lucretia's husband, Costanzo's
bastard, owed his investiture of the fief of Pesaro by Sixtus IV and
Innocent VIII. Collenuccio, however, fell under his displeasure and was
cast into prison in 1488 and subsequently banished, when he went to
Ferrara, where he devoted his services to the reigning family. He
accompanied Cardinal Ippolito to Rome, and here we find him in 1494 when
Lucretia was about to take up her residence in Pesaro. In Rome she may
have made the acquaintance of this scholar.[36]

Nor was the young poet Guido Posthumus Silvester in Pesaro during her
time, for he was then a student in Padua. Lucretia must have regretted
the absence from her court of this soulful and aspiring poet, and her
charming personality might have served him for an inspiration for verses
quite different from those which he later addressed to the Borgias.

Sforza's beautiful consort was received with open arms in Pesaro, where
she immediately made many friends. She was in the first charm of her
youthful bloom, and fate had not yet brought the trouble into her life
which subsequently made her the object either of horror or of pity. If
she enjoyed any real love in her married life with Sforza she would have
passed her days in Pesaro as happily as the queen of a pastoral comedy.
But this was denied her. The dark shadows of the Vatican reached even
to the Villa Imperiale on Monte Accio. Any day a despatch from her
father might summon her back to Rome. Her stay in Pesaro may also have
become too monotonous, too empty for her; perhaps, also, her husband's
position as condottiere in the papal army and in that of Venice
compelled him often to be away from his court.

Events which in the meantime had convulsed Italy took Lucretia back to
Rome, she having spent but a single year in Pesaro.


FOOTNOTES:

[35] Memorie di Tommaso Diplovatazio Patrizio Constantinopolitano e
Pesarese, da Annibale Olivieri. Pesaro, 1771.

[36] Regarding Collenuccio see the works of his compatriot Giulio
Perticari, Opp. Bologna, 1837. Vol. ii, 52 sqq.




CHAPTER XI

THE INVASION OF ITALY--THE PROFLIGATE WORLD


Early in September, 1494, Charles VIII marched into Piedmont, and the
affairs of all Italy suffered an immediate change. The Pope and his
allies Alfonso and Piero de' Medici found themselves almost defenseless
in a short time. As early as November 17th the King entered Florence.
Alexander was anxious to meet him with his own and the Neapolitan troops
at Viterbo, where Cardinal Farnese was legate; but the French overran
the Patrimonium without hindrance, and even the Pope's mistress, her
sister Girolama, and Madonna Adriana, who were Alexander's "heart and
eyes," fell into the hands of a body of French scouts.

The Mantuan agent, Brognolo, informed his master of this event in a
despatch dated November 29, 1494: "A calamity has happened which is also
a great insult to the Pope. Day before yesterday Madonna Hadriana and
Madonna Giulia and her sister set out from their castle of Capodimonte
to go to their brother the cardinal, in Viterbo, and, when about a mile
from that place, they met a troop of French cavalry by whom they were
taken prisoners, and led to Montefiascone, together with their suite of
twenty-five or thirty persons."

The French captain who made this precious capture was Monseigneur
d'Allegre, perhaps the same Ivo who subsequently entered the service of
Cæsar. "When he learned who the beautiful women were he placed their
ransom at three thousand ducats, and in a letter informed King Charles
whom he had captured, but the latter refused to see them. Madonna Giulia
wrote to Rome saying they were well treated, and asking that their
ransom be sent."[37]

The knowledge of this catastrophe caused Alexander the greatest dismay.
He immediately despatched a chamberlain to Marino, where Cardinal
Ascanio was to be found in the headquarters of the Colonna, and who, on
his urgent request, had returned November 2d, and had had an interview
with King Charles. He complained to the cardinal of the indignity which
had been put upon him, and asked his cooperation to secure the release
of the prisoners. He also wrote to Galeazzo of Sanseverino, who was
accompanying the king to Siena, and who, wishing to please the Pope,
urged Charles VIII to release the ladies. Accompanied by an escort of
four hundred of the French, they were led to the gates of Rome, where
they were received December 1st by Juan Marades, the Pope's
chamberlain.[38]

This romantic adventure caused a sensation throughout all Italy. The
people, instead of sympathizing with the Pope, ridiculed him
mercilessly. A letter from Trotti, the Ferrarese ambassador at the court
of Milan, to Duke Ercole, quotes the words which Ludovico il Moro,
the usurper of the throne of his nephew, whom he had poisoned, uttered
on this occasion concerning the Pope.

[Illustration: CHARLES VIII.

From an engraving by Pannier.]

"He (Ludovico) gravely reproved Monsignor Ascanio and Cardinal
Sanseverino for surrendering Madonna Giulia, Madonna Adriana, and
Hieronyma to his Holiness; for, since these ladies were the 'heart and
eyes' of the Pope, they would have been the best whip for compelling him
to do everything which was wanted of him, for he could not live without
them. The French, who captured them, received only three thousand ducats
as ransom, although the Pope would gladly have paid fifty thousand or
more simply to have them back again. The same duke received news from
Rome, and also from Angelo in Florence, that when the ladies entered,
his Holiness went to meet them arrayed in a black doublet bordered with
gold brocade, with a beautiful belt in the Spanish fashion, and with
sword and dagger. He wore Spanish boots and a velvet biretta, all very
gallant. The duke asked me, laughing, what I thought of it, and I told
him that, were I the Duke of Milan, like him, I would endeavor, with the
aid of the King of France and in every other way--and on the pretext of
establishing peace--to entrap his Holiness, and with fair words, such as
he himself was in the habit of using, to take him and the cardinals
prisoners, which would be very easy. He who has the servant, as we say
at home, has also the wagon and the oxen; and I reminded him of the
verse of Catullus: 'Tu quoque fac simile: ars deluditur arte.'"[39]

Ludovico, the worthy contemporary of the Borgias, once an intimate
friend of Alexander VI, hated the Pope when he turned his face away
from him and France, and he was especially embittered by the treacherous
capture of his brother Ascanio. December 28th the same ambassador wrote
to Ercole, "The Duke Ludovico told me that he was hourly expecting the
arrival of Messer Bartolomeo da Calco with a courier bringing the news
that the Pope was taken and beheaded."[40] I leave it to the reader to
decide whether Ludovico, simply owing to his hatred of the Pope, was
slandering him and indulging in extravagances concerning him when he had
this conversation with Trotti, and also when he publicly stated to his
senate that "the Pope had allowed three women to come to him; one of
them being a nun of Valencia, the other a Castilian, the third a very
beautiful girl from Venice, fifteen or sixteen years of age." "Here in
Milan," continued Trotti in his despatch, "the same scandalous things
are related of the Pope as are told in Ferrara of the Torta."[41]

Elsewhere we may read how Charles VIII, victorious without the trouble
of winning battles, penetrated as far as Rome and Naples. His march
through Italy is the most humiliating of all the invasions which the
peninsula suffered; but it shows that when states and peoples are ready
for destruction, the strength of a weak-headed boy is sufficient to
bring about their ruin. The Pope outwitted the French monarch, who,
instead of having him deposed by a council, fell on his knees before
him, acknowledged him to be Christ's vicar, and concluded a treaty with
him.

After this he set out for Naples, which shortly fell into his hands.
Italy rose, a league against Charles VIII was formed, and he was
compelled to return. Alexander fled before him, first in the direction
of Orvieto, and then toward Perugia. While there he summoned Giovanni
Sforza, who arrived with his wife, June 16, 1495, remained four days,
and then went back to Pesaro.[42] The King of France succeeded in
breaking his way through the League's army at the battle of the Taro,
and thus honorably escaped death or capture.

Having returned to Rome, Alexander established himself still more firmly
in the holy chair, about which he gathered his ambitious bastards, while
the Borgias pushed themselves forward all the more audaciously because
the confusion occasioned in the affairs of Italy by the invasion of
Charles VIII made it all the easier for them to carry out their
intentions.

Lucretia remained a little longer in Pesaro with her husband, whom
Venice had engaged in the interests of the League. Giovanni Sforza,
however, does not appear to have been present either at the battle of
the Taro or at the siege of Novara. When peace was declared in October,
1495, between France and the Duke of Milan, whereby the war came to an
end in Northern Italy, Sforza was able to take his wife back to Rome.
Marino Sanuto speaks of her as having been in that city at the end of
October, and Burchard gives us a picture of Lucretia at the Christmas
festivities.

While in the service of the League Sforza commanded three hundred foot
soldiers and one hundred heavy horse. With these troops he set out for
Naples in the spring of the following year, when the united forces lent
the young King Ferrante II great assistance in the conflicts with the
French troops under Montpensier. Even the Captain-general of Venice, the
Marchese of Mantua, was there, and he entered Rome, March 26, 1496.
Sforza with his mercenaries arrived in Rome, April 15th, only to leave
the city again April 28th. His wife remained behind. May 4th he reached
Fundi.[43]

Alexander's two sons, Don Giovanni and Don Giuffrè, were still away from
Rome. One, the Duke of Gandia, was also in the pay of Venice, and was
expected from Spain to take command of four hundred men which his
lieutenant, Alovisio Bacheto, had enlisted for him. The other, Don
Giuffrè, had, as we have seen, gone to Naples in 1494, where he had
married Donna Sancia and had been made Prince of Squillace. As a member
of the house of Aragon he shared the dangers of the declining dynasty in
the hope of inducing the Pope not to abandon it. He accompanied King
Ferrante on his flight, and also followed his standard when, after the
retreat of Charles VIII, he, with the help of Spain, Venice, and the
Pope, again secured possession of his kingdom, entering Naples in the
summer of 1495.

Not until the following year did Don Giuffrè and his wife come to Rome.
In royal state they entered the Eternal City, May 20, 1496. The
ambassadors, cardinals, officers of the city, and numerous nobles went
to meet them at the Lateran gate. Lucretia also was there with her
suite. The young couple were escorted to the Vatican. The Pope on his
throne, surrounded by eleven cardinals, received his son and
daughter-in-law. On his right hand he had Lucretia and on his left
Sancia, sitting on cushions. It was Whitsuntide, and the two princesses
and their suites boldly occupied the priests' benches in S. Peter's,
and, according to Burchard, the populace was greatly shocked.

Three months later, August 10, 1496, Alexander's eldest son, Don
Giovanni, Duke of Gandia, entered Rome, where he remained, his father
having determined to make him a great prince.[44] It is not related
whether he brought his wife, Donna Maria, with him.

For the first time Alexander had all his children about him, and in the
Borgo of the Vatican there were no less than three nepot-courts.
Giovanni resided in the Vatican, Lucretia in the palace of S. Maria in
Portico, Giuffrè in the house of the Cardinal of Aleria near the Bridge
of S. Angelo, and Cæsar in the same Borgo.

They all were pleasure-loving upstarts who were consumed with a desire
for honors and power; all were young and beautiful; except Lucretia, all
were vicious, graceful, seductive scoundrels, and, as such, among the
most charming and attractive figures in the society of old Rome. For
only the narrowest observer, blind to everything but their infamous
deeds, can paint the Borgias simply as savage and cruel brutes,
tiger-cubs by nature. They were privileged malefactors, like many other
princes and potentates of that age. They mercilessly availed themselves
of poison and poignard, removing every obstacle to their ambition, and
smiled when the object was attained.

If we could see the life which these unrestrained bastards led in the
Vatican, where their father, conscious now of his security and
greatness, was enthroned, we should indeed behold strange things. It was
a singular drama which was being enacted in the domain of S. Peter,
where two young and beautiful women held a dazzling court, which was
always animated by swarms of Spanish and Italian lords and ladies and
the elegant world of Rome. Nobles and monsignori crowded around to pay
homage to these women, one of whom, Lucretia, was just sixteen, and the
other, Sancia, a little more than seventeen years of age.

We may imagine what love intrigues took place in the palace of these
young women, and how jealousy and ambition there carried on their
intricate game, for no one will believe that these princesses, full of
the passion and exuberance of youth, led the life of nuns or saints in
the shadows of S. Peter's. Their palace resounded with music and the
dance, and the noise of revels and of masquerades. The populace saw
these women accompanied by splendid cavalcades riding through the
streets of Rome to the Vatican; they knew that the Pope was in daily
intercourse with them, visiting them in person and taking part in their
festivities, and also receiving them, now privately, and now with
ceremonious pomp, as befitted princesses of his house. Alexander
himself, much as he was addicted to the pleasures of the senses, cared
nothing for elaborate banquets. Concerning the Pope, the Ferrarese
ambassador wrote to his master in 1495 as follows:

     He partakes of but a single dish, though this must be a rich one.
     It is, consequently, a bore to dine with him. Ascanio and others,
     especially Cardinal Monreale, who formerly were his Holiness's
     table companions, and Valenza too, broke off this companionship
     because his parsimony displeased them, and avoided it whenever and
     however they could.[45]

The doings in the Vatican furnished ground for endless gossip, which had
long been current in Rome. It was related in Venice, in October,
1496, that the Duke of Gandia had brought a Spanish woman to his father,
with whom he lived, and an account was given of a crime which is almost
incredible, although it was related by the Venetian ambassador and other
persons.[46]

[Illustration: SAVONAROLA.

From a painting by Fra Bartolommeo]

It was not long before Donna Sancia caused herself to be freely gossiped
about. She was beautiful and thoughtless; she appreciated her position
as the daughter of a king. From the most vicious of courts she was
transplanted into the depravity of Rome as the wife of an immature boy.
It was said that her brothers-in-law Gandia and Cæsar quarreled over her
and possessed her in turn, and that young nobles and cardinals like
Ippolito d'Este could boast of having enjoyed her favors.

Savonarola may have had these nepot-courts in mind when, from the pulpit
of S. Marco in Florence, he declaimed in burning words against the Roman
Sodom.

Even if the voice of the great preacher, whose words were filling all
Italy, did not reach Lucretia's ears, from her own experience she must
have known how profligate was the world in which she lived. About her
she saw vice shamelessly displayed or cloaked in sacerdotal robes; she
was conscious of the ambition and avarice which hesitated at no crime;
she beheld a religion more pagan than paganism itself, and a church
service in which the sacred actors,--with whose conduct behind the
scenes she was perfectly familiar,--were the priests, the cardinals, her
brother Cæsar, and her own father. All this Lucretia beheld, but they
are wrong who believe that she or others like her saw and regarded it as
we do now, or as a few pure-minded persons of that age did; for
familiarity always dulls the average person's perception of the truth.
In that age the conceptions of religion, of decency, and of morality
were entirely different from those of to-day. When the rupture between
the Middle Ages and its ascetic Church and the Renaissance was complete,
human passions threw off every restraint. All that had hitherto been
regarded as sacred was now derided. The freethinkers of Italy created a
literature never equaled for bold cynicism. From the _Hermaphroditus_ of
Beccadeli to the works of Berni and Pietro Aretino, a foul stream of
novelle, epigrams, and comedies, from which the serious Dante would have
turned his eyes in disgust, overflowed the land.

Even in the less sensual novelle, the first of which was Piccolomini's
_Euryalus_, and the less obscene comedies, adultery and derision of
marriage are the leading motives. The harlots were the Muses of
belles-lettres during the Renaissance. They boldly took their place by
the side of the saints of the Church, and contended with them for fame's
laurels. There is a manuscript collection of poems of the time of
Alexander VI which contains a series of epigrams beginning with a number
in praise of the Holy Virgin and the Saints, and then, without word or
warning, are several glorifying the famous cyprians of the day;
following a stanza on S. Pauline is an epigram on Meretricis Nichine, a
well-known courtesan of Siena, with several more of the same sort. The
saints of heaven and the priestesses of Venus are placed side by side,
without comment, as equally admirable women.[47]

No self-respecting woman would now attend the performance of a comedy of
the Renaissance, whose characters frequently represented the popes, the
princes, and the noble women of the day; and their presentation, even
before audiences composed entirely of men, would now be prohibited by
the censor of the theater in every land.

The naturalness with which women of the South even now discuss subjects
which people in the North are careful to conceal excites astonishment;
but what was tolerated by the taste or morals of the Renaissance is
absolutely incredible. We must remember, however, that this obscene
literature was by no means so diffused as novels are at the present
time, and also that Southern familiarity with whatever is natural also
served to protect women. Much was external, and was so treated that it
had no effect whatever upon the imagination. In the midst of the vices
of the society of the cities there were noble women who kept themselves
pure.

To form an idea of the morals of the great, and especially of the courts
of that day, we must read the history of the Visconti, the Sforza, the
Malatesta of Rimini, the Baglione of Perugia, and the Borgias of Rome.
They were not more immoral than the members of the courts of Louis XIV
and XV and of August of Saxony, but their murders rendered them more
terrible. Human life was held to be of little value, but criminal
egotism often was qualified by greatness of mind (magnanimitas), so that
a bloody deed prompted by avarice and ambition was often condoned.

Egotism and the selfish use of conditions and men for the profit of the
individual were never so universal as in the country of Macchiavelli,
where unfortunately they still are frequently in evidence. Free from the
pedantic opinions of the Germans and the reverence for condition, rank,
and birth which they have inherited from the Middle Ages, the Italians,
on the other hand, always recognized the force of personality--no matter
whether it was that of a bastard or not--but they, nevertheless, were
just as likely to become the slaves of the successful. Macchiavelli
maintains that the Church and the priests were responsible for the moral
ruin of the peninsula--but were not the Church and these priests
themselves products of Italy? He should have said that characteristics
which were inherent in the Germanic races were foreign to the Italians.
Luther could never have appeared among them.

While our opinion of Alexander VI and Cæsar is governed by ethical
considerations, this was not the case with Guicciardini, and less still
with Macchiavelli. They examined not the moral but the political man,
not his motives but his acts. The terrible was not terrible when it was
the deed of a strong will, nor was crime disgraceful when it excited
astonishment as a work of art. The terrible way in which Ferdinand of
Naples handled the conspiracy of the nobles of his kingdom made him, in
the eyes of Italy, not horrible but great; and Macchiavelli speaks of
the trick with which Cæsar Borgia outwitted his treacherous condottieri
at Sinigaglia as a "masterstroke," while the Bishop Paolo Giovio called
it "the most beautiful piece of deception." In that world of egotism
where there was no tribunal of public opinion, man could preserve
himself only by overpowering power and by outwitting cunning with
craft. While the French regarded, and still regard, "ridiculous" as the
worst of epithets, the Italian dreaded none more than that of
"simpleton."

Macchiavelli, in a well-known passage in his _Discorsi_ (i. 27),
explains his theory with terrible frankness, and his words are the exact
keynote of the ethics of his age. He relates how Julius II ventured into
Perugia, although Giampolo Baglione had gathered a large number of
troops there, and how the latter, overawed by the Pope, surrendered the
city to him. His comment is verbatim as follows: "People of judgment who
were with the Pope wondered at his foolhardiness, and at Giampolo's
cowardice; they could not understand why the latter did not, to his
everlasting fame, crush his enemy with one blow and enrich himself with
the plunder, for the Pope was accompanied by all his cardinals with
their jewels. They could not believe that he refrained on account of any
goodness or any conscientious scruples, for the heart of a wicked man,
who committed incest with his sister, and destroyed his cousins and
nephews so he might rule, could not be accessible to any feelings of
respect. So they came to the conclusion that there are men who can
neither be honorably bad nor yet perfectly good, who do not know how to
go about committing a crime, great in itself or possessing a certain
splendor. This was the case with Giampolo; he who thought nothing of
incest and the murder of his kinsmen did not know how, or rather did not
dare, in spite of the propitious moment, to perform a deed which would
have caused every one to admire his courage, and would have won for him
an immortal name. For he would first have shown the priests how small
men are in reality who live and rule as they do, and he would have been
the first to accomplish a deed whose greatness would have dazzled every
one, and would have removed every danger which might have arisen from
it."

Is it any wonder that in view of such a prostitution of morals to the
conception of success, fame, and magnificence, as Macchiavelli here and
in _Il Principe_ advocates, men like the Borgias found the widest field
for their bold crimes? They well knew that the greatness of a crime
concealed the shame of it. The celebrated poet Strozzi in Ferrara placed
Cæsar Borgia, after his fall, among the heroes of Olympus; and the
famous Bembo, one of the first men of the age, endeavors to console
Lucretia Borgia on the death of the "miserable little" Alexander VI,
whom he at the same time calls her "great" father.

No upright man, conscious of his own worth, would now enter the service
of a prince stained by such crimes as were the Borgias, if it were
possible for such a one now to exist, which is wholly unlikely. But then
the best and most upright of men sought, without any scruples whatever,
the presence and favors of the Borgias. Pinturicchio and Perugino
painted for Alexander VI, and the most wonderful genius of the century,
Leonardo da Vinci, did not hesitate to enter the service of Cæsar Borgia
as his engineer, to erect fortresses for him in the same Romagna which
he had appropriated by such devilish means.

The men of the Renaissance were in a high degree energetic and creative;
they shaped the world with a revolutionary energy and a feverish
activity, in comparison with which the modern processes of civilization
almost vanish. Their instincts were rougher and more powerful, and their
nerves stronger than those of the present race. It will always appear
strange that the tenderest blossoms of art, the most ideal creations of
the painter, put forth in the midst of a society whose moral
perversity and inward brutality are to us moderns altogether loathsome.
If we could take a man such as our civilization now produces and
transfer him into the Renaissance, the daily brutality which made no
impression whatever on the men of that age would shatter his nervous
system and probably upset his reason.

[Illustration: NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI.

From an engraving by G. Marri.]

Lucretia Borgia lived in Rome surrounded by these passions, and she was
neither better nor worse than the women of her time. She was thoughtless
and was filled with the joy of living. We do not know that she ever went
through any moral struggles or whether she ever found herself in
conscious conflict with the actualities of her life and of her
environment. Her father maintained an elaborate household for her, and
she was in daily intercourse with her brothers' courts. She was their
companion and the ornament of their banquets; she was entrusted with the
secret of all the Vatican intrigues which had any connection with the
future of the Borgias, and all her vital interests were soon to be
concentrated there.

Never, even in the later years of her life, does she appear as a woman
of unusual genius; she had none of the characteristics of the _viragos_
Catarina Sforza and Ginevra Bentivoglio; nor did she possess the
deceitful soul of an Isotta da Rimini, or the spirituelle genius of
Isabella Gonzaga. If she had not been the daughter of Alexander VI and
the sister of Cæsar Borgia, she would have been unnoticed by the
historians of her age or, at most, would have been mentioned only as one
of the many charming women who constituted the society of Rome. In the
hands of her father and her brother, however, she became the tool and
also the victim of their political machinations, against which she had
not the strength to make any resistance.


FOOTNOTES:

[37] This information is given by Marino Sanuto, Venuta di Carlo VIII,
in Italia; original in the Paris library, also a copy in the Marciana.
He calls Giulia "favorita del Pontefice, di età giovane, et bellissima
savia accorda et mansueta."

[38] According to one of Brognolo's despatches (Mantuan archives) Giulia
and Adriana returned December 1st, on which date Pandolfo Collenuccio,
who was in Rome, wrote, "Una optima novella ce è per alcuno. Che Ma
Julia si è recuperata, et andò Messer Joan Marrades per Lei. Et è venuta
in Roma: e dicesi, che Domenica de nocte allogiò in Palazzo." Archives
of Modena.

[39] Despatch of Giacomo Trotti, Milan, December 21, 1494. Archives of
Modena.

[40] Che li pareva ogni hora vedere messer Bartolomeo da Calche venire a
Sua Eccia cum una staffetta, chel papa fosse preso, e li fosse
taliata la testa.

[41] Trotti to the Duke of Ferrara, Milan, December 24, 1494.

[42] This is the date given by Marino Sanuto in his Ms. History of the
Invasion of Charles VIII, fol. 470.

[43] These dates are from the Diary of Marino Sanuto, vol. i. fol. 55,
58, 85.

[44] Il di de S. Laurentio il Duca de Gandia figliuolo del Papa, intrò
in Roma accompagnato dal Card. de Valentia, et tutta la corte con
grandissima pompa. Despatch of Ludovico Carissimi to the Duke of
Ferrara, Rome, August 15, 1496. Archives of Modena.

[45] Boccaccio to Ercole, March 24, 1495.

[46] The report is given in Diar. Marino Sanuto, vol. i, 258, and is
reprinted in part in the Civiltà Cattolica, March 15, 1873, p. 727. The
entire passage is as follows: Da Roma per le lettere del orator nostro
se intese et etiam de private persone cossa assai abominevole in la
chiesa di Dio che al papa erra nato un fiolo di una dona romana maridata
ch'el padre l'havea rufianata e di questa il marito invitò il suocero
ala vigna el lo uccise tagliandoli el capo ponendo quello sopra uno
legno con letere che dicera questo e il capo de mio suocero che a
rufianato sua fiola al papa et che inteso questo il papa fece metter el
dito in exilio di Roma con Taglia. Questa nova vene per letere
particular etiam si godea con la sua spagnola menatali di spagna per suo
fiol duca di Gandia novamente li venuto.

[47] Epitaphia clarissimarum mulierum que virtute: arte: aut aliqua nota
claruerunt. Codex Hartmann Schedel in the State Library of Munich.




CHAPTER XII

THE DIVORCE AND SECOND MARRIAGE


After the surrender of the remnant of the French forces in the fall of
1496, Giovanni Sforza returned from Naples. There is no doubt that he
went to Rome for the purpose of taking Lucretia home with him to Pesaro,
where we find him about the close of the year, and where he spent the
winter. The chroniclers of Pesaro, however, state that he left the city
in disguise, January 15, 1497, and that Lucretia followed him a few days
later for the purpose of going to Rome.[48] Both were present at the
Easter festivities in the papal city.

Sforza was now a worn-out plaything which Alexander was preparing to
cast away, for his daughter's marriage to the tyrant of Pesaro promised
him nothing more, the house of Sforza having lost all its influence;
moreover, the times were propitious for establishing connections which
would be of greater advantage to the Borgias. The Pope was unwilling to
give his son-in-law a command in the war against the Orsini, which he
had begun immediately after the return of his son Don Giovanni from
Spain, for whom he wanted to confiscate the property of these mighty
lords. He secured the services of Duke Guidobaldo of Urbino, who
likewise had served in the allied armies of Naples, and whom the
Venetians released in order that he might assume supreme command of the
papal troops.

This noble man was the last of the house of Montefeltre, and the Borgias
already had their eyes on his possessions. His sister Giovanna was
married in 1478 to the municipal prefect, Giovanni della Rovere, a
brother of Cardinal Giuliano, and in 1490 she bore him a daughter,
Francesca Maria, a child who was looked upon as heir of Urbino.
Guidobaldo did not disdain to serve as a condottiere for pay and in the
hope of winning honors; he was also a vassal of the Church. Fear of the
Borgias led him to seek their friendship although he hated them.

In the war against the Orsini the young Duke of Gandia was next in
command under Guidobaldo, and Alexander made him the standard-bearer of
the Church and Rector of Viterbo, and of the entire Patrimonium after he
had removed Alessandro Farnese from that position. This appears to have
been due to a dislike he felt for Giulia's brother. September 17, 1496,
the Mantuan agent in Rome, John Carolus, wrote to the Marchioness
Gonzaga: "Cardinal Farnese is shut up in his residence in the
Patrimonium, and will lose it unless he is saved by the prompt return of
Giulia."

The same ambassador reported to his sovereign as follows: "Although
every effort is made to conceal the fact that these sons of the Pope are
consumed with envy of each other, the life of the Cardinal of S. Giorgio
(Rafael Riario) is in danger; should he die, Cæsar would be given the
office of chancellor and the palace of the dead Cardinal of Mantua,
which is the most beautiful in Rome, and also his most lucrative
benefices. Your Excellency may guess how this plot will terminate."[49]

The war against the Orsini ended with the ignominious defeat of the
papal forces at Soriano, January 23, 1497, whence Don Giovanni, wounded,
fled to Rome, and where Guidobaldo was taken prisoner. The victors
immediately forced a peace on most advantageous terms.

Not until the conclusion of the war did Lucretia's husband return to
Rome. We shall see him again there, for the last time, at the Easter
festivities of 1497, when, as Alexander's son-in-law, he assumed his
official place during the celebration in S. Peter's, and, standing near
Cæsar and Gandia, received the Easter palm from the Pope's hand. His
position in the Vatican had, however, become untenable; Alexander was
anxious to dissolve his marriage with Lucretia. Sforza was asked to give
her up of his own free will, and, when he refused, was threatened with
extreme measures.

Flight alone saved him from the dagger or poison of his brothers-in-law.
According to statements of the chroniclers of Pesaro, it was Lucretia
herself who helped her husband to flee and thus caused the suspicion
that she was also a participant in the conspiracy. It is related that,
one evening when Jacomino, Lord Giovanni's chamberlain, was in Madonna's
room, her brother Cæsar entered, and on her command the chamberlain
concealed himself behind a screen. Cæsar talked freely with his sister,
and among other things said that the order had been given to kill
Sforza. When he had departed, Lucretia said to Jacomino: "Did you hear
what was said? Go and tell him." This the chamberlain immediately did,
and Giovanni Sforza threw himself on a Turkish horse and rode in
twenty-four hours to Pesaro, where the beast dropped dead.[50]

According to letters of the Venetian envoy in Rome, Sforza fled in
March, in Holy Week. Under some pretext he went to the Church of S.
Onofrio, where he found the horse waiting for him.[51]

The request for the divorce was probably not made by Lucretia, but by
her father and brothers, who wished her to be free to enter into a
marriage which would advance their plans. We are ignorant of what was
now taking place in the Vatican, and we do not know that Lucretia made
any resistance; but if she did, it certainly was not of long duration,
for she does not appear to have loved her husband. Pesaro's escape did
not please the Borgias. They would have preferred to have silenced this
man forever; but now that he had gotten away and raised an objection, it
would be necessary to dissolve the marriage by process of law, which
would cause a great scandal.

Shortly after Sforza's flight a terrible tragedy occurred in the house
of Borgia--the mysterious murder of the Duke of Gandia. On the failure
of Alexander's scheme to confiscate the estates of the Orsini and bestow
them on his dearly beloved son, he thought to provide for him in another
manner. He made him Duke of Benevento, thereby hoping to prepare the way
for him to reach the throne of Naples. A few days later, June 14th,
Vannozza invited him and Cæsar, together with a few of their kinsmen, to
a supper in her vineyard near S. Pietro in Vinculo. Don Giovanni,
returning from this family feast, disappeared in the night, without
leaving a trace, and three days later the body of the murdered man was
found in the Tiber.

According to the general opinion of the day, which in all probability
was correct, Cæsar was the murderer of his brother. From the moment
Alexander VI knew this crime had been committed, and assumed
responsibility for its motives and consequences, and pardoned the
murderer, he became morally accessory after the fact, and fell himself
under the power of his terrible son. From that time on, every act of his
was intended to further Cæsar's fiendish ambition.

None of the records of the day say that Don Giovanni's consort was in
Rome when this tragedy occurred. We are therefore forced to assume that
she was not there when her husband was murdered. It is much more likely
that she had not left Spain, and that she was living with her two little
children in Gandia or Valencia, where she received the dreadful news in
a letter written by Alexander to his sister Doña Beatrice Boria y
Arenos. This is rendered probable by the court records of Valencia.
September 27, 1497, Doña Maria Enriquez appeared before the tribunal of
the governor of the kingdom of Valencia, Don Luis de Cabaineles, and
claimed the estate, including the duchy of Gandia and the Neapolitan
fiefs of Suessa, Teano, Carinola, and Montefoscolo, for Don Giovanni's
eldest son, a child of three years. The duke's death was proved by legal
documents, among which was this letter written by Alexander, and the
tribunal accordingly recognized Gandia's son as his legal heir.[52]

Doña Maria also claimed her husband's personal property in his house in
Rome, which was valued at thirty thousand ducats, and which on the death
of Don Giovanni, had been transferred by Alexander VI, to the
fratricide Cæsar to administer for his nephew, as appears from an
official document of the Roman notary Beneimbene, dated December 19,
1498.

At this time Lucretia was not in her palace in the Vatican. June 4th she
had gone to the convent of S. Sisto on the Appian Way, thereby causing a
great sensation in Rome. Her flight doubtless was in some way connected
with the forced annulment of her marriage. While her father himself may
not have banished her to S. Sisto, she, probably excited by Pesaro's
departure, and perhaps angry with the Pope, had doubtless sought this
place as an asylum. That she was angry with him is shown by a letter
written by Donato Aretino from Rome, June 19th, to Cardinal Ippolito
d'Este: "Madonna Lucretia has left the palace _insalutato hospite_ and
gone to a convent known as that of S. Sisto; where she now is. Some say
she will turn nun, while others make different statements which I can
not entrust to a letter."[53]

We know not what prayers and what confessions Lucretia made at the
altar, but this was one of the most momentous periods of her life. While
in the convent she learned of the terrible death of one of her brothers,
and shuddered at the crime of the other. For she, like her father and
all the Borgias, firmly believed that Cæsar was a fratricide. She
clearly discerned the marks of his inordinate ambition; she knew that he
was planning to lay aside the cardinal's robe and become a secular
prince; she must have known too that they were scheming in the Vatican
to make Don Giuffrè a cardinal in Cæsar's place and to marry the latter
to the former's wife, Donna Sancia, with whom, it was generally known,
he was on most intimate terms.

Alexander commanded Giuffrè and his young wife to leave Rome and take up
their abode in his princely seat in Squillace, and he set out on August
7th for that place. It is stated the Pope did not want his children and
nepots about him any longer, and that he also wished to banish his
daughter Lucretia to Valencia.[54]

In the meantime, in July, Cæsar had gone to Capua as papal legate, where
he crowned Don Federico, the last of the Aragonese, as King of Naples.
September 4th he returned to Rome.

Alexander had appointed a commission under the direction of two
cardinals for the purpose of divorcing Lucretia from Giovanni Sforza.
These judges showed that Sforza had never consummated the marriage, and
that his spouse was still a virgin, which, according to her contemporary
Matarazzo of Perugia, set all Italy to laughing. Lucretia herself stated
she was willing to swear to this.

During these proceedings her spouse was in Pesaro. Thence he
subsequently went in disguise to Milan to ask the protection of Duke
Ludovico and to get him to use his influence to have his wife, who had
been taken away, restored to him. This was in June. He protested against
the decision which had been pronounced in Rome, and which had been
purchased, and Ludovico il Moro made the naive suggestion that he
subject himself to a test of his capacity in the presence of trustworthy
witnesses, and of the papal legate in Milan, which, however, Sforza
declined to do.[55] Ludovico and his brother Ascanio finally induced
their kinsman to yield, and Sforza, intimidated, declared in writing
that he had never consummated his marriage with Lucretia.[56]

The formal divorce, therefore, took place December 20, 1497, and Sforza
surrendered his wife's dowry of thirty-one thousand ducats.

Although we may assume that Alexander compelled his daughter to consent
to this separation, it does not render our opinion of Lucretia's part in
the scandalous proceedings any less severe; she shows herself to have
had as little will as she had character, and she also perjured herself.
Her punishment was not long delayed, for the divorce proceedings made
her notorious and started terrible rumors regarding her private life.
These reports began to circulate at the time of the murder of Gandia and
of her divorce from Sforza; the cause of both these events was stated to
have been an unmentionable crime. According to a reliable witness of the
day it was the lord of Pesaro himself, injured and exasperated, who
first--and to the Duke of Milan--had openly uttered the suspicion which
was being whispered about Rome. By permitting himself to do this, he
showed that he had never loved Lucretia.[57]

Alexander had dissolved his daughter's marriage for political reasons.
It was his purpose to marry Lucretia and Cæsar into the royal house of
Naples. This dynasty had reestablished itself there after the expulsion
of the French, but its position had been so profoundly shaken that its
fall was imminent; and it was this very fact that made Alexander hope to
be able to place his son Cæsar on the throne of Naples. The most
terrible of the Borgias now appropriated the place left vacant by the
Duke of Gandia, to which he had long aspired, and only for the sake of
appearances did he postpone casting aside the cardinal's robe. The Pope,
however, was already scheming for his son's marriage; for him he asked
King Federico for the hand of his daughter Carlotta, who had been
educated at the court of France as a princess of the house of Savoy. The
king, an upright man, firmly refused, and the young princess in horror
rejected the Pope's insulting offer. Federico, in his anxiety, made one
sacrifice to the monster in the Vatican; he consented to the betrothal
of Don Alfonso, Prince of Salerno, younger brother of Donna Sancia and
natural son of Alfonso II, to Lucretia. Alexander desired this marriage
for no other reason than for the purpose of finally inducing the king to
agree to the marriage of his daughter and Cæsar.

Even before Lucretia's new betrothal was settled upon it was rumored in
Rome that her former affianced, Don Gasparo, was again pressing his suit
and that there was a prospect of his being accepted. Although the young
Spaniard failed to accomplish his purpose, Alexander now recognized the
fact that Lucretia's betrothal to him had been dissolved illegally.

In a brief dated June 10, 1498, he speaks of the way his daughter was
treated--without special dispensation for breaking the engagement, in
order that she might marry Giovanni of Pesaro, which was a great
mistake--as illegal. He says in the same letter that Gasparo of Procida,
Count of Almenara, had subsequently married and had children, but not
until 1498 did Lucretia petition to have her betrothal to him formally
declared null and void. The Pope, therefore, absolved her of the perjury
she had committed by marrying Giovanni Sforza in spite of her engagement
to Don Gasparo, and while he now, for the first time, declared her
formal betrothal to the Count of Procida to have been dissolved, he gave
her permission to marry any man whom she might select.[58] Thus did a
pope play fast and loose with one of the holiest of the sacraments of
the Church.

When Lucretia had in this way been protected against the demands of all
pretenders to her hand, she was free to enter into a new alliance, which
she did June 20, 1498, in the Vatican. If we were not familiar with the
character of the public men of that age we should be surprised to learn
that King Federico's proxy on this occasion was none other than Cardinal
Ascanio Sforza, who had been instrumental in bringing about the marriage
of his nephew and Lucretia, and who had consented in Sforza's name to
the disgraceful divorce. Thus were he and his brother Ludovico
determined to retain the friendship of the Borgias at any price.

Lucretia received a dowry of forty thousand ducats, and the King of
Naples bound himself to make over the cities of Quadrata and Biselli to
his nephew for his dukedom.[59]

The young Alfonso accordingly came to Rome in July to become the husband
of a woman whom he must have regarded at least as unscrupulous and
utterly fickle. He doubtless looked upon himself as a sacrifice
presented by his father at the altar of Rome. Quietly and sorrowfully,
welcomed by no festivities, almost secretly, came this unhappy youth to
the papal city. He went at once to his betrothed in the palace of S.
Maria in Portico. In the Vatican, July 21st, the marriage was blessed by
the Church. Among the witnesses to the transaction were the Cardinals
Ascanio, Juan Lopez, and Giovanni Borgia. In obedience to an old custom
a naked sword was held over the pair by a knight, a ceremony which in
this instance was performed by Giovanni Cervillon, captain of the papal
guard.


FOOTNOTES:

[48] Lod. Zacconi, Hist. di Pesaro, Ms. in the Bibl. Oliveriana; also
Pietro Marzetti.

[49] Letters in the Gonzaga archives in Mantua.

[50] Battista Almerici I, and Pietro Marzetti, Memorie di Pesaro, Ms. in
the Oliveriana. These chronicles are often confusing as to dates and
full of mistakes.

[51] Marino Sanuto, Diar. vol. i, 410. March, 1497.

[52] This document is given in part by Amati in Strozzi's Periodico di
Numismatica, Anno III, part ii, p. 73. Florence, 1870.

[53] In the archives of Modena. Letters of Donato Aretino from Rome.

[54] Letter of Ludovico Carissimi, Rome, August 8, 1497. Archives of
Modena.

[55] Et mancho se è curato de fare prova de se qua con Done per poterne
chiarire el Rmo. Legato che era qua, sebbene S. Extia tastandolo sopra
ciò gli ne habia facto offerta. Despatch from the Ferrarese ambassador
in Milan, Antonio Costabili, to Duke Ercole, Milan, June 23, 1497.
Archives of Modena.

[56] Concerning this, Pandolfo Collenuccio, a member of Cardinal
Ippolito's suite in Rome, wrote to the Duke of Ferrara, December 25,
1498 (1497), as follows: El S. de Pesaro ha scripto qua de sua mano: non
haverla mai cognosciuta ... et esser impotente, alias la sententia non
se potea dare.... El prefato S. dice però haver scripto così per obedire
el Duca de Milano et Aschanio. The autographic letter is in the archives
of Modena.

[57] In the same despatch from Milan, June 23, 1497, the Ferrarese
Ambassador Costabili stated that Sforza had said to the Duke Ludovico:
Anzi haverla conosciuta infinite volte, ma chel Papa non gelha tolta per
altro se non per usare con Lei. Extendendose molto a carico di S.
Beatno.

[58] The original of this letter is in the archives of Modena.

[59] Bisceglie, formerly pronounced and written Biseglia or Biselli.
Quadrata is now Corato, near Andria.




CHAPTER XIII

A REGENT AND A MOTHER


Lucretia, now Duchess of Biselli, had been living since July, 1498, with
a new husband, a youth of seventeen, she herself having just completed
her eighteenth year. She and her consort did not go to Naples, but
remained in Rome; for, as the Mantuan agent reported to his master, it
was expressly agreed that Don Alfonso should live in Rome a year, and
that Lucretia should not be required to take up her abode in the kingdom
of Naples during her father's lifetime.[60]

The youthful Alfonso was fair and amiable. Talini, a Roman chronicler of
that day, pronounced him the handsomest young man ever seen in the
Imperial City. According to a statement made by the Mantuan agent in
August, Lucretia was really fond of him. A sudden change in affairs,
however, deprived her of the calm joys of domestic life.

The moving principle in the Vatican was the measureless ambition of
Cæsar, who was consuming with impatience to become a ruling sovereign.
August 13, 1498, he flung aside the cardinal's robes and prepared to set
out for France; Louis XII, who in April had succeeded Charles VIII,
having promised him the title of Duke of Valentinois and the hand of a
French princess. Alexander provided for his son's retinue with regal
extravagance.

It happened one day that a train of mules laden with silks and cloth of
gold on the way to Cæsar in Rome was plundered by the people of Cardinal
Farnese and of his cousin Pier Paolo in the forest of Bolsena, whereupon
the Pope addressed some vigorous communications to the cardinal, in
whose territory, he stated, the robbery had been committed.[61]

In the service of the Farnese were numerous Corsicans, some as
mercenaries and bullies, some as field laborers, and these people, who
were universally feared, probably were the guilty ones, for it is
difficult to believe that Cardinal Alessandro would have undertaken such
a venture on his own account. It seems, however, that the relations of
the Borgias and the Farnese were somewhat strained during this period.
The cardinal spent most of his time on his family estates, and at this
juncture little was heard of his sister Giulia. It is not even known
whether or not she was living in Rome and continuing her relations with
the Pope, although, from subsequent revelations, it appears that she
was. April 2, 1499, we find the cardinal and his sister again in Rome,
where a nuptial contract was concluded in the Farnese palace between
Laura Orsini, Giulia's seven-year-old daughter, and Federico Farnese,
the twelve-year-old son of the deceased condottiere Raimondo Farnese, a
nephew of Pier Paolo. Laura's putative father, Orsino Orsini, was
present at the ceremony.[62]

It was probably Adriana and Giulia who were endeavoring to bring about a
reconciliation between the house of Orsini and the Borgias. In the
spring of 1498 these barons, having issued victorious from their war
with the Pope, began a bitter contest with their hereditary foes, the
Colonna, which, however, ended in their own defeat. These houses made
peace with each other in July, a fact which caused Alexander no little
anxiety, for upon the hostility of these, the two mightiest families of
Rome, depended the Pope's dominion over the city; his greatest danger
lay in their mutual friendship. He therefore endeavored again to set
them at loggerheads, and he succeeded in attaching the Orsini to
himself,--which they subsequently had reason to regret. He accomplished
his purpose so well that they intermarried with the Borgias; Paolo
Orsini, Giambattista's brother, uniting his son Fabio with Girolama, a
sister of Cardinal Giovanni Borgia the younger, September 8, 1498. The
marriage contract was concluded in the presence of the Pope and a
brilliant gathering in the Vatican, and one of the official witnesses
was Don Alfonso of Biselli, who held the sword over the young
couple.[63]

Shortly afterwards, October first, Cæsar Borgia set sail for France,
where he was made Duke of Valentinois, and where, in May, 1499, he
married Charlotte d'Albret, sister of the King of Navarre. At this court
he met two men who were destined later to exercise great influence upon
his career--George of Amboise, Archbishop of Rouen, to whom he had
brought the cardinal's hat, and Giuliano della Rovere. The latter,
hitherto Alexander's bitterest enemy, now suffered himself, by the
intermediation of the King of France, to be won over to the cause of the
Borgias; he permitted himself even to become Cæsar's stepping-stone to
greatness.

The reconciliation was sealed by a marriage between the two families;
the city prefect, Giovanni della Rovere, Giuliano's brother, betrothing
his eighteen-year-old son Francesco Maria to Angela Borgia, September 2,
1500.

Angela's father, Giuffrè, was a son of Giovanni, sister of Alexander VI,
and of Guglielmo Lanzol. Giovanni Borgia the younger, Cardinal Ludovico,
and Rodrigo, captain of the papal guard, were her brothers. Her sister
Girolama, as above stated, was married to Fabio Orsini. The ceremony of
Angela's betrothal took place in the Vatican in the presence of the
ambassador of France.

For the purpose of driving Ludovico il Moro from Milan, Louis XII had
concluded an alliance with Venice, which the Pope also joined on the
condition that France would help his son to acquire Romagna.

Ascanio Sforza, who was unable to prevent the loss of Milan, and who
knew that his own life was in danger in Rome, fled July 13, 1499, to
Genazzano and subsequently to Genoa.

His example was followed by Lucretia's youthful consort. We do not know
what occurred in the Vatican to cause Don Alfonso quietly to leave Rome,
where he had spent but a single year with Lucretia. We can only say that
his decision must have been brought about by some turn which the Pope's
politics had taken. The object of the expedition of Louis XII was not
only the overthrow of the Sforza dynasty in Milan, but also the seizure
of Naples; it was intended to be a sequel to the attempt of Charles
VIII, which was defeated by the great League. The young prince was aware
of the Pope's intention to destroy his uncle Federico, who had deeply
offended him by refusing to grant Cæsar the hand of his daughter
Carlotta. After this occurrence the relations of Lucretia's husband with
the Pope had altogether changed.

Ascanio was the only friend the unfortunate prince had in Rome, and it
was probably he who advised him to save himself from certain death by
flight, as Lucretia's other husband had done. Alfonso slipped away
August 2, 1499. The Pope sent some troopers after him, but they failed
to catch him. It is uncertain whether Lucretia knew of his intended
flight. A letter written in Rome by a Venetian, August 4th, merely says:
"The Duke of Biseglia, Madonna Lucretia's husband, has secretly fled and
gone to the Colonna in Genazzano; he deserted his wife, who has been
with child for six months, and she is constantly in tears."[64]

She was in the power of her father, who, highly incensed by the prince's
flight, banished Alfonso's sister Donna Sancia to Naples.

Lucretia's position, owing to these circumstances, became exceedingly
trying. Her tears show that she possessed a heart. She loved, and
perhaps for the first time. Alfonso wrote her from Genazzano, urgently
imploring her to follow him, and his letters fell into the hands of the
Pope, who compelled her to write her husband and ask him to return. It
was doubtless his daughter's complaining that induced Alexander to send
her away from Rome. August 8th he made her Regent of Spoleto. Hitherto
papal legates, usually cardinals, had governed this city and the
surrounding territory; but now the Pope entrusted its administration to
a young woman of nineteen, his own daughter, and thither she repaired.

He gave her a letter to the priors of Spoleto which was as follows:

     DEAR SONS: Greeting and the Apostolic Blessing! We have
     entrusted to our beloved daughter in Christ, the noble lady,
     Lucretia de Borgia, Duchess of Biseglia, the office of keeper of
     the castle, as well as the government of our cities of Spoleto and
     Foligno, and of the county and district about them. Having perfect
     confidence in the intelligence, the fidelity, and probity of the
     Duchess, which We have dwelt upon in previous letters, and likewise
     in your unfailing obedience to Us and to the Holy See, We trust
     that you will receive the Duchess Lucretia, as is your duty, with
     all due honor as your regent, and show her submission in all
     things. As We wish her to be received and accepted by you with
     special honor and respect, so do We command you in this epistle--as
     you value Our favor and wish to avoid Our displeasure--to obey the
     Duchess Lucretia, your regent, in all things collectively and
     severally, in so far as law and custom dictate in the government of
     the city, and whatever she may think proper to exact of you, even
     as you would obey Ourselves, and to execute her commands with all
     diligence and promptness, so that your devotion may receive due
     approbation. Given in Rome, in St. Peter's, under the papal seal,
     August 8, 1499.

     HADRIANUS (Secretary).[65]

Lucretia left Rome for her new home the same day. She set out with a
large retinue, and accompanied by her brother Don Giuffrè; Fabio Orsini,
now the consort of Girolama Borgia, her kinswoman; and a company of
archers. She left the Vatican mounted on horseback, the governor of the
city, the Neapolitan ambassador, and a number of other gentlemen forming
an escort to act as a guard of honor, while her father took a position
in a loggia over the portal of the palace of the Vatican to watch his
departing daughter and her cavalcade. For the first time he found
himself in Rome deprived of all his children.

Lucretia made the journey partly on horseback and partly in a litter,
and the trip from Rome to Spoleto required not less than six days. At
Porcaria, in Umbria, she found a deputation of citizens of Spoleto
waiting to greet her, and to accompany her to the city, which had been
famous since the time of Hannibal, and which had been the seat of the
mighty Lombard dukes. The castle of Spoleto is very ancient, its
earliest portions dating from the Dukes Faroald and Grimoald. In the
fourteenth century it was restored by the great Gil d'Albornoz, the
contemporary of Cola di Rienzi, and it was completed shortly afterwards
by Nicholas V. It is a magnificent piece of Renaissance architecture,
overlooking the old city and the deep ravine which separates it from
Monte Luco. From its high windows one may look out over the valley of
the Clitunno and that of the Tiber, the fertile Umbrian plain, and, on
the east, to the Apennines.

August 15th Lucretia Borgia received the priors of the city, to whom she
presented her papal appointment, whereupon they swore allegiance to her.
Later the commune gave a banquet in her honor.

Lucretia's stay in Spoleto was short. Her regency there was merely
intended to signify the actual taking possession of the territory which
Alexander desired to bestow upon his daughter.

In the meantime her husband Alfonso had decided, unfortunately for
himself, to obey Alexander's command and return to his wife--perhaps
because he really loved her. The Pope ordered him to go to Spoleto by
way of Foligno, and then to come with his spouse to Nepi, where he
himself intended to be. The purpose of this meeting was to establish his
daughter as sovereign there also.

Nepi had never been a baronial fief, although the prefects of Vico and
the Orsini had held the place at different times. The Church through its
deputies governed the town and surrounding country. When Alexander was a
cardinal his uncle Calixtus had made him governor of the city, and such
he remained until he was raised to the papal throne, when he conferred
Nepi upon Cardinal Ascanio Sforza. The neatly written parchment
containing the municipal statute confirming Ascanio's appointment, which
is dated January 1, 1495, is still preserved in the archives of the
city. At the beginning of the year 1499, however, Alexander again
assumed control of Nepi by compelling the castellan, who commanded the
fortress for the truant Ascanio, to surrender it to him. He now invested
his daughter with the castle, the city, and the domain of Nepi.[66]
September 4, 1499, Francesco Borgia, the Pope's treasurer, who was also
Bishop of Teano, took possession of the city in her name.

September 25th Alexander himself, accompanied by four cardinals, went to
Nepi. In the castle, which he had restored, he met Lucretia and her
husband, and also her brother Don Giuffrè. He returned to Rome almost
immediately--October 1st. On the tenth he addressed a brief from there
to the city of Nepi, in which he commanded the municipality thenceforth
to obey Lucretia, Duchess of Biselli, as their true sovereign. On the
twelfth he sent his daughter a communication in which he empowered her
to remit certain taxes to which the citizens of Nepi had hitherto been
subject.[67]

Lucretia, therefore, had become the mistress of two large domains--a
fact which clearly shows that she stood in high favor with her father.
She did not again return to Spoleto, but entrusted its government to a
lieutenant. Although Alexander made Cardinal Gurk legate for Perugia
and Todi early in October, he reserved Spoleto for his daughter. Later,
August 10, 1500, he made Ludovico Borgia--who was Archbishop of
Valencia--governor of this city, without, however, impairing his
daughter's rights to the large revenue which the territory yielded.

As early as October 14th Lucretia returned to Rome. November 1, 1499,
she gave birth to a son, who was named, in honor of the Pope, Rodrigo.
Her firstborn was baptized with great pomp November 11th in the Sistine
Chapel--not the chapel now known by that name, but the one which Sixtus
IV had built in S. Peter's. Giovanni Cervillon held the child in his
arms, and near by were the Governor of Rome and a representative of the
Emperor Maximilian. All the cardinals, the ambassadors of England,
Venice, Naples, Savoy, Siena, and the Republic of Florence were present
at the ceremony. The governor of the city held the child over the font.
The godfathers were Podocatharo, Bishop of Caputaqua, and Ferrari,
Bishop of Modena.

In the meantime, October 6th, Louis XII had taken possession of Milan,
Ludovico Sforza having fled, on the approach of the French forces, to
the Emperor Maximilian. In accordance with his agreement with Alexander,
the king now lent troops to Cæsar Borgia to enable him to seize the
Romagna, where it was proclaimed that the vassals of the Church, the
Malatesta of Rimini, the Sforza of Pesaro, the Riario of Imola and
Forli, the Varano of Camerino, and the Manfredi of Faenza had forfeited
their fiefs to the Pope.

Cæsar went to Rome, November 18, 1499. He stayed in the Vatican three
days and then set forth again to join his army, which was besieging
Imola. It was his intention first to take this city and then attack
Forli, in the castle of which the mistress of the two cities, Catarina
Sforza, had established herself for the purpose of resisting him.

While he was engaged in his campaigns in Romagna, his father was
endeavoring to seize the hereditary possessions of the Roman barons. He
first attacked the Gaetani. From the end of the thirteenth century this
ancient family had held large landed estates in the Campagna and
Maritima. It had divided into several branches, one of which was settled
in the vicinity of Naples. There the Gaetani were Dukes of Traetto,
Counts of Fundi and Caserta, and likewise vassals and favorites of the
crown of Naples.

Sermoneta, the center of the domain of the Gaetani family in the Roman
Campagna, was an ancient city with a feudal castle, situated in the
foothills of the Volscian mountains. Above it and to one side were the
ruins of the great castle of Norba; below were the beautiful remains of
Nymsa; while at its foot, extending to the sea, lay the Pontine marshes.
The greater part of this territory, which was traversed by the Appian
Way, including the Cape of Circello, was the property of the Gaetani, to
whom it still belongs.

At the time of which we are speaking it was ruled by the sons of
Honoratus II, a powerful personality, who had raised his house from
ruin. He died in the year 1490, leaving a widow, Catarina Orsini, and
three sons--Nicola the prothonotary; Giacomo, and Guglielmo. His
daughter Giovanella was the wife of Pierluigi Farnese and mother of
Giulia. Nicola, who had married Eleonora Orsini, died in the year 1494;
consequently, next to the prothonotary Giacomo, Guglielmo Gaetani was
head of the house of Sermoneta.

Alexander lured the prothonotary to Rome and, having confined him in
the castle of S. Angelo, began a process against him. Guglielmo
succeeded in escaping to Mantua, but Nicola's little son Bernardino was
murdered by the Borgia hirelings. Sermoneta was besieged, and its
inhabitants surrendered without resistance.

As early as March 9, 1499, Alexander compelled the apostolic chamber to
sell his daughter the possessions of the Gaetani for eighty thousand
ducats. He stated in a document, which was signed by eighteen cardinals,
that the magnitude of the expenditures which he had recently made in the
interests of the Holy See compelled him to increase the Church property;
and for this purpose there were Sermoneta, Bassiano, Ninfa and Norma,
Tivera, Cisterna, San Felice (the Cape of Circello), and San Donato,
which, owing to the rebellion of the Gaetani, might be confiscated. This
transaction was concluded in February, 1500, and Lucretia, who was
already mistress of Spoleto and Nepi, thus became ruler of
Sermoneta.[68] In vain did the unfortunate Giacomo Gaetani protest from
his prison; July 5, 1500, he was poisoned. His mother and sisters buried
him in S. Bartolomeo, which stands on an island in the Tiber, where the
Gaetani had owned a palace for a great many years.

Giulia Farnese, therefore, was unable to save her own uncle. She was
reminded that Giacomo and Nicola had stood beside her when she was
married to the youthful Orsini in 1489 in the Borgia palace. We do not
know whether Giulia was living in Rome at this time. We occasionally
find her name in the epigrams of the day, and it appears in a satire,
_Dialogue between Death and the Pope, sick of a Fever_, in which he
called upon Giulia to save him, whereupon Death replied that his
mistress had borne him three or four children. As the satire was written
in the summer of 1500, when Alexander was suffering from the fever, it
is probable that his relations with Giulia still continued.

Cæsar, who had taken Imola, December 1, 1499, was far from pleased when
he saw the great estates of the Gaetani, whose revenues he himself could
use to good advantage, bestowed upon his sister; and, as he himself
wished absolutely to control the will of his father, her growing
influence in the Vatican caused him no little annoyance. He had sinister
plans for whose execution the time was soon to prove propitious.


FOOTNOTES:

[60] Despatch of Joh. Lucidus Cataneus, Rome, August 8, 1498. Gonzaga
archives.

[61] The briefs are in the state archives of Venice.

[62] The instrument is in Beneimbene's protocol-book.

[63] The instrument is in Beneimbene's protocol-book.

[64] Diary of Marino Saruto, ii, 751.

[65] This brief is in the state archives of Spoleto.

[66] The Bull of Investiture, written on parchment, is dated Rome, 1499,
Non. (the month is not given). It is an absolute _donum_. The document
is now in the archives of Modena.

[67] Both briefs are preserved in the archives of the State-house of
Nepi.

[68] The documents concerning this sale, dated February 11 to 15, 1500,
are preserved in the archives of Modena.




CHAPTER XIV

SOCIAL LIFE OF THE BORGIAS


Lucretia certainly must have been pleased by her brother's long absence;
the Vatican was less turbulent. Besides herself only Don Giuffrè and
Donna Sancia, who had effected her return, maintained a court there.

We might avail ourselves of this period of quiet to depict Lucretia's
private life, her court, and the people about her; but it is impossible
to do this, none of her contemporaries having left any description of
it. Even Burchard shows us Lucretia but rarely, and when he does it is
always in connection with affairs in the Vatican. Only once does he give
us a fleeting view of her palace--on February 27, 1496--when Giovanni
Borgia, Juan de Castro, and the recently created Cardinal Martinus of
Segovia were calling upon her.

None of the foreign diplomatists of that time, so far as we may learn
from their despatches, made any reports regarding Lucretia's private
life. We have only a few letters written by her during her residence in
Rome, and there is not a single poem dedicated to her or which mentions
her; therefore it is due to the malicious epigrams of Sannazzaro and
Pontanus that she has been branded as the most depraved of courtesans.
If there ever was a young woman, however, likely to excite the
imagination of the poet, Lucretia Borgia in the bloom of her youth and
beauty was that woman. Her connection with the Vatican, the mystery
which surrounded her, and the fate she suffered, make her one of the
most fascinating women of her age. Doubtless there are buried in various
libraries numerous verses dedicated to her by the Roman poets who must
have swarmed at the court of the Pope's daughter to render homage to her
beauty and to seek her patronage.

In Rome, Lucretia had an opportunity to enjoy, if she were so disposed,
the society of many brilliant men, for even during the sovereignty of
the Borgias the Muses were banished neither from the Vatican nor from
Rome. It can not be denied, however, that the daughters of princely
houses were allowed to devote themselves to the cultivation of the
intellect more freely at the secular courts of Italy than they were at
the papal court. Not until Lucretia went to Ferrara to live was she able
to endeavor to emulate the example of the princesses of Mantua and
Urbino. While living in Rome she was too young and her environment too
narrow for her to have had any influence upon the literary and æsthetic
circles of that city, although, owing to her position, she must have
been acquainted with them.

Her father was not incapable of intellectual pleasures; he had his court
minstrels and poets. The famous Aurelio Brandolini, who died in 1497,
was wont to improvise to the strains of the lute during banquets in the
Vatican and in Lucretia's palace. Cæsar's favorite, Serafino of Aquila,
the Petrarch of his age, who died in Rome in the year 1500, still a
young man, aspired to the same honor.

Cæsar himself was interested in poetry and the arts, just as were all
the cultivated men and tyrants of the Renaissance. His court poet was
Francesco Sperulo, who served under his standard, and who sang his
campaigns in Romagna and in the neighborhood of Camerino.[69] A number
of Roman poets who subsequently became famous recited their verses in
the presence of Lucretia, among them Emilio Voccabella and Evangelista
Fausto Maddaleni. Even at that time the three brothers Mario, Girolamo,
and Celso Mellini enjoyed great renown as poets and orators, while the
brothers of the house of Porcaro--Camillo, Valerio, and Antonio--were
equally famous. We have already noted that Antonio was one of the
witnesses at the marriage of Girolama Borgia in the year 1482, and that
he subsequently was Lucretia's proxy when she was betrothed to Centelles
in 1491. These facts show how closely and how long the Porcaro were
allied to the Borgias.

This Roman family had been made famous in the history of the city by the
fate of Stefano, Cola di Rienzi's successor. The Porcaro claimed descent
from the Catos, and for this reason many of them adopted the name
Porcius. Enjoying friendly relations with the Borgias, they claimed them
as kinsmen, stating that Isabella, the mother of Alexander VI, was
descended from the Roman Porcaro, who somehow had passed to Spain. The
similarity of sound in the Latin names Borgius and Porcius gave some
appearance of truth to this pretension.

Next to Antonio, Hieronymus Porcius was one of the most brilliant
retainers of the house of Borgia. Alexander, upon his election to the
papal throne, made him auditor of the Ruota (the Papal Court of
Appeals). He was the author of a work printed in Rome in September,
1493, under the title _Commentarius Porcius_, which was dedicated to the
King and Queen of Spain. In it he describes the election and coronation
of Alexander VI, and quotes portions of the declarations of loyalty
which the Italian envoys addressed to the Pope. Court flattery could not
be carried further than it was in this case by Hieronymus, an affected
pedant, an empty-headed braggart, a fanatical papist. Alexander made him
Bishop of Andria and Governor of the Romagna. In 1497 Hieronymus, then
in Cesena, composed a dialogue on Savonarola and his "heresy concerning
the power of the Pope." The kernel of the whole thing was the
fundamental doctrine of the infallibilists; namely, that only those who
blindly obey the Pope are good Christians.[70]

Porcius also essayed poetry, celebrating the magnificence of the Pope
and Cardinal Cæsar, whom, in his verses on the Borgia Steer, he
described as his greatest benefactor. Apparently he was also the author
of the elegy on the death of the Duke of Gandia, which is still
preserved.

Phædra Inghirami, the famous student of Cicero, whom Erasmus admired and
whom Raphael rendered immortal by his portrait, doubtless made the
acquaintance of the Borgias and of Lucretia through the Porcaro. Even as
early as this he was attracting the attention of Rome. Inghirami
delivered an oration at the mass which the Spanish ambassador had said
for the Infante Don Juan, January 16, 1498, in S. Jacopo in Navona,
which was greatly admired. He also made a reputation as an actor in
Cardinal Rafael Riario's theater.

The drama was then putting forth its first fruits, not only at the
courts of the Este and Gonzaga families, but also in Rome. Alexander
himself, owing to his sensuous nature, was especially fond of it, and
had comedies and ballets performed at all the family festivities in the
Vatican. The actors were young students from the Academy of Pomponius
Laetus, and we have every reason to believe that Inghirami, the Mellini,
and the Porcaro took part in these performances whenever the
opportunity was offered. Carlo Canale, Vannozza's consort, must also
have lent valuable assistance, for he had been familiar with the stage
in Mantua; and no less important was the aid of Pandolfo Collenuccio,
who had repeatedly been Ferrara's ambassador in Rome, where he enjoyed
daily intercourse with the Borgias.

The celebrated Pomponius, to whom Rome was indebted for the revival of
the theater, spent his last years, during the reign of Alexander, in the
enjoyment of the highest popular esteem. Alexander himself may have been
one of his pupils, as Cardinal Farnese certainly was. Pomponius died
June 6, 1498, and the same pope who had sent Savonarola to the stake had
his court attend the obsequies of the great representative of classic
paganism, which were held in the Church of Aracoeli, a fact which lends
additional support to the belief that he was personally known to the
Borgias. Moreover, one of his most devoted pupils, Michele Ferno, had
for a long time been a firm adherent of Alexander. Although the Pope in
1501 issued the first edict of censorship, he was not an enemy of the
sciences. He fostered the University of Rome, several of whose chairs
were at that time held by men of note; for example, Petrus Sabinus and
John Argyropulos. One of the greatest geniuses--one whose light has
blessed all mankind--was for a year an ornament of this university and
of the reign of Alexander; Copernicus came to Rome from far away Prussia
in the jubilee year 1500, and lectured on mathematics and astronomy.

Among Alexander's courtiers there were many brilliant men whose society
Lucretia must have had an opportunity to enjoy. Burchard, the master of
ceremonies, laid down the rules for all the functions in which the
Pope's daughter took part. He must have called upon her frequently, but
she could scarcely have foreseen that, centuries later, this Alsatian's
notes would constitute the mirror in which posterity would see the
reflections of the Borgias. His diary, however, gives no details
concerning Lucretia's private life--this did not come within his duties.

Never did any other chronicler describe the things about him so clearly
and so concisely, so dryly, and with so little feeling--things which
were worthy of the pen of a Tacitus. That Burchard was not friendly to
the Borgias is proved by the way his diary is written; it, however, is
absolutely truthful. This man well knew how to conceal his feelings--if
the dull routine of his office had left him any. He went through the
daily ceremonial of the Vatican mechanically, and kept his place there
under five popes. Burchard must have seemed to the Borgias a harmless
pedant; for if not, would they have permitted him to behold and describe
their doings and yet live? Even the little which he did write in his
diary concerning events of the day would have cost him his head had it
come to the knowledge of Alexander or Cæsar. It appears, however, that
the diaries of the masters of ceremony were not subjected to official
censorship. Cæsar would have spared him no more than he did his father's
favorite, Pedro Calderon Perotto, whom he stabbed, and Cervillon, whom
he had killed--both of whom frequently performed important parts in the
ceremonies in the Vatican.

Nor did he spare the private secretary, Francesco Troche, whom Alexander
VI had often employed in diplomatic affairs. Troche, according to a
Venetian report a Spaniard, was, like Canale, a cultivated humanist, and
like him, he was also on friendly terms with the house of Gonzaga. There
are still in existence letters of his to the Marchioness Gonzaga, in
which he asks her to send him certain sonnets she had composed. She
likewise writes to him regarding family matters, and also asks him to
find her an antique cupid in Rome. There is no doubt but that he was one
of Lucretia's most intimate acquaintances. In June, 1503, Cæsar had also
this favorite of his father strangled.

Besides Burchard and Lorenz Behaim, there was another German who was
familiar with the family affairs of the Borgias, Goritz of Luxemburg,
who subsequently, during the reigns of Julius II and Leo X, became
famous as an academician. Even in Alexander's time the cultivated world
of Rome was in the habit of meeting at Goritz's house in Trajan's Forum
for the purpose of engaging in academic discussions. All the Germans who
came to Rome sought him out, and he must have received Reuchlin, who
visited that city in 1498, and subsequently Copernicus, Erasmus, and
Ulrich von Hutten, who remembered him with gratitude; it is also
probable that Luther visited his hospitable home. Goritz was _supplicant
referent_, and as such he must have known Lucretia personally, because
the influential daughter of the Pope was the constant recipient of
petitions of various sorts. He had ample opportunity to observe events
in the Vatican, but of his experiences he recorded nothing; or, if he
did, his diary was destroyed in the sack of Rome in 1527, when he lost
all his belongings.

Among Lucretia's personal acquaintances was still another man, one who
was in a better position than any one else to write the history of the
Borgias. This was the Nestor of Roman notaries, old Camillo Beneimbene,
the trusted legal adviser of Alexander and of most of the cardinals and
grandees of Rome. He knew the Borgias in their private as well as in
their public character; he had been acquainted with Lucretia from her
childhood; he drew up all her marriage contracts. His office was on the
Lombard Piazza, now known as S. Luigi dei Francesi. Here he worked,
drawing up legal documents until the year 1505, as is shown by
instruments in his handwriting.[71] A man who had been the official
witness and legal adviser in the most important family affairs of the
Borgias for so long a time, and who, therefore, was familiar with all
their secrets, must have occupied, so far as their house, and especially
Lucretia, were concerned, the position of a close friend. Beneimbene
records none of his personal experiences, but his protocol-book is still
preserved in the archives of the notary of the Capitol.

Adriano Castelli of Corneto, a highly cultivated humanist, and
privy-secretary to Alexander, who subsequently made him a cardinal, was
very close to the Borgias. As the Pope's secretary he must have
frequently come in contact with Lucretia. Among her intimate
acquaintances were also the famous Latinist, Cortesi; the youthful
Sardoleto, the familiar of Cardinal Cibò; young Aldo Manuzio; the
intellectual brothers Rafael and Mario Maffei of Volterra; and Egidio of
Viterbo, who subsequently became famous as a pulpit orator and was made
a cardinal. The last maintained his connection with Lucretia while she
was Duchess of Ferrara. He exercised a deep influence upon the religious
turn which her nature took during this the second period of her life.

The youthful Duchess of Biselli certainly enjoyed the lively society of
the cultured and gallant ecclesiastics about her--Cardinals Medici,
Riario, Orsini, Cesarini, and Farnese--not to mention the Borgias and
the Spanish prelates. We may look for her, too, at the banquets in the
palaces of Rome's great families, the Massimi and Orsini, the Santa
Croce, Altieri, and Valle, and in the homes of the wealthy bankers
Altoviti, Spanocchi, and Mariano Chigi, whose sons Lorenzo and
Agostino--the latter eventually became famous--enjoyed the confidence of
the Borgias.

Lucretia was able in Rome to gratify a taste for the fine arts.
Alexander found employment for the great artists of the day in the
Vatican, where Perugino executed some paintings for him, and where,
under the picture of the holy Virgin, Pinturicchio, who was his court
artist, painted the portrait of the adulteress, Giulia Farnese. He also
painted portraits of several members of the Borgia family in the castle
of S. Angelo.

"In the castle of S. Angelo," says Vasari, "he painted many of the rooms
_a grotesche_; but in the tower below, in the garden, he depicted scenes
from the life of Alexander VI. There he painted the Catholic Queen
Isabella; Niccolò Orsini, Count of Pitigliano; Giangiacomo Trivulzio;
and many other kinsmen and friends of the Pope, and especially Cæsar
Borgia and his brother and sisters, as well as numerous great men of the
age." Lorenz Behaim copied the epigrams which were placed under six of
these paintings in the "castle of S. Angelo, below in the papal
gardens." All represented scenes from the critical period of the
invasion of Italy by Charles VIII, and they were painted in such a way
as to make Alexander appear as having been victorious. One showed the
king prostrating himself at the Pope's feet in this same garden of the
castle of S. Angelo; another represented Charles declaring his loyalty
before the consistory; another, Philip of Sens and Guillaume of S. Malo
receiving the cardinal's hat; another, the mass in S. Peter's at which
Charles VIII assisted; the subject of another was the passage to S.
Paul's, with the king holding the Pope's stirrup; and, lastly, a scene
depicting the departure of Charles for Naples, accompanied by Cæsar
Borgia and the Sultan Djem.[72]

These paintings are now lost, and with them the portraits of the members
of the Borgia family. Pinturicchio doubtless painted several likenesses
of the beautiful Lucretia. Probably many of the figures in the paintings
of this master resemble the Borgias, but of this we are not certain. In
the collections of antiquaries, and among the innumerable old portraits
which may be seen hanging in rows on the discolored walls in the palaces
of Rome and in the castles in Romagna, there doubtless are likenesses of
Lucretia, of Cæsar, and of his brothers, which the beholder never
suspects as such. It is well known that there was a faithful portrait of
Alexander VI and his children above the altar of S. Lucia in the Church
of S. Maria del Popolo, the work of Pinturicchio. Later, when Alexander
restored this church, the painting was removed to the court of the
cloister, and eventually it was lost.[73]

Of the famous artists of the day, Lucretia must likewise have known
Antonio di Sangallo, her father's architect, and also Antonio
Pollajuolo, the most renowned sculptor of the Florentine school in Rome
during the last decades of the fifteenth century. He died there in 1498.

But the most famous of all the artists then in Rome was Michael Angelo.
He appeared there first in 1498, an ambitious young man of three and
twenty. At that time the city of Rome was an enchanting environment for
an artistic nature. The boundless immorality of her great past, speaking
so eloquently from innumerable monuments of the pagan and Christian
worlds; her majesty and holy calm; the sudden breaking loose of furious
passions--all this is beyond the imaginative power of modern men, just
as is the wickedly secular nature of the papacy and the spirit of the
Renaissance which swept over these ruins. We are unable to comprehend in
their entirety the soul-activities of this great race, which was both
creative and destructive. For to the same feeling which impelled men to
commit great crimes do we owe the great works of art of the Renaissance.
In those days evil, as well as good, was in the _grand style_. Alexander
VI displayed himself to the world, for whose opinion he had supreme
contempt, as shamelessly and fearlessly as did Nero.

The Renaissance, owing to the violent contrasts which it presents, now
naïvely and now in full consciousness of their incongruity, and also on
account of the fiendish traits by which it is characterized, will always
constitute one of the greatest psychologic problems in the history of
civilization.

All virtues, all crimes, all forces were set in motion by a feverish
yearning for immaterial pleasures, beauty, power, and immortality. The
Renaissance has been called an intellectual bacchanalia, and when we
examine the features of the bacchantes they become distorted like those
of the suitors in Homer, who anticipated their fall; for this society,
this Church, these cities and states--in fine, this culture in its
entirety--toppled over into the abyss which was yawning for it. The
reflection that men like Copernicus, Michael Angelo, and Bramante,
Alexander VI and Cæsar Borgia could live in Rome at one and the same
time is well nigh overpowering.

Did Lucretia ever see the youthful artist, subsequently the friend of
the noble lady, Vittoria Colonna, whose portrait he painted? We know
not; but there is no reason to doubt that she did. The curiosity of the
artist and of the man would have induced Michael Angelo to endeavor to
gain a glimpse of the most charming woman in Rome. Although only a
beginner, he was already recognized as an artist of great talent. As he
had just been taken up by Gallo the Roman and Cardinal La Grolaye, it is
altogether probable that he would have been the subject also of
Lucretia's curiosity.

Affected by the recent tragedies in the house of Borgia--for example,
the murder of the Duke of Gandia--Michael Angelo was engaged upon the
great work which was the first to attract the attention of the city, the
Pietà, which Cardinal La Grolaye had commissioned him to paint. This
work he completed in 1499, about the time the great Bramante came to
Rome. The group should be studied with the epoch of the Borgias for
background; the Pietà rises supreme in ethical significance, and in the
moral darkness about her she seems a pure sacrificial fire lighted by a
great and earnest spirit in the dishonored realm of the Church. Lucretia
stood before the Pietà, and the masterpiece must have affected this
unhappy daughter of a sinful pope more powerfully than the words of her
confessor or than the admonitions of the abbesses of S. Sisto.


FOOTNOTES:

[69] Manuscript in the Vatican, No. 5205.

[70] Collocutores itinerantes Tuscus et Remus, Romæ in Campo Floræ,
1497.

[71] See the author's essay, Das Archiv der Notare des Capitols in Rom,
and the protocol-book of the Notary Camillus de Beneimbene, 1457 to
1505. Proceedings of k. bayr. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu München,
1872. Part iv.

[72] In the Codex Hartmann Schedel in the state library of Munich.

[73] Piazza (Gerarchia Cardinalizia) states that he saw it as late as
1712.




CHAPTER XV

MISFORTUNES OF CATARINA SFORZA


The jubilee year 1500 was a fortunate one for Cæsar, but an unhappy one
for Lucretia. She began it January 1st with a formal passage to the
Lateran, whither she went to make the prescribed pilgrimage to the Roman
churches. She rode upon a richly caparisoned jennet, her escort
consisting of two hundred mounted nobles, men and women. On her left was
her consort, Don Alfonso; on her right one of the ladies of her court;
and behind them came the captain of the papal guard, Rodrigo Borgia.
While she and her retinue were crossing over the Bridge of S. Angelo,
her father stood in a loggia of the castle, feasting his eyes upon his
beloved daughter.

The new year brought Alexander only good news--if we except that of the
death of the Cardinal-legate Giovanni Borgia, Bishop of Melfi and
Archbishop of Capua, who was known as the "younger," to distinguish him
from another cardinal of the same name. He died in Urbino, January 8,
1500, of a fever, according to a statement made by Elisabetta, consort
of Guidobaldo, to her brother Gonzaga, in a letter written from
Fossombrone on the same day.[74]

Cæsar was in Forli when he received the news of the cardinal's death,
the very morning--January 12th--on which the stronghold surrendered to
him. He at once conveyed the information to the Duke of Ferrara in a
letter, in which he said that Giovanni Borgia had been called to Rome
by the Pope, and having set out from Forli, had died suddenly in Urbino
of a flux. The fact that he had been in Cæsar's camp, and that,
according to Elisabetta's letter, he had been taken sick in Urbino, lent
some probability to the suspicion that he had been poisoned.

It is worthy of note that Cæsar, in his letter to the duke, speaks of
the deceased as his brother;[75] and Ercole, in offering him his
condolences, January 18th, on the death of the cardinal, also called him
Cæsar's brother. Are we thereby warranted in concluding that the younger
Giovanni Borgia was a son of Alexander VI? Further, the Ferrarese
chronicler Zambotto, speaking of the cardinal's death, uses the
expression, "son of Pope Alexander."[76] If this was the case, the
number of Alexander's children must be increased, for Ludovico Borgia
was also his son. This Borgia, who succeeded to Giovanni's benefices,
was Archbishop of Valencia and subsequently cardinal. He reported his
promotion to the Marchioness Gonzaga in a letter in which he everywhere
speaks of the deceased as "his brother," just as Cæsar had done.[77]

These statements, however, do not refute the hitherto generally accepted
opinion regarding the descent of Giovanni Borgia, "the younger," and
Zambotta certainly was in error--the word _fratre_, which he uses in his
letter means merely "dear cousin," _fratello cugino_.[78]

January 14th news reached the Vatican that Cæsar had taken the castle of
Forli. After a brave resistance Catarina Sforza Riario, together with
her two brothers, was compelled to surrender. The grandchild of the
great Francesco Sforza of Milan, the natural daughter of Galeazzo Maria
and the illegitimate sister of Blanca, wife of Emperor Maximilian, was
the ideal of the heroic women of Italy, who were found not only in
Bojardo's and Ariosto's poems, but also in real life. Her nature
exceeded the feminine and verged on caricature. To understand the
evolution of such personalities, in whom beauty and culture, courage and
reason, sensuality and cruelty combined to produce a strange organism,
we must be familiar with the conditions from which they sprang. Catarina
Sforza's experiences made her the amazon that she was.

At an early age she was married to the rude nephew of Sixtus IV,
Girolamo Riario, Count of Forli. Shortly afterwards her terrible father
met a tyrant's death in Milan. Then her husband fell beneath the daggers
of the conspirators, who flung his naked body from a window of the
stronghold of Forli. Catarina, however, with determined courage,
succeeded in keeping the castle for her children, and she avenged her
husband's death with ferocious cruelty. Subsequently she was known--to
quote Marino Sanuto's words--as "a courageous woman and cruel
virago."[79] Six years later she saw her brother Giangaleazzo die of
poison administered by Ludovico il Moro, while before her very eyes her
second, but not openly recognized, husband, Giacomo Feo of Savona, was
slain in Forli by conspirators. She immediately mounted her charger, and
at the head of her guard pursued the murderers to their quarter, where
she had every living being--men, women, and children--hacked to pieces.
She buried a third lover, Giovanni Medici, in 1497.

With cunning and force this amazon ruled her little domain until she
herself finally fell into Cæsar's hands. Few lamented her fate. When the
news reached Milan that she was in the duke's power, and consequently
also in that of Pope Alexander, the celebrated General Giangiacomo
Trivulzio made a jesting remark which clearly shows how little her fate
grieved the people. According to the stories of the day, Cæsar led her
to Rome in golden chains, like another Queen of Palmyra. He entered the
city in triumph, February 26th, and the Pope assigned the Belvedere to
the captive for her abode.

The city was filled at that time with the faithful, who had come to
receive absolution for their sins, this the jubilee year,--and from a
Borgia. Among the number was Elisabetta Gonzaga, consort of Guidobaldo
of Urbino. The pilgrimage of this famous woman was a dangerous
experiment, the Pope having secretly placed Urbino on the list of
proscribed cities included in the Church fiefs. Cæsar already looked
upon it as his property. The thought of meeting this Borgia in Rome must
have been exceedingly painful to her. How easily might he have found a
pretext for keeping her prisoner! Her brother, Francesco Gonzaga, warned
her against her decision, but on her way to Rome she wrote him a letter
so remarkable and so amiable that we quote it at length:

     ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE AND LORD, HONORED BROTHER: I have left
     Urbino and set out for Rome for the purpose of receiving
     absolution, this the jubilee year. Several days ago I informed your
     Excellency of my prospective journey. Only to-day, in Assisi, did I
     receive your letter; I understand from what you write that you
     wish me to abandon this journey--perhaps thinking that I have not
     yet set out--which grieves me greatly, and causes me unspeakable
     pain, because I wish in this as in all other things to do your
     Majesty's will, having always looked upon you as my most honored
     father, and never having had any thought or purpose but to follow
     your wishes. However, as I have said, I am now on the way and am
     out of the country. With the help of Fabritius (Colonna) and
     Madonna Agnesina, my honored sister-in-law and sister, I have made
     arrangements for a residence in Rome, and for whatever may be
     necessary for my comfort. I have also informed them that I would be
     in Marino four days hence, and consequently Fabritius has gone to
     the trouble of securing an escort for me; further, my departure and
     journey have been noised about; therefore, I see no way to abandon
     this pilgrimage without affecting my honor and that of my
     husband--since the thing has gone so far--the more so as the
     journey was undertaken with the full knowledge and consent of my
     lord, and all and everything carefully considered. Your Majesty
     must not be distressed or annoyed by this, my journey, and in order
     that you may know everything, I will tell you that I am first going
     to Marino, and thence, accompanied by Madonna Agnesina, and
     incognito, shall go to Rome for the purpose of receiving absolution
     at this the holy jubilee of the Church. I need not see any one
     there, for during my stay in Rome I shall live in the palace of the
     deceased Cardinal Savelli. The house is a good one, and is exactly
     what I want, and it is within reach of the Colonna. It is my
     intention to return soon to Marino, there to spend the greater part
     of the time. Your Majesty, therefore, need have no further anxiety
     about my journey, and must not be displeased by it. Although these
     reasons are sufficient to induce me not only to continue the
     journey, but to begin it, if I had not already set out I would
     relinquish it, not on account of any fear of anything unpleasant
     that might attend my pilgrimage, but simply to comply with the wish
     expressed in your Majesty's letter, as I desire to do always. But
     as I am now here, and as your Excellency will soon receive this
     letter, I am sure you will approve of my course. I earnestly beg
     you to do so, and to assure me by letter, addressed to Rome, that
     you are not displeased, so that I may receive absolution in
     greater peace and tranquillity. If you do not I shall suffer great
     anxiety and grief. I commend myself to your Excellency's merciful
     benevolence as your Majesty's youngest sister,

  ELISABETTA.

  ASSISI, _March 21, 1500_.

Agnesina di Montefeltre mentioned in the letter, Guidobaldo's soulful
sister, was married to Fabritius Colonna, who subsequently became one of
Italy's greatest captains. She was then twenty-eight years of age. She
and her husband lived at the castle of Marino in the Alban mountains,
where, in 1490, she bore him Vittoria Colonna, the future ornament of
her house. Elisabetta found this beautiful child already betrothed to
Ferrante d'Avalos, son of Marquis Alfonso of Pescara; Ferdinand II of
Naples having brought about the betrothal of the two children as early
as 1495 for the purpose of winning over the Colonna, the retainers of
the house of Aragon.

The Duchess of Urbino actually went to Rome for the purpose of
protecting her noble kinswoman, whom she kept incognito. She remained
there until Easter. On her way to S. Peter's she directed anxious
glances toward the Belvedere, where the bravest woman of Italy, a
prisoner, was grieving her life away, Catarina Sforza having been
confined there since Cæsar's return, February 26th, as is attested by a
letter of that date written by the Venetian ambassador in Rome to his
Signory. Elisabetta's feelings must have been rendered still more
painful by the fact that her own husband, as well as her brother
Gonzaga, both of whom were in the service of France, had given the
princess up for lost.

She had scarcely left Rome when Catarina received news that her uncles
Ludovico and Ascanio had fallen into the hands of the King of France.
Having, with the aid of Swiss troops, again secured possession of Milan
in 1500, they were ignominiously betrayed by the mercenaries at Novara,
April 10th. Ludovico was carried away to France, where he died in
misery, having spent ten years a prisoner in the tower of Loches; the
once powerful cardinal was likewise taken a captive to France. A great
tragedy had occurred in the house of Sforza. What must have been
Catarina's distress when she, in her prison, learned that fate had
overthrown all her race! Could one transport himself to that environment
he would breathe the oppressive atmosphere with which Shakespeare
enveloped his characters.

Catarina's jailers were the two most dreaded men of the age--the Pope
and his son. The very thought of what surrounded her must have filled
her with terror. In the Belvedere she was in constant dread of Cæsar's
poison, and it is indeed a wonder that she did escape it. She made an
unsuccessful attempt at flight, whereupon Alexander had her removed to
the castle of S. Angelo. However, certain French gentlemen in the
service of the one who was bent on her destruction--especially Ivo
d'Allegre--interceded for her; and the Pope, after she had spent a year
and a half in captivity, allowed her to choose Florence for her asylum.
He himself commended her to the Signory in the following letter:

     UNTO MY BELOVED SONS: Greeting and the Apostolic Blessing.
     Our beloved daughter in Christ, the noble lady Catarina Sforza, is
     on her way to you. She, as you are aware, having for good reasons
     been held a prisoner by Us for a time, has again become the object
     of Our mercy. We, according to Our custom and to Our pastoral
     duties, have not only exercised mercy with regard to this Catarina,
     but also, so far as We with God's help were able, have looked with
     paternal solicitude after her welfare; therefore We deem it proper
     to write you for the purpose of commending this Catarina to your
     protection, so that she, having full confidence in Our good will
     towards you, and returning, so to speak, into her own country, may
     not be deluded in her expectations and by Our recommendation. We,
     therefore, shall be glad to learn that she has been well received
     and treated by you, in gratitude to her for having chosen your city
     for her abode, and owing to your feelings toward Us. Given at Rome,
     in S. Peter's, under the Apostolic seal, July 13, 1501. In the
     ninth year of our pontificate.

     HADRIANUS.

Catarina Sforza died in a convent in Florence in 1509. In her fatherland
she left a son of the same mettle as herself, Giovanni Medici, the last
of the great condottieri of the country, who became famous as leader of
the Black Bands. There is a seated figure in marble of this captain, of
herculean strength, with the neck of a centaur, near the church of S.
Lorenzo in Florence.


FOOTNOTES:

[74] In the Gonzaga archives.

[75] In questa mattina ho hauto lo adviso de la morte del Rmo Card.
Borgia _mio fratre_ passato de questa vita in Urbino. Forli, January 16,
1500. Archives of Modena.

[76] A. 1500, Jan. 22 (this is incorrect), mori il Carle Borgia fiolo de
Papa Alexo a Orbino. Silva Cronicarum Bernardini Zambotti. Ms. in the
library of Ferrara.

[77] La bona memoria del Cardinale Borgia mio fratre. Rome, July 30,
1500. Gonzaga archives.

[78] Cittadella's opinion that Giovanni Borgia, junior, was a son of
Pierluigi, Alexander's brother, is also incorrect.

[79] Femina quasi virago crudelissima et di gran animo. Venuta di Carlo
VIII, p. 811, Ms. Virago here means amazon.




CHAPTER XVI

MURDER OF ALFONSO OF ARAGON


After the fall of the Riario, of Imola, and Forli, all the tyrants in
the domain of the Church trembled before Cæsar; and greater princes,
like those of the Gonzaga and Este families, who were either entirely
independent or were semi-independent vassals of the Church, courted the
friendship of the Pope and his dreaded son. Cæsar, as an ally of France,
had secured for himself the services of these princes, and since 1499
they had helped him in his schemes in the Romagna. He engaged in a
lively correspondence with Ercole d'Este, whom he treated as his equal,
as his brother and friend, although he was a young and immature man. To
him he reported his successes, and in return received congratulations,
equally confidential in tone, all of which consisted of diplomatic lies
inspired by fear. The correspondence between Cæsar and Ercole, which is
very voluminous, is still preserved in the Este archives in Modena. It
began August 30, 1498, when Cæsar was still a cardinal. In this letter,
which is written in Latin, he announces to the duke that he is about to
set out for France, and asks him for a saddle horse.

Cæsar engaged in an equally confidential correspondence with Francesco
Gonzaga, with whom he entered into intimate relations which endured
until his death. In the archives of the Gonzaga family in Mantua there
are preserved forty-one letters written by Cæsar to the marquis and his
consort Isabella. The first is dated October 31, 1498, from Avignon; the
second, January 12, 1500, from Forli; the third is as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS SIR AND HONORED BROTHER: From your
     Excellency's letter we have learned of the birth of your
     illustrious son, which has occasioned us no less joy than we would
     have felt on the birth of an heir to ourselves. As we, owing to our
     sincere and brotherly goodwill for you, wish you all increase and
     fortune, we willingly consent to be godfather, and will appoint for
     our proxy anyone whom your Excellency may choose. May he in our
     stead watch over the child from the moment of his baptism. We
     earnestly pray to God to preserve the same to you.

     Your Majesty will not fail to congratulate your illustrious consort
     in our name. She will, we hope, through this son prepare the way
     for a numerous posterity to perpetuate the fame of their
     illustrious parents. Rome, in the Apostolic Palace, May 24, 1500.

  CÆSAR BORGIA of France, Duke of Valentinois,
  Gonfallonier, and Captain-General
  of the Holy Roman Church.

This son of the Marquis of Mantua was the hereditary Prince Federico,
born May 17, 1500. Two years later, when Cæsar was at the zenith of his
power, Gonzaga requested the honor of the betrothal of this son and the
duke's little daughter Luisa.

Cæsar remained in Rome several months to secure funds for carrying out
his plans in Romagna. All his projects would have been wrecked in a
moment if his father had not escaped, almost unharmed, when the walls of
a room in the Vatican collapsed, June 27, 1500. He was extricated from
the rubbish only slightly hurt. He would allow no one but his daughter
to care for him. When the Venetian ambassador called, July 3d, he found
Madonna Lucretia, Sancia, the latter's husband, Giuffrè, and one of
Lucretia's ladies-in-waiting, who was the Pope's "favorite," with him.
Alexander was then seventy years of age. He ascribed his escape to the
Virgin Mary, just as Pius IX did his own when the house near S. Agnese
tumbled down. July 5th Alexander held a service in her honor, and on his
recovery he had himself borne in a procession to S. Maria del Popolo,
where he offered the Virgin a goblet containing three hundred ducats.
Cardinal Piccolomini ostentatiously scattered the gold pieces over the
altar before all the people.

The saints had saved a great sinner from the falling walls in the
Vatican, but they refrained from interfering eighteen days later to
prevent a hideous crime--the attempted murder of a guiltless person. In
vain had the youthful Alfonso of Biselli been warned by his own
premonitions and by his friends during the past year to seek safety in
flight. He had followed his wife to Rome like a lamb to the slaughter,
only to fall under the daggers of the assassins from whom she was
powerless to save him. Cæsar hated him, as he did the entire house of
Aragon, and in his opinion his sister's marriage to a Neapolitan prince
had become as useless as had been her union with Sforza of Pesaro;
moreover, it interfered with the plans of Cæsar, who had a matrimonial
alliance in mind for his sister which would be more advantageous to
himself. As her marriage with the Duke of Biselli had not been
childless, and, consequently, could not be set aside, he determined upon
a radical separation of the couple.

July 15, 1500, about eleven o'clock at night, Alfonso was on his way
from his palace to the Vatican to see his consort; near the steps
leading to S. Peter's a number of masked men fell upon him with daggers.
Severely wounded in the head, arm, and thigh, the prince succeeded in
reaching the Pope's chamber. At the sight of her spouse covered with
blood, Lucretia sank to the floor in a swoon.

Alfonso was carried to another room in the Vatican, and a cardinal
administered the extreme unction; his youth, however, triumphed, and he
recovered. Although Lucretia, owing to her fright, fell sick of a fever,
she and his sister Sancia took care of him; they cooked his food, while
the Pope himself placed a guard over him. In Rome there was endless
gossip about the crime and its perpetrators. July 19th the Venetian
ambassador wrote to his Signory: "It is not known who wounded the duke,
but it is said that it was the same person who killed the Duke of Gandia
and threw him into the Tiber. Monsignor of Valentinois has issued an
edict that no one shall be found with arms between the castle of S.
Angelo and S. Peter's, on pain of death."

Cæsar remarked to the ambassador, "I did not wound the duke, but if I
had, it would have been nothing more than he deserved." His hatred of
his brother-in-law must have been inspired also by personal reasons of
which we are ignorant. He even ventured to call upon the wounded man,
remarking on leaving, "What is not accomplished at noon may be done at
night."

The days passed slowly; finally the murderer lost patience. At nine
o'clock in the evening of August 18th, he came again; Lucretia and
Sancia drove him from the room, whereupon he called his captain,
Micheletto, who strangled the duke. There was no noise, not a sound; it
was like a pantomime; amid a terrible silence the dead prince was borne
away to S. Peter's.

The affair was no longer a secret. Cæsar openly stated that he had
destroyed the duke because the latter was seeking his life, and he
claimed that by Alfonso's orders some archers had shot at him when he
was strolling in the Vatican gardens.

[Illustration: CÆSAR BORGIA.

From a painting by Giorgione.]

Nothing so clearly discloses the terrible influence which Cæsar
exercised over his wicked father as this deed, and the way in which the
Pope regarded it. From the Venetian ambassador's report it appears that
it was contrary to Alexander's wishes, and that he had even attempted to
save the unfortunate prince's life. After the crime had been committed,
however, the Pope dismissed it from his mind, both because he did not
dare to bring Cæsar--whom he had forgiven for the murder of his
brother--to a reckoning, and because the murder would result in offering
him opportunities which he desired. He spared himself the trouble of
directing useless reproaches to his son, for Cæsar would only have
laughed at them. Was the care with which Alexander had his unfortunate
son-in-law watched merely a bit of deceit? There are no grounds for
believing that the Pope either planned the murder himself or that he
consented to it.

Never was bloody deed so soon forgotten. The murder of a prince of the
royal house of Naples made no more impression than the death of a
Vatican stable boy would have done. No one avoided Cæsar; none of the
priests refused him admission to the Church, and all the cardinals
continued to show him the deepest reverence and respect. Prelates vied
with each other to receive the red hat from the hand of the all-powerful
murderer, who offered the dignity to the highest bidders. He needed
money for carrying out his schemes of confiscation in the Romagna. His
condottieri, Paolo Orsini, Giuliano Orsini, Vitellozzo Vitelli, and
Ercole Bentivoglio were with him during these autumn days. His father
had equipped seven hundred heavy men at arms for him, and, August 18th,
the Venetian ambassador reported to the signory that he had been
requested by the Pope to ask the Doge to withdraw their protection from
Rimini and Faenza. Negotiations were in progress with France to secure
her active support for Cæsar. August 24th the French ambassador, Louis
de Villeneuve, made his entry into Rome; near S. Spirito a masked man
rode up and embraced him. The man was Cæsar. However openly he committed
his crimes, he frequently went about Rome in disguise.

The murder of the youthful Alfonso of Aragon was by far the most tragic
deed committed by the Borgias, and his fate was more terrible than even
that of Astorre Manfredi. If Lucretia really loved her husband, as there
is every reason to suppose she did, his end must have caused her the
greatest anguish; and, even if she had no affection for him, all her
feelings must have been aroused against the murderer to whose fiendish
ambition the tragedy was due. She must also have rebelled against her
father, who regarded the crime with such indifference.

None of the reports of the day describe the circumstances in which she
found herself immediately after the murder, nor events in the Vatican
just preceding it. Although Lucretia was suffering from a fever, she did
not die of grief, nor did she rise to avenge her husband's murder, or to
flee from the terrible Vatican.

She was in a position similar to that of her sister-in-law, Doña Maria
Enriquez, after Gandia's death; but while the latter and her sons had
found safety in Spain, Lucretia had no retreat to which she could retire
without the consent of her father and brother.

It would be wrong to blame the unfortunate woman because at this fateful
moment of her life she did not make herself the subject of a tragedy. Of
a truth, she appears very weak and characterless. We must not look for
great qualities of soul in Lucretia, for she possessed them not. We are
endeavoring to represent her only as she actually was, and, if we judge
rightly, she was merely a woman differentiated from the great mass of
women, not by the strength, but by the graciousness, of her nature. This
young woman, regarded by posterity as a Medea or as a loathsomely
passionate creature, probably never experienced any real feeling. During
the years she lived in Rome she was always subject to the will of
others, for her destiny was controlled, first, by her father, and
subsequently by her brother. We know not how much of an effort, in view
of the circumstances by which she was trammeled, she could make to
maintain the dignity of woman. If Lucretia, however, ever did possess
the courage to assert her individuality and rights before those who
injured her, she certainly would have done so when her husband was
murdered. Perhaps she did assail her sinister brother with
recriminations and her father with tears. She was troublesome to Cæsar,
who wished her away from the Vatican, consequently Alexander banished
her for a time; and apparently she herself was not unwilling to go. The
Venetian ambassador Paolo Capello refers to some quarrel between
Lucretia and her father. He departed from Rome, September 16, 1500, and
on his return to Venice made a report to his government on the condition
of affairs, in which he says: "Madonna Lucretia, who is gracious and
generous, formerly was in high favor with the Pope, but she is so no
longer."

August 30th, Lucretia, accompanied by a retinue of six hundred riders,
set out from Rome for Nepi, of which city she was mistress. There,
according to Burchard, she hoped to recover from the perturbation which
the death of the Duke of Biselli had caused her.




CHAPTER XVII

LUCRETIA AT NEPI


Travelers from Rome to Nepi, then as now, followed the Via Cassia,
passing Isola Farnese, Baccano, and Monterosi. The road consisted in
part of the ancient highway, but it was in the worst possible condition.
Near Monterosi the traveler turned into the Via Amerina, much of the
pavement of which is still preserved, even up to the walls of Nepi.

Like most of the cities of Etruria, Nepi (Nepe or Nepete) was situated
on a high plain bordered by deep ravines, through which flowed small
streams, called _rii_. The bare cliffs of tuff constituted a natural
means of defense, and where they were low, walls were built.

The southern side of the city of Nepi, where the Falisco River flows and
empties into a deep chasm, was in ancient times fortified with high
walls built of long, square blocks of tuff laid upon each other without
mortar, like the walls of neighboring Falerii. Some remains of Nepi's
walls may still be seen near the Porta Romana, although much of the
material has been used in constructing the castle and for the high
arches of the Farnese aqueduct.

The castle defended the weakest side of Nepi, where, in the old days,
stood the city fortress. In the eighth century it was the seat of a
powerful duke, Toto, who made a name for himself also in the history of
Rome. Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia gave it the form it now has, rebuilding
the castle and enlarging the two great towers inside the walls, the
larger of which is round and the smaller square. Later the castle was
restored and furnished with bastions by Paul III and his son, Pierluigi
Farnese, the first Duke of Castro and Nepi.[80]

In 1500 this castle was as strong as that of Civitacastellana, which
Alexander VI rebuilt. Unfortunately, it is now in ruins. The remains of
the castle-palace and all the outer walls are covered with thick ivy.
Time has spared nothing but the two great towers.

On the side toward the city the ruined stronghold is entered through a
gateway above which is inscribed in the fair characters of the
Renaissance, YSV VNICVS CVSTOS. PROCVL HINC TIMORES. YSV. This leads
into a rectangular court surrounded by walls now in ruins. The beholder
is confronted by the façade of the castle, a two-storied structure in
the style of the Renaissance, with windows whose casements are made of
peperino (cement). The inscription P. LOISIVS FAR DVX PRIMVS CASTRI on
the door frame shows that this was also the work of the Farnese.

The interior is a mass of ruins, all the walls having fallen in. This
notable monument of the past has been suffered to go to decay; it was
only eighty years ago that the walls of the last remaining salon fell
in. The only room left is an upper chamber, reached by climbing a
ladder. The place where the hearth was is still discernible, as is also
the paneled ceiling found in so many of the buildings of the early
Renaissance. The ends of the rafters are supported by beautifully
carved consoles. All the woodwork is stained dark brown, and here and
there on the ceiling are wooden shields, on which are painted the Borgia
arms in colors.

In various places in the interior, and also without, on the towers of
the stronghold, the same arms may be seen carved in stone. There are
also two stones, with the arms very carefully chiseled, set in the walls
of the entrance hall of the town house of Nepi, which were originally in
the castle where they had been placed by Lucretia's orders. The Borgia
arms and those of the house of Aragon, which Lucretia, as Duchess of
Biselli, had adopted, are united under a ducal crown.

Lonely Nepi, which now has only 2,500 inhabitants, had but few more in
the year 1500. It was a little town in Campagna, whose streets were
bordered by Gothic buildings, with a few old palaces and towers
belonging to the nobles, among the most important of whom were the
Celsi. There is a small public square, formerly the forum, on which the
town hall faces, and also an old church, originally built upon the ruins
of the temple of Jupiter. There were a few other ancient churches and
cloisters, such as S. Vito and S. Eleuterio, and other remains of
antiquity, which have now disappeared. There are only two ancient
statues left--the figures of two of Nepi's citizens whose names are now
unknown--they are on the façade of the palace, a beautiful building
dating from the late Renaissance. Owing to the topography of the region
and the general decadence peculiar to all Etruria, the country about
Nepi is forbidding and melancholy. The dark and rugged chasms, with
their huge blocks of stone and steep walls of black and dark red tuff,
with rushing torrents in their depths, cause an impression of grandeur,
but also of sadness, with which the broad and peaceful highlands and the
idyllic pastures, where one constantly hears the melancholy bleating of
the sheep, and the sad notes of the shepherds' flutes are in perfect
accord.

Here and there dark oak forests may still be seen, but four hundred
years ago, in the neighborhood of Nepi, they were more numerous and
denser than they are to-day; in the direction of Sutri and
Civitacastellana they are well cleared up; but there are still many fine
groves. From the top of the castle may be seen a magnificent panorama,
which is even more extensive than that which greets the eye from the
castle of Spoleto. There on the horizon are the dark volcano of
Bracciano and Monte di Rocca Romana, and here the mountains of Viterbo,
on whose wide slopes the town of Caprarola, which belonged to the
Farnese, is visible. On the other side rises Soracte. Towards the north
the plateau slopes gently down to the valley of the Tiber, across which,
in the misty distance, the blue chain of the Sabine mountains stands out
boldly, with numerous fortresses scattered about the declivities.

August 31st Alfonso's young widow went to the castle of Nepi, taking
with her part of her court and her child Rodrigo. These knights and
ladies, all generally so merry, were now either oppressed by a real
sorrow or were required by court etiquette to renounce all pleasures. In
this lonely stronghold Lucretia could lament, undisturbed, the
taking-off of the handsome youth who had been her husband for two years,
and together with whom she had dwelt in this same castle scarcely a
twelve-month before. There was nothing to disturb her melancholy
brooding; but, instead, castle, city, and landscape all harmonized with
it.

Some of Lucretia's letters written during her stay at the castle of
Nepi are still in existence, and they are especially valuable, being the
only ones we have which date from what is known as the Roman period of
the life of the famous woman. Lucretia addressed them to her trusted
servant in Rome, Vincenzo Giordano; some are in her own handwriting, and
others in that of her secretary, Cristoforo. She signs herself "the most
unhappy Princess of Salerno," although she herself afterwards struck out
the words, _principessa de Salerno_, and left only the words, _La
infelicissima_. In only a single letter--and this one has no date--did
she allow the whole signature to stand.

The first letters, dated September 15th and October 24, 1500, "in our
city of Nepi," are devoted to domestic affairs, especially clothes, of
which she was in need. Two days later she states that she had written to
the Cardinal of Lisbon, her godfather, in the interest of the bearer of
the letter, Giovanni of Prato. October 28th she directs Vincenzo to have
certain clothes made for the little Rodrigo and to send them to her
immediately by a courier. She also orders him to have prayers said for
her in all the convents "on account of this, my new sorrow." October
30th she wrote as follows:

     VINCENZO: As we have decided that the memorial service for
     the soul of his Lordship, the duke, my husband--may the glory of
     the saints be his--shall be held, you will, with this end in view,
     go to his Eminence the Lord Cardinal of Colenzo, whom we have
     charged with this office, and will do whatever his Eminence
     commands you, both in regard to paying for the mass and also for
     performing whatever his Majesty directs; and you will keep account
     of what you spend of the five hundred which you have, for I will
     see that you are reimbursed, so it will be necessary. From the
     castle of Nepi, next to the last day of October, 1500.

     THE UNHAPPY PRINCESS OF SALERNO.

There is an undated letter written by Lucretia which, apparently,
belongs to the same period, because it is written in a melancholy tone,
and in it she asks Heaven to watch over her bed. The last dated letters,
which are of October 31st and November 2d, are devoted to unimportant
domestic affairs; they show that Lucretia was in Nepi as late as
November. Another undated letter to the same Vincenzo Giordano refers to
her return to Rome; it purposely contains obscurities which it is now
impossible to decipher and fictitious names which had been agreed upon
with her servant. Even the signature is a conventional sign. The epistle
is word for word as follows: "I am so filled with misgivings and anxiety
on account of my returning to Rome that I can scarcely write--I can only
weep. And all this time when I found that Farina neither answered nor
wrote to me I was able neither to eat nor sleep, and wept continually.
God forgive Farina, who could have made everything turn out better and
did not do so. I will see whether I can send him Roble before I set
out--for I wish to send him. No more for the present. Again look well to
that matter, and on no account let Rexa see this letter."

Lucretia, it appears, wished to leave Nepi and return to Rome, for which
her father at first might refuse his permission. Perhaps Rexa in this
letter means Alexander, and the name Farina may signify Cardinal
Farnese, upon whose intermediation she counted. Vincenzo finally wrote
her that he had spoken to the Pope himself, and Lucretia, in an undated
letter, showed her servant how pleased she was because everything had
turned out better than she had expected. This is the only letter in
which the signature, "The unhappy Princess of Salerno" is not stricken
out.

We do not know how long Lucretia remained in Nepi, where, in summer,
the moisture rising from the rocky chasms caused deadly fevers, and
still renders that place and Civitacastellana unhealthful. Her father
recalled her to Rome before Christmas, and received her again into his
favor as soon as her brother left the city. Only a few months had passed
when Lucretia's soul was again filled with visions of a brilliant
future, before which the vague form of the unfortunate Alfonso sank into
oblivion. Her tears dried so quickly that, on the expiration of a year,
no one would have recognized in this young and frivolous woman the widow
of a trusted consort who had been foully murdered. From her father
Lucretia had inherited, if not inexhaustible vitality, at least the
lightness of mind which her contemporaries, under the name of joy of
living, discovered in her and in the Pope.


FOOTNOTES:

[80] Over the Porta Romana and on the bastions may still be seen the
colossal arms of Paul III and those of his son carved in stone. The
inscription reads:

P. ALOISIVS FARNESIVS DVX I. CASTRI ET NEPETE MVNIMENTVM HOC AD TVTELAM
CIVITATIS EXSTRVXIT. MDXL.




CHAPTER XVIII

CÆSAR AT PESARO


Towards the end of September, Cæsar entered Romagna with seven hundred
heavy men at arms, two hundred light horsemen, and six thousand foot
soldiers. First he advanced against Pesaro for the purpose of driving
out his former brother-in-law. Sforza, on hearing of the terrible fate
of his successor as husband of Lucretia, had good reason to congratulate
himself on his escape. He was literally consuming with hate of all the
Borgias, but, instead of being able to avenge himself for the injury
they had done him, he found himself threatened with another, a greater
and almost unavoidable one. He had been informed by his representative
in Rome and by the ambassador of Spain, who was friendly to him, of the
preparations his enemy was making, a fact proved by his letter to
Francesco Gonzaga, the brother of his first wife, Maddalena.[81]

September 1, 1500, he informed the Marquis of Cæsar's intention to
attack Pesaro, and asked him to endeavor to interest the Emperor
Maximilian in his behalf. On the twenty-sixth he wrote an urgent appeal
for help. This the marquis did not refuse, but he sent him only a
hundred men under the command of an Albanian. Thus do we see how these
illegitimate dynasties of Italy were in danger of being overthrown by
every breath. Faenza was the only place where the people loved their
lord, the young and fair Astorre Manfredi, and remained true to him. In
all the other cities of Romagna, however, the regime of the tyrants was
detested. Sforza himself could be cruel and exacting, and not in vain
had he been a pupil of the Borgias in Rome.

Never was throne so quickly overturned as his, or, rather, so promptly
abandoned before it was attacked. Cæsar was some distance from Pesaro
when there was a movement in his favor among the people; a party hostile
to the Sforza was formed, while the whole populace, excited by the
thought of what might follow the storming of the city by the heartless
enemy, was anxious to make terms with him. In vain did the poet, Guido
Posthumus, who had recently returned from Padua to his fatherland, urge
his fellow citizens, in ardent verses, to resist the enemy.[82] The
people rose Sunday, October 11th, even before Cæsar had appeared under
the city walls. What then happened is told in Sforza's letter to
Gonzaga:

     ILLUSTRIOUS SIR AND HONORED BROTHER-IN-LAW: Your
     Excellency doubtless has learned ere this how the people of Pesaro,
     last Sunday morning, incited by four scoundrels, rose in arms, and
     how I, with a few who remained faithful, was forced to retire to
     the castle as best I could. When I saw that the enemy was
     approaching, and that Ercole Bentivoglio, who was near Rimini, was
     pressing forward, I left the castle at night to avoid being shut
     in--this was on the advice and with the help of the Albanian
     Jacomo. In spite of the bad roads and great obstacles, I escaped to
     this place, for which I have, first of all, to thank your
     Excellency--you having sent me Jacomo--and next, to thank him for
     bringing me through safely. What I shall now do, I know not; but if
     I do not succeed in getting to your Excellency within four days, I
     will send Jacomo, who will tell you how everything happened, and
     what my plans are. In the meantime I wish you to know that I am
     safe, and that I commend myself to you. Bologna, October 17, 1500.
     Your Excellency's Brother-in-Law and Servant,

  JOHANNES SFORZA of Aragon, Count of Cotignola and Pesaro.

October 19th he again wrote from Bologna, saying he was going to
Ravenna, and intended to return from there to Pesaro, where the castle
was still bravely holding out; he also asked the marquis to send him
three hundred men. Three days later, however, he reported from Ravenna
that the castle had capitulated.

Cæsar Borgia had taken the city of Pesaro, not only without resistance,
but with the full consent of the people, and with public honors he
entered the Sforza palace, where only four years before his sister had
held her court. He took possession of the castle October 28th, summoned
a painter and commanded him to draw a picture of it on paper for him to
send the Pope. From the battlements of the castle of the Sforza twelve
trumpeters sounded the glad tidings, and the heralds saluted Cæsar as
Lord of Pesaro. October 29th he set out for the castle of Gradara.[83]

Among those who witnessed his entry into Pesaro was Pandolfo
Collenuccio. On receiving news of the fall of the city, Duke Ercole,
owing to fear, and also on account of a certain bargain between himself
and the Pope, of which we shall soon speak, sent this man, whom Sforza
had banished, and who had found an asylum in Ferrara, to Cæsar to
congratulate him. Collenuccio gave the duke a report of his mission,
October 29th, in the following remarkable letter:

     MY ILLUSTRIOUS MASTER: Having left your Excellency, I
     reached Pesaro two and a half days ago, arriving there Thursday at
     the twenty-fourth hour. At exactly the same time the Duke of
     Valentino made his entry. The entire populace was gathered about
     the city gate, and he was received during a heavy fall of rain, and
     was presented with the keys of the city. He took up his abode in
     the palace, in the room formerly occupied by Signor Giovanni. His
     entry, according to the reports of some of my people who witnessed
     it, was very impressive. It was orderly, and he was accompanied by
     numerous horse and foot soldiers. The same evening I notified him
     of my arrival, and requested an audience whenever it should suit
     his Majesty's convenience. About two o'clock at night (eight
     o'clock in the evening) he sent Signor Ramiro and his majordomo to
     call upon me and to ask, in the most courteous manner, whether I
     was comfortably lodged, and whether, owing to the great number of
     people in the city, I lacked for anything. He had instructed them
     to tell me to rest myself thoroughly, and that he would receive me
     the following day. Early Wednesday he sent me by a courier, as a
     present, a sack of barley, a cask of wine, a wether, eight pairs of
     capons and hens, two large torches, two bundles of wax candles, and
     two boxes of sweetmeats. He, however, did not appoint an hour for
     an audience, but sent his excuses and said I must not think it
     strange. The reason was that he had risen at the twentieth hour
     (two o'clock in the afternoon) and had dined, after which he had
     gone to the castle, where he remained until night, and whence he
     returned greatly exhausted owing to a sore he had in the groin.

     To-day, about the twenty-second hour (four in the afternoon), after
     he had dined, he had Signor Ramiro fetch me to him; and with great
     frankness and amiability his Majesty first made his excuses for not
     granting me an audience the preceding day, owing to his having so
     much to do in the castle and also on account of the pain caused by
     his ulcer. Following this, and after I had stated that the sole
     object of my mission was to wait upon his Majesty to congratulate
     and thank him, and to offer your services, he answered me in
     carefully chosen words, covering each point and very fluently. The
     gist of it was, that knowing your Excellency's ability and
     goodness, he had always loved you and had hoped to enjoy personal
     relations with you. He had looked forward to this when you were in
     Milan, but events and circumstances then prevented it. But now that
     he had come to this country, he--determined to have his wish--had
     written the letter announcing his successes, of his own free will
     and as proof of his love, and feeling certain that your Majesty
     would be pleased by it. He says he will continue to keep you
     informed of his doings, as he desires to establish a firm
     friendship with your Majesty, and he proffers everything he owns
     and in his power should you ever have need. He desires to look upon
     you as a father. He also thanked your Majesty for the letter and
     for having sent it him by a messenger, although the letter was
     unnecessary; for even without it he would have known that your
     Majesty would be pleased by his success. In short, he could not
     have uttered better and more seemly words than those he used when
     he referred to you as his father and to himself as your son, which
     he did repeatedly.

     When I take both the actual facts and his words into consideration,
     I see why he wishes to establish some sort of friendly alliance
     with your Majesty. I believe in his professions, and I can see
     nothing but good in them. He was much pleased by your Majesty's
     sending a special messenger to him, and I heard that he had
     informed the Pope of it; to his followers here he spoke of it in a
     way that showed he considered it of the greatest moment.

     Replying in general terms, I said that I could only commend the
     wisdom he had shown in regard to your Excellency, owing to our
     position and to that of our State, which, however, could only
     redound to his credit; to this he emphatically assented. He gave me
     to understand that he recognized this perfectly, and thereupon,
     breaking the thread of our conversation, we came to the subject of
     Faenza. His Majesty said to me, "I do not know what Faenza wants to
     do; she can give us no more trouble than did the others; still she
     may delay matters. I replied that I believed she would do as the
     others had done; but if she did not, it could only redound to his
     Majesty's glory; for it would give him another opportunity to
     display his skill and valor by capturing the place." This seemed to
     please him, and he answered that he would assuredly crush it.
     Bologna was not mentioned. He was pleased by the messages which I
     brought him from your people, from Don Alfonso and the cardinal, of
     whom he spoke long and with every appearance of affection.

     Thereupon, having been together a full half hour, I took my
     departure, and his Majesty, mounting his horse, rode forth. This
     evening he is going to Gradara; to-morrow to Rimini, and then
     farther. He is accompanied by all his troops, including the
     artillery. He told me he would not move so slowly but that he did
     not wish to leave the cannon behind.

     There are more than two thousand men quartered here but they have
     done no appreciable damage. The surrounding country is swarming
     with troops; whether they have done much harm we do not know. He
     granted the city no privileges or exemptions. He left as his
     lieutenant a certain doctor of Forli. He took seventy pieces of
     artillery from the castle, and the guard he left there is very
     small.

     I will tell your Excellency something which a number of people
     mentioned to me; it was, however, related to me in detail by a
     Portuguese cavalier, a soldier in the army of the Duke of Valentino
     who is lodged here in the house of my son-in-law with fifteen
     troopers--an upright man who was a friend of our lord, Don
     Fernando, when he was with King Charles. He told me that the Pope
     intended to give this city to Madonna Lucretia for her portion, and
     that he had found a husband for her, an Italian, who would always
     be able to retain the friendship of Valentino. Whether this be true
     I know not, but it is generally believed.

     As to Fano, the Duke did not retain it. He was there five days. He
     did not want it, but the burghers presented it to him, and his it
     will be when he desires it. It is said the Pope commanded him not
     to take Fano unless the citizens themselves asked him to do so.
     Therefore it remained in _statu quo_.

     POSTSCRIPT:

     The Duke's daily life is as follows: he goes to bed at eight, nine,
     or ten o'clock at night (three to five o'clock in the morning).
     Consequently, the eighteenth hour is his dawn, the nineteenth his
     sunrise, and the twentieth his time for rising. Immediately on
     getting up he sits down to the table, and while there and
     afterwards he attends to his business affairs. He is considered
     brave, strong, and generous, and it is said he lays great store by
     straightforward men. He is terrible in revenge--so many tell me. A
     man of strong good sense, and thirsting for greatness and fame, he
     seems more eager to seize States than to keep and administer them.

  Your illustrious ducal Majesty's servant,

  PANDULPHUS.

  PESARO, _Thursday, October 29_,
  Six o'clock at night, 1500.


  _The Duke's Retinue_

  Bartolomeo of Capranica, Field-Marshal.}
  Piero Santa Croce.                     }
  Giulio Alberino.                       }
  Mario Don Marian de Stephano.          }    All Noblemen of Rome.
  A brother of the last.                 }
  Menico Sanguigni.                      }
  Jo. Baptista Mancini.                  }
  Dorio Savello.                         }

  _Prominent Men in the Duke's Household._

  Bishop of Elna,                } Spaniards.
  Bishop of Sancta Sista,        }
  Bishop of Trani, an Italian.
  A Neapolitan abbot.
  Sigr Ramiro del Orca, Governor; he is the factotum.
  Don Hieronymo, a Portuguese.
  Messer Agabito da Amelio, Secretary.
  Mesr Alexandro Spannocchia, Treasurer, who says that the duke
     since his departure from Rome up to the present time has spent
     daily, on the average, eighteen hundred ducats.

Collenuccio in his letter omits to mention the fact that he had
addressed to Cæsar, the new master of Pesaro, a complaint against its
former lord, Giovanni Sforza, and that the duke had reinstated him in
the possession of his confiscated property. He was destined a few years
later bitterly to regret having taken this step. Guido Posthumus, on the
other hand, whose property Cæsar appropriated, fled to the Rangone in
Modena. Sforza, expelled, reached Venice November 2d, where he
endeavored, according to Malipiero, to sell the Republic his estates of
Pesaro--in which attempt he failed. Thence he went to Mantua. At that
time Modena and Mantua were the asylums of numerous exiled tyrants who
were hospitably received into the beautiful castle of the Gonzaga, which
was protected by the swamps of the Mincio.

After the fall of Pesaro, Rimini likewise expelled its hated oppressors,
the brothers Pandolfo and Carlo Malatesta, whereupon Cæsar Borgia laid
siege to Faenza. The youthful Astorre, its lord, finally surrendered,
April 25, 1501, to the destroyer, on the duke's promise not to deprive
him of his liberty. Cæsar, however, sent the unfortunate young man to
Rome, where he and his brother Octavian, together with several other
victims, were confined in the castle of S. Angelo. This was the same
Astorre with whom Cardinal Alessandro Farnese wished to unite his sister
Giulia in marriage, and the unfortunate youth may now have regretted
that this alliance had not taken place.


FOOTNOTES:

[81] His correspondence with Gonzaga is preserved in the archives of
Mantua.

[82] Ad. Pisaurenses: Guidi Posthumi Silvestris Pisaurensis Elegiarum
Librii ii, p. 33. Bonon, 1524.

[83] Pietro Marzetti, Memorie di Pesaro. Ms. in the Oliveriana.




CHAPTER XIX

ANOTHER MARRIAGE PLANNED FOR LUCRETIA


During this time Lucretia, with her child Rodrigo, was living in the
palace of S. Peter's. If she was inclined to grieve for her husband, her
father left her little time to give way to her feelings. He had recourse
to her thoughtlessness and vanity, for the dead Alfonso was to be
replaced by another and greater Alfonso. Scarcely was the Duke of
Biselli interred before a new alliance was planned. As early as
November, 1500, there was talk of Lucretia's marrying the hereditary
Prince of Ferrara, who, since 1497, had been a widower; he was
childless, and was just twenty-four years of age. Marino Zorzi, the new
Venetian ambassador, first mentioned the project to his signory November
26th. This union, however, had been considered in the Vatican much
earlier--in fact while Lucretia's husband was still living. At the
Christmas holidays of 1500 it was publicly stated that she was to marry
the Duke of Gravina, an Orsini who, undeterred by the fate of Lucretia's
former husbands, came to Rome in December to sue for her hand. Some hope
was held out to him, probably with a view to retaining the friendship of
his family.

Alexander himself conceived the plan of marrying Lucretia to Alfonso of
Ferrara. He desired this alliance both on his beloved daughter's account
and because it could not fail to prove advantageous to Cæsar; it would
not only assure to him the possession of Romagna, which Venice might
try to wrest from him, but it would also increase his chances of
consummating his plans regarding Bologna and Florence. At the same time
it would bring to him the support of the dynasties of Mantua and Urbino,
which were connected by marriage with the house of Ferrara. It would be
the nucleus of a great league, including France, the Papacy, Cæsar's
States, Ferrara, Mantua, and Urbino, which would be sufficiently strong
to defend Alexander and his house against all enemies.

If the King of France was to maintain his position in Italy he would
require, above all else, the help of the Pope. He already occupied
Milan, and he wished to seize half of the kingdom of Naples and hold it
as a vassal of the Church; for France and Spain had already agreed upon
the wicked partition of Naples, to which Alexander had thus far neither
refused nor given his consent.

In order to win over the Duke of Ferrara to his bold scheme, Alexander
availed himself, first of all, of Giambattista Ferrari of Modena, an old
retainer of Ercole, who was wholly devoted to the Pope, and whom he had
made datarius and subsequently a cardinal. Ferrari ventured to suggest
the marriage to the duke, "on account," so he wrote him, "of the great
advantage which would accrue to his State from it."[84] This proposal
caused Ercole no less embarrassment than King Federico of Naples had
felt when he was placed in a similar position. His pride rebelled. His
daughter, the noble Marchioness Isabella of Mantua, and her
sister-in-law Elisabetta of Urbino, were literally beside themselves.
The youthful Alfonso objected most vigorously. Moreover, there was a
plan afoot to marry the hereditary duke to a princess of the royal
house of France, Louise, widow of the Duke of Angoulême.[85] Ercole
rejected the offer absolutely.

Alexander had foreseen his opposition, but he felt sure he could
overcome it. He had the advantages of the alliance pointed out more
clearly, and also the disadvantages which might result from a refusal;
on one hand was Ferrara's safety and advancement, and on the other the
hostility of Cæsar and the Pope, and perhaps also that of France.[86]
Alexander was so certain of his victory that he made no secret of the
projected marriage, and he even spoke of it with satisfaction in the
consistory, as if it were an accomplished fact.[87] He succeeded in
winning the support of the French court, which, however, was not
difficult, as Louis XII was then very anxious for the Pope to allow him
to lead his army out of Tuscany, through the States of the Church, into
Naples, which he could not do without the secret consent of his
Holiness. Above all, the Pope counted on the help of Cardinal Amboise,
to whom Cæsar had taken the red hat when he went to France, and whose
ambitious glances were directed toward the papal throne, which, with the
aid of his friend Cæsar and of the Spanish cardinals, he hoped to reach
on the death of Alexander.

It is, nevertheless, a fact that Louis XII at first was opposed to the
match, and even endeavored to prevent it. He himself was not only
determinedly set against everything which would increase the power of
Cæsar and the Pope, but he was also anxious to enhance his own influence
with Ferrara by bringing about the marriage of Alfonso and some French
princess. In May Alexander sent a secretary to France to induce the king
to use his influence to effect the alliance, but this Louis declined to
do.[88] On the other hand, he was anxious to bring about the marriage of
Don Ferrante, Alfonso's brother, with Lucretia, and secure for her, as
portion, the territory of Piombino.[89] He had also placed a check on
Cæsar's operations in Central Italy, in consequence of which the
latter's attempts against Bologna and Florence had miscarried.

The whole scheme for the marriage would have fallen through if the
subject of the French expedition against Naples had not just then come
up. There is ground for believing that the Pope's consent was made
contingent upon the King's agreeing to the marriage.

June 13, 1501, Cæsar himself, now created Duke of Romagna by his father,
came secretly to Rome, where he remained three weeks, exerting all his
efforts to further the plan. After this, he and his men at arms followed
the French Marshal Aubigny, who had set out from near Rome for Naples,
to engage in a nefarious war of conquest, whose horrors, in the briefest
of time, overwhelmed the house of Aragon.

As early as June the King of France yielded to the Pope's solicitations,
and exerted his influence in Ferrara, as appears from a despatch of the
Ferrarese ambassador to France, dated June 22d. He reported to Ercole
that he had stated to the king that the Pope threatened to deprive the
duke of his domain if he did not consent to the marriage; whereupon the
king replied that Ferrara was under his protection and could fall only
when France fell. The envoy feared that the Pope might avail himself of
the question of the investiture of Naples--upon which the king was
determined--to win him over to his side. He finally wrote the duke that
Monsignor de Trans, the most influential person at the king's court, had
advised him to agree to the marriage upon the conditional payment of two
hundred thousand ducats, the remission of Ferrara's annual dues, and
certain benefices for the house of Este.[90]

Amboise sent the Archbishop of Narbonne and other agents to Ferrara to
win over the duke; the King of France himself wrote and urged him to
give his consent, and he now refused Don Alfonso the hand of the French
princess. While the French ambassador was presenting his case to the
duke, the Pope's messengers and Cæsar's agents were also endeavoring to
secure his consent. Caught in a network of intrigue, fear at last forced
Ercole to yield.

July 8th he had Louis XII notified that he would do as he wished, if he
and the Pope could agree upon the conditions.[91] He yielded only to the
demand of the king, who advised the marriage solely because he himself
had need of the Pope. All the while he was urging Ercole to give his
consent, he was also counselling him not to be in too great haste to
send his son Don Ferrante to Rome to conclude the matter, but to hold
him back as long as possible--until he himself should reach Lombardy,
which would be in September. He even had Ercole informed that he would
keep his promise to bestow the hand of Madonna d'Angoulême on Don
Alfonso, and he made no effort to conceal the displeasure he felt on
account of the projected alliance with Lucretia.[92] To the Ferrarese
ambassador he remarked that he would consider the duke unwise if he
allowed his son to marry the daughter of the Pope, for, on Alexander's
death, he would no longer know with whom he had concluded the alliance,
and Alfonso's position would become very uncertain.[93]

The duke did not hurry; it is true he sent his secretary, Hector
Bellingeri, to Rome, but only for the purpose of telling the Pope that
he had yielded to the king's wishes upon the condition that his own
demands would be satisfied. The Pope and Cæsar, however, urged that the
marriage contract be executed at once, and they requested the Cardinal
of Rouen, who was then in Milan, to induce Ercole to send his son
Alfonso there (to Milan), so that the transaction might be concluded in
the cardinal's presence. This the duke refused to do until the Pope
agreed to the conditions upon which he had based his consent.[94]

While these shameful negotiations regarding Lucretia were dragging on,
Cæsar was in Naples, and was the instrument and witness of the sudden
overthrow of the hated house of Aragon, whose throne, however, was not
to fall to his portion. Alexander used this opportunity to appropriate
the property of the barons of Latium, especially that of the Colonna,
the Savelli, and Estouteville, all of which, owing to the Neapolitan
war, had been left without protection. The confiscation of this property
was, as we shall soon see, part of the scheme which included the
marriage. As early as June, 1501, he had taken possession of a number
of cities belonging to these families. Alexander, accompanied by troops,
horse and foot-soldiers, went to Sermoneta July 27th.

This was the time that--just before his departure--he made Lucretia his
representative in the Vatican. Following are Burchard's words: "Before
his Holiness, our Master, left the city, he turned over the palace and
all the business affairs to his daughter Lucretia, authorizing her to
open all letters which should come addressed to him. In important
matters she was to ask advice of the Cardinal of Lisbon.

"When a certain matter came up--I do not know just what it was--it is
said Lucretia went to the above-named cardinal and informed him of the
Pope's instructions, and laid the matter before him. Thereupon he said
to her, that whenever the Pope had anything to submit to the consistory,
the vice-chancellor, or some other cardinal in his stead, would write it
down together with the opinions of those present; therefore some one
should now record what is said. Lucretia replied, 'I can write very
well.' 'Where is your pen?' asked the cardinal. Lucretia saw that he was
joking, and she laughed, and thus their conference had a fit ending."

What a scene for the Vatican! A young and beautiful woman, the Pope's
own daughter, presiding over the cardinals in consistory. This one scene
is sufficient to show to what depths the Church of Rome had sunk; it is
more convincing than a thousand satires, than a thousand official
reports. The affairs which the Pope entrusted to his daughter were--at
least so we assume--wholly secular and not ecclesiastical; but this bold
proceeding was entirely unprecedented. The prominence given Lucretia,
the highest proof of favor her father could show her, was due to
special reasons. Alexander had just been assured of the consent of
Alfonso d'Este to the marriage with Lucretia, and in his joy he made her
regent in the Vatican. This was to show that he recognized in her, the
prospective Duchess of Ferrara, a person of weight in the politics of
the peninsula. In doing this he was simply imitating the example of
Ercole and other princes, who were accustomed, when absent from their
domains, to confide state business to the women of their families.

The duke had found it difficult to overcome his son's objections, for
nothing could offend the young prince so deeply as the determination to
compel him to marry Lucretia; not because she was an illegitimate child,
for this blot signified little in that age when bastards flourished in
all Latin countries. Many of the ruling dynasties of Italy bore this
stain--the Sforza, the Malatesta, the Bentivoglio, and the Aragonese of
Naples; even the brilliant Borso, the first Duke of Ferrara, was the
illegitimate brother of his successor, Ercole. Lucretia, however, was
the daughter of a Pope, the child of a priest, and this, in the eyes of
the Este, constituted her disgrace. Neither her father's licentiousness
nor Cæsar's crimes could have greatly affected the moral sense of the
court of Ferrara, but not one of the princely houses of that age was so
depraved that it was indifferent to the reputation of a woman destined
to become one of its prominent members.

Alfonso was the prospective husband of a young woman whose career,
although she was only twenty-one years of age, had been most
extraordinary. Twice had Lucretia been legally betrothed, twice had she
been married, and twice had she been made a widow by the wickedness or
crimes of others. Her reputation, consequently, was bad, therefore
Alfonso, himself a man of the world, never could feel sure of this
young woman's virtue, even if he did not believe all the reports which
were circulated regarding her. The scandalous gossip about everything
which takes place at court passed from city to city just as quickly then
as it does now. The duke and his son were informed by their agents of
everything which actually occurred in the Borgia family, as well as of
every story which was started concerning its members. The frightful
reasons which the disgraced Sforza had given Lucretia's father in
writing as grounds for the annulment of his marriage were at once
communicated to the duke in Ferrara. The following year his agent in
Venice informed him that "a report had come from Rome that the Pope's
daughter had given birth to an illegitimate child."[95] Moreover, all
the satires with which the enemies of the Borgias persecuted
them--including Lucretia--were well known at the court of Ferrara, and
doubtless maliciously enjoyed. Are we warranted in assuming that the
Este considered these reports and satires as really well founded, and
yet overcame their scruples sufficiently to receive a Thais into their
house when they would have incurred much less danger by following the
example of Federico of Naples, who had persisted in refusing his
daughter's hand to Cæsar Borgia?

It is now time to investigate the charges which were made against
Lucretia; and, in view of what Roscoe and others have already proved,
this will not occupy us long. The number of accusers among her
contemporaries certainly is not small. The following--to name only the
most important--charged her explicitly or by implication with incest:
the poets Sannazzaro and Pontanus, and the historians and statesmen
Matarazzo, Marcus Attilius Alexis, Petrus Martyr, Priuli, Macchiavelli,
and Guicciardini, and their opinions have been constantly reiterated
down to the present time. On the other side we have her eulogists among
her contemporaries and their successors.

Here it should be noted that Lucretia's accusers and their charges can
refer only to the Roman period of her life, while her admirers appear
only in the second epoch, when she was Duchess of Ferrara. Among the
latter are men who are no less famous than her accusers: Tito and Ercole
Strozzi, Bembo, Aldo Manuzio, Tebaldeo, Ariosto, all the chroniclers of
Ferrara, and the French biographer Bayard. All these bore witness to the
uprightness of her life while in Ferrara, but of her career in Rome they
knew nothing. Lucretia's advocate, therefore, can offer only negative
proofs of her virtue. Even making allowance for the courtier's flattery,
we are warranted in assuming that upright men like Aldo, Bembo, and
Ariosto could never have been so shameless as to pronounce a woman the
ideal character of her day if they had believed her guilty, or even
capable, of the hideous crimes with which she had been charged only a
short time before.

Among Lucretia's accusers only those who were actual witnesses of her
life in Rome are worthy of attention; and Guicciardini, her bitterest
enemy, is not of this number. The verdicts of all later writers,
however, have been based upon his opinion of Lucretia, because of his
fame as a statesman and historian. He himself made up his estimate from
current gossip or from the satires of Pontanus and Sannazzaro--two poets
who lived in Naples and not in Rome. Their epigrams merely show that
they were inspired by a deep-seated hatred of Alexander and Cæsar, who
had wrought the overthrow of the Aragonese dynasty, and further with
what crimes men were ready to credit evil-doers.

[Illustration: GUICCIARDINI.

From an engraving by Blanchard.]

The words of Burchard, who was a daily witness of everything that
occurred in the Vatican, must be considered as of much greater weight.
Against him in particular has the spleen of the papists been directed,
for by them his writings are regarded as the poisonous source from which
the enemies of the papacy, especially the Protestants, have derived
material for their slanders regarding Alexander VI. Their anger may
readily be explained, for Burchard's diary is the only work written in
Rome--with the exception of that of Infessura, which breaks off abruptly
at the beginning of 1494--which treats of Alexander's court; moreover,
it possesses an official character. Those, however, who attempt to
palliate the doings of the papacy would feel less hatred for Burchard if
they were acquainted with the reports of the Venetian envoys and the
despatches of innumerable other ambassadors which have been used in this
work.

Burchard is absolutely free from malice, making no mention whatever of
Alexander's private conduct. He records only facts--never rumors--and
these he glosses over or cloaks diplomatically. The Venetian ambassador
Polo Capello reports how Cæsar Borgia stabbed the chamberlain Perotto
through the Pope's robe, but Burchard makes no mention of the fact. The
same ambassador explicitly states, as does also a Ferrarese agent, that
Cæsar killed his brother Gandia; Burchard, however, utters not a word
concerning the subject.[96] Nor does he say anything about the way
Cæsar despatched his brother-in-law Alfonso. The relations of the
members of the Borgia family to each other and to strangers, such as the
Farnese, the Pucci, and the Orsini; the intrigues at the papal court;
the long series of crimes; the extortion of money; the selling of the
cardinal's hat; and all the other enormities which fill the despatches
of the ambassadors--regarding all this Burchard is silent. Even Vannozza
he names but once, and then incorrectly. There are two passages in
particular in his diary which have given the greatest offense: the
report of the bacchanal of fifty harlots in the Vatican, and the attack
made on the Borgias in the anonymous letter to Silvio Savelli. These
passages are found in all the manuscripts and doubtless also in the
original of the diary. That the letter to Silvio is a fabrication of
neither Burchard nor of some malicious Protestant is proved by the fact
that Marino Sanuto also reproduces it in his diary. Further, that
neither Burchard nor any subsequent writer concocted the story of the
Vatican bacchanal is proved by the same letter, whose author relates it
as a well-known fact. Matarazzo of Perugia also confirms it; his account
differs from that of Burchard, whose handwriting he could hardly have
seen at that time, but it agrees with reports which he himself had
heard. He remarks that he gave it full credence, "for the thing was
known far and wide, and because my informants were not Romans merely,
but were the Italian people, therefore have I mentioned it."

This remark indicates the source of the scandalous anecdote--it was
common talk. It doubtless was based upon an actual banquet which Cæsar
gave in his palace in the Vatican. Some such orgy may have taken place
there, but who will believe that Lucretia, now the legally recognized
bride of Alfonso d'Este and about to set out for Ferrara, was an amused
spectator of it?

This is the only passage in Burchard's diary where Lucretia appears in
an unfavorable light; nowhere else has he recorded anything
discreditable to her. The accusations of the Neopolitans and of
Guicciardini are not substantiated by anything in his diary. In fact we
find corroboration nowhere unless we regard Matarazzo as an authority,
which he certainly was not. He states that Giovanni Sforza had
discovered that criminal relations existed between his wife and Cæsar
and Don Giovanni, to which a still more terrible suspicion was added.
Sforza, therefore, had murdered Gandia and fled from Rome, and in
consequence Alexander had dissolved his marriage. Setting aside the
monstrous idea that the young woman was guilty at one and the same time
of threefold incest, Matarazzo's account contains an anachronism: Sforza
left Rome two months before the murder of Gandia.

An authentic despatch of the Ferrarese ambassador in Milan, dated June
23, 1497, makes it clear that Lucretia's worthless consort was the one
who started these rumors about her. Certainly no one could have known
Lucretia's character and mode of life better than her husband.
Nevertheless Sforza, before the tribunals of every age, would be
precisely the one whose testimony would receive the least credit.
Consuming with hate and a desire for revenge, this was the reason he
ascribed to the evil-minded Pope for dissolving the marriage. Thus the
suspicion he let drop became a rumor, and the rumor ultimately
crystallized into a belief. In this connection, however, it is worthy of
note that Guido Posthumus, Sforza's faithful retainer, who in epigrams
revenged himself on Alexander for his master's disgrace, neither
mentions this suspicion nor anywhere refers to Lucretia.[97]

In none of the numerous despatches of the day is this suspicion
mentioned, although in a private letter of Malipiero's, dated Rome, June
17, 1497, and in one of Polo Capello's reports, allusion is made to the
"rumor" regarding the criminal relations of Don Giovanni and his
sister.[98] Could the fact that Lucretia never engaged in any love
intrigue--at least she is not charged with having done so--with anyone
else, when there were in Rome so many courtiers, young nobles, and great
cardinals who were her daily companions, have given rise to these
reports? It is a fact that nothing has been discovered which would
indicate that this beautiful young woman ever did engage in any love
affair. Even the report of the ambassador, who, writing to Ferrara, not
from Rome but from Venice, states that Lucretia had given birth to a
child stands alone. She had at that time been separated from her husband
Sforza a whole year. But even if we admit that this rumor was well
founded, and that Lucretia did engage in some illicit love affair, are
not these relations and slips frequent enough in all societies and at
all times? Even now nothing is more readily glossed over in the polite
world.

It is difficult to believe that Lucretia, in the midst of the depravity
of Rome, and in the environment in which she was placed, could have kept
herself spotless; but just as little will any unprejudiced person
believe that she was really guilty of that unmentionable crime. If it
were possible to conceive that a young woman could have the strength--a
strength beyond that of the most depraved and hardened man--to hide
behind a joyous exterior the moral perturbation which the most loathsome
crime in the world would certainly cause the subject, we should be
forced to admit that Lucretia Borgia possessed a power of dissimulation
which passed all human bounds. Nothing, however, charmed the Ferrarese
so much as the never failing, graceful joyousness of Alfonso's young
wife. Any woman of feeling can decide correctly whether--if Lucretia
were guilty of the crimes with which she was charged--she could have
appeared as she did, and whether the countenance which we behold in the
portrait of the bride of Alfonso d'Este in 1502 could be the face of the
inhuman fury described in Sannazzaro's epigram.


FOOTNOTES:

[84] Compare Sannazzaro's epitaph on Alexander VI with the epigram of
Guido Posthumus: In Tumulum Sexti.

[85] Cardinal Ferrari to Ercole, Rome, February 18, 1501. This is the
first of the letters regarding this subject in the archives of Modena.

[86] Ercole's letter to his ambassador in Florence, Manfredo Manfredi,
April 25, 1501. Archives of Modena.

[87] Ferrari to Ercole, May 1, 1501.

[88] Girolamo Saerati to Ercole, Rome, May 8, 1501.

[89] Bartolomeo de' Cavallieri, Ferrarese ambassador to France, to
Ercole, Chalons, May 26, 1501.

[90] At least such was the plan advocated by Monsignor de Trans, French
ambassador in Rome. Letter of Aldovrandus de Guidonibus to Duke Ercole,
Lugo, April 25, 1501. State archives of Modena.

[91] Bartolomeo de' Cavallieri to Ercole, Lyons, June 22, 1501.

[92] Ercole to Giovanni Valla, July 8, 1501. Ercole to the Cardinal of
Rouen, July 8, 1501.

[93] Despatches of Bartolomeo de'Cavallieri, Ferrarese ambassador at the
court of France, to Ercole, July 10, 14, and 21, 1501.

[94] Despatch of the same, undated.

[95] Ercole to Giovanni Valla, his special envoy to the Cardinal of
Rouen, in Milan, July 21 and 26, 1501.

[96] Da Roma accertasi, che la figliola del papa ha partorito.... Giov.
Alberto della Pigna to the duke, Venice, March 15, 1498. Archives of
Modena.

[97] One of the first statements that Cæsar was his brother's murderer
is found in a despatch of the Ferrarese ambassador at Venice. De novo ho
inteso, como de la morte del Duca di Candia fo causa el Cardinale suo
fratello. Pigna's despatch to Ercole, Venice, February 22, 1498.

[98] The Malipiero letter (Archiv. Stor. It. VII, i, 490) contains the
following: Si dice, que il sig. Giovanni Sforza ha fatto questo effetto
(the murder of Gandia) perchè il Duca (di Gandia) usava con la sorella,
sua consorte, la qual è fiola del Papa, ma d'un altra madre (which was
incorrect). The Venetian ambassador, Polo Capello, refers to this rumor
(si dice) in his well known Relation of September, 1500.




CHAPTER XX

NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE HOUSE OF ESTE


The hereditary Prince of Ferrara made a determined resistance before
yielding to his father's pressure, but the latter was now so anxious for
the marriage to take place that he told his son that, if he persisted in
his refusal, he would be compelled to marry Lucretia himself. After the
duke had overcome his son's pride and secured his consent, he regarded
the marriage merely as an advantageous piece of statecraft. He sold the
honor of his house at the highest price obtainable. The Pope's agents in
Ferrara, frightened by Ercole's demands, sent Ramondo Remolini to Rome
to submit them to Alexander, who sought the intervention of the King of
France to secure more favorable terms from the duke. A letter from the
Ferrarese ambassador to France to his master throws a bright light on
this transaction.

     MY ILLUSTRIOUS MASTER: Yesterday the Pope's envoy told me
     that his Holiness had written him about the messenger your
     Excellency had sent him demanding two hundred thousand ducats, the
     remission of the annual tribute, the granting of the _jus
     patronatus_ for the bishopric of Ferrara, by decree of the
     consistory, and certain other concessions. He told me that the Pope
     had offered a hundred thousand, and as to the rest--your Excellency
     should trust to him, for he would grant them in time and would
     advance the interests of the house of Este so that everyone would
     see how high in his favor it stood. In addition, he told me that he
     was instructed to ask his most Christian Majesty to write to the
     illustrious cardinal to advise your Excellency to agree. As your
     Excellency's devoted servant I mention this, although it is
     superfluous; for if this marriage is to take place, you will
     arrange it in such a way that "much promising and little
     fulfillment" will not cause you to regret it. I informed your
     Excellency in an earlier letter how his most Christian Majesty had
     told me that his wishes in this affair were the same as your own,
     and that if the marriage was to be brought about, you might derive
     as much profit from it as possible, and if it was not to take
     place, his Majesty stood ready to give Don Alfonso the lady whom
     your Excellency might select for him in France.

  Your ducal Excellency's servant,

  BARTOLOMEO CAVALERI.

  LYONS, _August 7, 1501_.

Alexander did not wish to send his daughter to Ferrara with empty hands,
but the portion which Ercole demanded was not a modest one. It was
larger than Blanca Sforza had brought the Emperor Maximilian; moreover,
one of the duke's demands involved an infraction of the canon law, for,
in addition to the large sum of money, he insisted upon the remission of
the yearly tribute paid the Church by the fief of Ferrara, the cession
of Cento and Pieve, cities which belonged to the archbishopric of
Bologna, and even on the relinquishment of Porto Cesenatico and a large
number of benefices in favor of the house of Este. They wrangled
violently, but so great was the Pope's desire to secure the ducal throne
of Ferrara for his daughter that he soon announced that he would
practically agree to Ercole's demands, which Cæsar urged him to do.[99]
Nor was Lucretia herself less urgent in begging her father to consent;
she was the duke's most able advocate in Rome, and Ercole knew that it
was due largely to her skilful pleading that he succeeded in carrying
his point.

The negotiations took this favorable turn about the end of July or the
beginning of August, and the earliest of the duke's letters to Lucretia
and the Pope, among those preserved in the archives of the house of
Este, belong to this period.

August 6th Ercole wrote his future daughter-in-law, recommending to her
for her agent one Agostino Huet (a secretary of Cæsar's), who had shown
the greatest interest in conducting the negotiations.

August 10th he reported to the Pope the result of the conferences which
had taken place, and urged him not to look on his demands as
unreasonable. This he repeated in a letter dated August 21st, in which
he stated in plain, commercial terms that the price was low enough; in
fact, that it was merely nominal.

In the meantime the projected marriage had become known to the world,
and was the subject of diplomatic consideration, for the strengthening
of the papacy was agreeable to neither the Powers of Italy nor those
beyond the peninsula. Florence and Bologna, which Cæsar coveted were
frightened; the Republic of Venice, which was in constant friction with
Ferrara, and which had designs upon the coast of Romagna, did not
conceal her annoyance, and she ascribed the whole thing to Cæsar's
ambition.[100] The King of France put a good face upon the matter, as
did also the King of Spain; but Maximilian was so opposed to the
marriage that he endeavored to prevent it. Ferrara was just beginning to
acquire the political importance which Florence had possessed in the
time of Lorenzo de' Medici, consequently its influence was such that the
German emperor could not be indifferent to an alliance between it and
the papacy and France. Moreover, Bianca Sforza was Maximilian's wife,
and at the German court there were other members and retainers of the
overthrown house--all bitter enemies of the Borgias.

In August the Emperor despatched letters to Ferrara in which he warned
Ercole against any marital alliance between his house and that of
Alexander. This warning of Maximilian's must have been highly acceptable
to the duke, as he could use it to force the Pope to accede to his
demands. He mentioned the letter to his Holiness, but assured him that
his determination would remain unshaken. Then he instructed his
counselor, Gianluca Pozzi, to answer the Emperor's letter.[101] Ercole's
letter to his chancellor is dated August 25th, but before its contents
became known in Rome the Pope hastened to agree to the duke's
conditions, and to have the marriage contract executed. This was done in
the Vatican, August 26, 1501.[102]

He immediately despatched Cardinal Ferrari to Ercole with the contract,
whereupon Don Ramiro Remolini and other proxies hastened to
Ferrara,[103] where, in the castle of Belfiore, the nuptial contract was
concluded _ad verba_, September 1, 1501.

On the same day the duke wrote Lucretia, saying that, while he hitherto
had loved her on account of her virtues and on account of the Pope and
her brother Cæsar, he now loved her more as a daughter. In the same tone
he wrote to Alexander himself, informing him that the betrothal had
taken place, and thanking him for bestowing the dignity of Archpriest of
S. Peter's on his son, Cardinal Ippolito.[104]

Less diplomatic was Ercole's letter to the Marchese Gonzaga informing
him of the event. It clearly shows what was his real opinion, and he
tries to excuse himself for consenting by saying he was forced to take
the step.

     ILLUSTRIOUS SIR AND DEAREST BROTHER: We have informed your
     Majesty that we have recently decided--owing to practical
     considerations--to consent to an alliance between our house and
     that of his Holiness--the marriage of our eldest son, Alfonso, and
     the illustrious lady Lucretia Borgia, sister of the illustrious
     Duke of Romagna and Valentinois, chiefly because we were urged to
     consent by his Most Christian Majesty, and on condition that his
     Holiness would agree to everything stipulated in the marriage
     contract. Subsequently his Holiness and ourselves came to an
     agreement, and the Most Christian King persistently urged us to
     execute the contract. This was done to-day in God's name, and with
     the assistance of the (French) ambassador and the proxies of his
     Holiness, who were present; and it was also published this morning.
     I hasten to inform your Majesty of the event because our mutual
     relations and love require that you should be made acquainted with
     everything which concerns us--and so we offer ourselves to do your
     pleasure.

     FERRARA, _September 2, 1501_.[105]

September 4th a courier brought the news that the nuptial contract had
been signed in Ferrara. Alexander immediately had the Vatican
illuminated and the cannon of Castle S. Angelo announce the glad
tidings. All Rome resounded with the jubilations of the retainers of the
house of Borgia.

This moment was the turning point in Lucretia's life. If her soul
harbored any ambition and yearning for worldly greatness, what must she
now have felt when the opportunity to ascend the princely throne of one
of Italy's oldest houses was offered her! If she had any regret and
loathing for what had surrounded her in Rome, and if longings for a
better life were stronger in her than were these vain desires, there was
now held out to her the promise of a haven of rest. She was to become
the wife of a prince famous, not for grace and culture, but for his good
sense and earnestness. She had seen him once in Rome, in her early
youth, when she was Sforza's betrothed. No sacrifice would be too great
for her if it would wipe out the remembrance of the nine years which had
followed that day. The victory she had now won by the shameful
complaisance of the house of Este was associated with deep humiliation,
for she knew that Alfonso had condescended to accept her hand only after
long urging and under threats. A bold, intriguing woman might overcome
this feeling of humiliation by summoning up the consciousness of her
genius and her charm; while one less strong, but endowed with beauty and
sweetness, might be fascinated by the idea of disarming a hostile
husband with the magic of her personality. The question, however,
whether any honor accrued to her by marrying a man against his will, or
whether under such circumstances a high-minded woman would not have
scornfully refused, would probably never arise in the mind of such a
light-headed woman as Lucretia certainly was, and if it did in her case,
Cæsar and her father would never have allowed her to give voice to any
such undiplomatic scruples. We can discover no trace of moral pride in
her; all we discern is a childishly naive joy at her prospective
happiness.

The Roman populace saw her, accompanied by three hundred knights and
four bishops, pass along the city streets, September 5th, on her way to
S. Maria del Popolo to offer prayers of thanksgiving. Following a
curious custom of the day, which shows Folly and Wisdom side by side,
just as we find them in Calderon's and Shakespeare's dramas, Lucretia
presented the costly robe which she wore when she offered up her prayer,
to one of her court fools, and the clown ran merrily through the streets
of Rome, bawling out, "Long live the illustrious Duchess of Ferrara!
Long live Pope Alexander!" With noisy demonstrations the Borgias and
their retainers celebrated the great event.

Alexander summoned a consistory, as though this family affair were an
important Church matter. With childish loquacity he extolled Duke
Ercole, pronouncing him the greatest and wisest of the princes of Italy;
he described Don Alfonso as a handsomer and greater man than his son
Cæsar, adding that his former wife was a sister-in-law of the Emperor.
Ferrara was a fortunate State, and the house of Este an ancient one; a
marriage train of great princes was shortly to come to Rome to take the
bride away, and the Duchess of Urbino was to accompany it.[106]

September 14th Cæsar Borgia returned from Naples, where Federico, the
last Aragonese king of that country, had been forced to yield to France.
To his great satisfaction he found Lucretia prospective Duchess of
Ferrara. On the fifteenth Ercole's envoys, Saraceni and Bellingeri,
appeared. Their object was to see that the Pope fulfilled his
obligations promptly. The duke was a practical man; he did not trust
him. He was unwilling to send the bridal escort until he had the papal
bull in his own hands. Lucretia supported the ambassador so zealously
that Saraceni wrote his master that she already appeared to him to be a
good Ferrarese.[107] She was present in the Vatican while Alexander
carried on the negotiations. He sometimes used Latin for the purpose of
displaying his linguistic attainments; but on one occasion, out of
regard for Lucretia, he ordered that Italian be used, which proves that
his daughter was not a perfect mistress of the classic tongue.

From this ambassador's despatches it appears that life in the Vatican
was extremely agreeable. They sang, played and danced every evening. One
of Alexander's greatest delights was to watch beautiful women dancing,
and when Lucretia and the ladies of her court were so engaged he was
careful to summon the Ferrarese ambassadors so that they might note his
daughter's grace. One evening he remarked laughingly that "they might
see that the duchess was not lame."[108]

       *       *       *       *       *

The Pope never tired of passing the nights in this way, although Cæsar,
a strong man, was worn out by the ceaseless round of pleasure. When the
latter consented to grant the ambassadors an audience, a favor which was
not often bestowed even on cardinals, he received them dressed, but
lying in bed, which caused Saraceni to remark in his despatch, "I feared
that he was sick, for last evening he danced without intermission, which
he will do again tonight at the Pope's palace, where the illustrious
duchess is going to sup."[109] Lucretia regarded it as a relief when, a
few days later, the Pope went to Civitacastellana and Nepi. September
25th the ambassadors wrote to Ferrara, "The illustrious lady continues
somewhat ailing, and is greatly fatigued; she is not, however, under the
care of any physician, nor does she neglect her affairs, but grants
audiences as usual. We think that this indisposition merely indicates
that her Majesty should take better care of herself. The rest which she
will have while his Holiness is away will do her good; for whenever she
is at the Pope's palace, the entire night, until two or three o'clock,
is spent in dancing and at play, which fatigues her greatly."[110]

About this time occurred a disagreeable episode in connection with
Giovanni Sforza, Lucretia's divorced husband, which the Pope discussed
with the Ferrarese ambassadors. What they feared from him is revealed by
the following despatch:

     ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE AND MASTER: As his Holiness the Pope
     desires to take all proper precautions to prevent the occurrence of
     anything that might be unpleasant to your Excellency, to Don
     Alfonso, and especially to the duchess, and also to himself, he has
     asked us to write your Excellency and request that you see to it
     that Lord Giovanni of Pesaro--who, his Holiness has been informed,
     is in Mantua--shall not be in Ferrara at the time of the marriage
     festivities. For, although his divorce from the above named
     illustrious lady was absolutely legal and according to prescribed
     form, as the records of the proceedings clearly show, he himself
     fully consenting to it, he may, nevertheless, still harbor some
     resentment. If he should be in Ferrara there would be a possibility
     of his seeing the lady, and her Excellency would therefore be
     compelled to remain in concealment to escape disagreeable
     memories. He, therefore, requests your Excellency to prevent this
     possibility with your usual foresight. Thereupon his Holiness
     freely expressed his opinion of the Marchese of Mantua, and
     censured him severely because he of all the Italian princes was the
     only one who offered an asylum to outcasts, and especially to those
     who were under not only his own ban, but under that of his Most
     Christian Majesty. We endeavored, however, to excuse the marchese
     by saying that he, a high-minded man, could not close his domain to
     such as wished to come to him, especially when they were people of
     importance, and we used every argument to defend him. His Holiness,
     however, seemed displeased by our defense of the marchese. Your
     Excellency may, therefore, make such arrangements as in your wisdom
     seem proper. And so we, in all humility, commend ourselves to your
     mercy.

     ROME, _September 23, 1501_.[111]

As a result of Ercole's insistence, the question of the reduction of
Ferrara's yearly tribute as a fief of the Holy See from four hundred
ducats to one hundred florins was brought to a vote in the consistory,
September 17th. It was expected that there would be violent opposition.
Alexander explained what Ercole had done for Ferrara, his founding
convents and churches, and his strengthening the city, thus making it a
bulwark for the States of the Church. The cardinals were induced to
favor the reduction by the intervention of the Cardinal of Cosenza--one
of Lucretia's creatures--and of Messer Troche, Cæsar's confidant. They
authorized the reduction and the Pope thanked them, especially praising
the older cardinals--the younger, those of his own creation, having been
more obstinate.[112]

The same day he secured possession of the property he had wrested from
the barons who had been placed under his ban August 20th. These domains,
which embraced a large part of the Roman Campagna, were divided into two
districts. The center of one was Nepi; that of the other Sermoneta--two
cities which Lucretia, their former mistress, immediately renounced.
Alexander made these duchies over to two children, Giovanni Borgia and
Rodrigo. At first the Pope ascribed the paternity of the former child to
his own son Cæsar, but subsequently he publicly announced that he
himself was its father.

It is difficult to believe in such unexampled shamelessness, but the
legal documents to prove it are in existence. Both bulls are dated
September 1, 1501, and are addressed to my beloved son, "the noble
Giovanni de Borgia and Infante of Rome." In the former, Alexander states
that Giovanni, a child of three years, was the natural son of Cæsar
Borgia, unmarried (which he was at the time of its birth), by a single
woman. By apostolic authority he legitimated the child and bestowed upon
it all the rights of a member of his family. In the second brief he
refers to the proceedings in which the child had been declared to be
Cæsar's son, and says verbatim: "Since it is owing, not to the duke
named (Cæsar), but to us and to the unmarried woman mentioned that you
bear this stain (of illegitimate birth), which for good reasons we did
not wish to state in the preceding instrument; and in order that there
may be no chance of your being caused annoyance in the future, we will
see to it that that document shall never be declared null, and of our
own free will, and by virtue of our authority, we confirm you, by these
presents, in the full enjoyment of everything as provided in that
instrument." Thereupon he renews the legitimation and announces that
even if this his child, which had hitherto been declared to be Cæsar's,
shall in future, in any document or act be named and described as his
(Cæsar's), and even if he uses Cæsar's arms, it shall in no way inure to
the disadvantage of the child, and that all such acts shall have the
same force which they would have had if the boy had been described not
as Cæsar's, but as his own, in the documents referring to his
legitimation.[113]

It is worthy of note that both these documents were executed on one and
the same day, but this is explained by the fact that the canon law
prevented the Pope from acknowledging his own son. Alexander, therefore,
extricated himself from the difficulty by telling a falsehood in the
first bull. This lie made the legitimation of the child possible, and
also conferred upon it the rights of succession; and this having once
been embodied in a legal document, the Pope could, without injury to the
child, tell the truth.

September 1, 1501, Cæsar was not in Rome. Even a man of his stamp may
have blushed for his father, when he thus made him the rival of this
bastard for the possession of the property. Later, after Alexander's
death, the little Giovanni Borgia passed for Cæsar's son; he had,
moreover, been described as such by the Pope in numerous briefs.[114]

It is not known who was the mother of this mysterious child. Burchard
speaks of her merely as a "certain Roman." If Alexander, who described
her as an "unmarried woman," told the truth, Giulia Farnese could not
have been its mother.

It is possible, however, that the Pope's second statement likewise was
untrue, and that the "Infante of Rome" was not his son, but was a
natural child of Lucretia. The reader will remember that in March, 1498,
the Ferrarese ambassador reported to Duke Ercole that it was rumored in
Rome that the Pope's daughter had given birth to a child. This date
agrees perfectly with the age of the Infante Giovanni in September,
1501. Both documents regarding his legitimation, which are now preserved
in the Este archives, were originally in Lucretia's chancellery. She may
have taken them with her from Rome to Ferrara, or they may have been
brought to her later. Eventually we shall find the Infante at her court
in Ferrara, where he was spoken of as her "brother." These facts suggest
that the mysterious Giovanni Borgia was Lucretia's son--this, however,
is only a hypothesis. The city of Nepi and thirty-six other estates were
conferred upon the child as his dukedom.

The second domain, including the duchy of Sermoneta and twenty-eight
castles, was given to little Rodrigo, Lucretia's only son by Alfonso of
Aragon.

Under Lucretia's changed conditions, this child was an embarrassment to
her, for she either was not allowed or did not dare to bring a child by
her former husband to Ferrara. For the sake of her character let us
assume that she was compelled to leave her child among strangers. The
order to do so, however, does not appear to have emanated from Ferrara,
for, September 28th, the ambassador Gerardi gave his master an account
of a call which he made on Madonna Lucretia, in which he said, "As her
son was present, I asked her--in such a way that she could not mistake
my meaning--what was to be done with him; to which she replied, 'He will
remain in Rome, and will have an allowance of fifteen thousand
ducats.'"[115] The little Rodrigo was, in truth, provided for in a
princely manner. He was placed under the guardianship of two
cardinals--the Patriarch of Alexandria and Francesco Borgia, Archbishop
of Cosenza. He received the revenues of Sermoneta, and he also owned
Biselli, his unfortunate father's inheritance; for Ferdinand and
Isabella of Castile authorized their ambassador in Rome, Francesco de
Roxas, January 7, 1502, to confirm Rodrigo in the possession of the
duchy of Biselli and the city of Quadrata. According to this act his
title was Don Rodrigo Borgia of Aragon, Duke of Biselli and Sermoneta,
and lord of Quadrata.[116]


FOOTNOTES:

[99] Cavallieri to Ercole, Lyons, August 8, 1501. The Pope has written
his nuncio that he agreed to the duke's demands, for the purpose of
concluding the marriage, which would be extraordinarily advantageous to
himself and the Duke of Romagna.

[100] Despatches of the Ferrarese ambassador, Bartolomeo Cartari, from
Venice, June 25, July 28, and August 2, 1501. Archives of Modena.

[101] Ercole's letter to Pozzi in Ferrara, August 25, 1501. Maximilian's
letters are not in the Este archives but in Vienna.

[102] The instrument was drawn by Beneimbene.

[103] Cardinal Ferrari to Ercole, Rome, August 27, 1501.

[104] Ducal Records, September 1, 1501.

[105] The letter is reproduced in Zucchetti's Lucrezia Borgia, Duchessa
di Ferrara, Milan, 1869.

[106] Ed altre cose che egli disse per maggiormente magnificare il
fatto. Matteo Canale to the Duke of Ferrara, Rome, September 11, 1501.

[107] Quale mi pare già essere optima Ferrarese. Despatch from Rome,
September 15th.

[108] Che voleva havessimo veduto che la Duchessa non era zoppa.
Saraceni to Ercole, Rome, September 16th.

[109] Rome, September 23d, Saraceni.

[110] Despatch, September 25th.

[111] To this Ercole replied in reassuring terms. Letter to his orators
in Rome, September 18, 1501.

[112] Despatch of Matteo Canale to Ercole, Rome, September 18, 1501.

[113] Both bulls are in the archives of Modena. The first is a copy, the
second an original. The lead seal is wanting, but the red and yellow
silk by which it was attached is still preserved. I first discovered the
facts in a manuscript in the Barberiniana in Rome.

[114] Mandate of the Pope regarding certain taxes, dated July 21, 1502:
Nobili Infanti Johanni Borgia, nostro secundum carnem nepoti; and in
another brief, dated June 12, 1502, Dil filii nobilis infantis Johannis
Borgia ducis Nepesini delecti filii nobilis viri Cæsaris Borgia de
Francia, etc. Archives of Modena.

[115] Geradi to Ercole, Rome, September 28th.

[116] Datum in civitate Hispali, January 7, 1502. Yo el rey. Archives of
Modena. In Liber Arrendamentorum Terrarum ad Illmos Dnos Rodericum Bor.
de Aragonia Sermoneti, et Jo. de bor., Nepesin. Duces infantes
spectantium et alearq. scripturar. status eorundem tangentium. Biselli,
1502.




CHAPTER XXI

THE EVE OF THE WEDDING


Lucretia was impatient to leave Rome, which, she remarked to the
ambassador of Ferrara, seemed to her like a prison; the duke himself was
no less anxious to conclude the transaction. The preparation of the new
bull of investiture, however, was delayed, and the cession of Cento and
Pievi could not be effected without the consent of Cardinal Giuliano
della Rovere, Archbishop of Bologna, who was then living in France.
Ercole, therefore, postponed despatching the bridal escort, although the
approach of winter would make the journey, which was severe at any time,
all the more difficult. Whenever Lucretia saw the Ferrarese ambassadors
she asked them how soon the escort would come to fetch her. She herself
endeavored to remove all obstacles. Although the cardinals trembled
before the Pope and Cæsar, they were reluctant to sign a bull which
would lose Ferrara's tribute to the Church. They were bitterly opposed
to allowing the descendants of Alfonso and Lucretia, without limitation,
to profit by a remission of the annual payment; they would suffer this
privilege to be enjoyed for three generations at most. The duke
addressed urgent letters to the cardinal and to Lucretia, who finally,
in October, succeeded in arranging matters, thereby winning high praise
from her father-in-law. During the first half of October she and the
duke kept up a lively correspondence, which shows that their mutual
confidence was increasing. It was plain that Ercole was beginning to
look upon the unequal match with less displeasure, as he discovered that
his daughter-in-law possessed greater sense than he had supposed. Her
letters to him were filled with flattery, especially one she wrote when
she heard he was sick, and Ercole thanked her for having written it with
her own hand, which he regarded as special proof of her affection.[117]

The ambassadors reported to him as follows: "When we informed the
illustrious Duchess of your Excellency's illness, her Majesty displayed
the greatest concern. She turned pale and stood for a moment bowed in
thought. She regretted that she was not in Ferrara to take care of you
herself. When the walls of the Vatican salon tumbled in, she nursed his
Holiness for two weeks without resting, as the Pope would allow no one
else to do anything for him."[118]

Well might the illness of Lucretia's father-in-law frighten her. His
death would have delayed, if not absolutely prevented, her marriage with
Alfonso; for up to the present time she had no proof that her
prospective husband's opposition had been overcome.

There are no letters written by either to the other at this time--a
silence which is, to say the least, singular. Still more disturbing to
Lucretia must have been the thought that her father himself might die,
for his death would certainly set aside her betrothal to Alfonso.
Shortly after Ercole's illness Alexander fell sick. He had caught cold
and lost a tooth. To prevent exaggerated reports reaching Ferrara, he
had the duke's envoy summoned, and directed him to write his master that
his indisposition was insignificant. "If the duke were here," said the
Pope, "I would--even if my face is tied up--invite him to go and hunt
wild boars." The ambassador remarked in his despatch that the Pope, if
he valued his health, had better change his habits, and not leave the
palace before daybreak, and had better return before nightfall.[119]

Ercole and the Pope received congratulations from all sides. Cardinals
and ambassadors in their letters proclaimed Lucretia's beauty and
graciousness. The Spanish envoy in Rome praised her in extravagant
terms, and Ercole thanked him for his testimony regarding the virtues of
his daughter-in-law.[120]

Even the King of France displayed the liveliest pleasure at the event,
which, he now discovered, would redound greatly to Ferrara's advantage.
The Pope, beaming with joy, read the congratulations of the monarch and
his consort to the consistory. Louis XII even condescended to address a
letter to Madonna Lucretia, at the end of which were two words in his
own hand. Alexander was so delighted thereby that he sent a copy of it
to Ferrara. The court of Maximilian was the only one from which no
congratulations were received. The emperor exhibited such displeasure
that Ercole was worried, as the following letter to his
plenipotentiaries in Rome shows:

     THE DUKE OF FERRARA, ETC.

     OUR WELL-LOVED: We have given his Holiness, our Lord, no
     further information regarding the attitude of the illustrious
     Emperor of the Romans towards him since Messer Michele Remolines
     departed from here, for we had nothing definite to communicate. We
     have, however, been told by a trustworthy person with whom the king
     conversed, that his Majesty was greatly displeased, and that he
     criticised his Holiness in unmeasured terms on account of the
     alliance which we have concluded with him, as he also did in
     letters addressed to us before the betrothal, in which he advised
     us not to enter into it, as you will learn from the copies of his
     letters which we send you with this. They were shown and read to
     his Holiness's ambassador here. Although, so far as we ourselves
     are concerned, we did not attach much importance to his Majesty's
     attitude, as we followed the dictates of reason, and are daily
     becoming more convinced that it will prove advantageous for us; it
     nevertheless appears proper, in view of our relations with his
     Holiness, that he should be informed of our position.

     You will, therefore, tell him everything, and also let him see the
     copies, if you think best, but you must say to him in our name that
     he is not to ascribe their authorship to us, and that we have not
     sent you these copies because of any special importance that we
     attached to them.

     FERRARA, _October 3, 1501_.

The duke now allowed nothing to shake his resolution. Early in October
he selected the escort whose departure from Ferrara, he frankly stated,
would depend upon the progress of his negotiations with the Pope. The
constitution of the bridal trains, both Roman and Ferrarese, was an
important question, and is referred to in one of Gerardo's despatches.

     ILLUSTRIOUS SIR, ETC.: To-day at six o'clock Hector and I
     were alone with the Pope, having your letters of the twenty-sixth
     ultimo and of the first of the present month, and also a list of
     those who are to compose the escort. His Holiness was greatly
     pleased, the various persons being people of wealth and standing,
     as he could readily see, the rank and position of each being
     clearly indicated. I have learned from the best of sources that
     your Excellency has exceeded all the Pope's expectations. After we
     had conversed a while with his Holiness, the illustrious Duke of
     Romagna and Cardinal Orsini were summoned. There were also present
     Monsignor Elna, Monsignor Troche, and Messer Adriano. The Pope had
     the list read a second time, and again it was praised, especially
     by the duke, who said he was acquainted with several of the persons
     named. He kept the list, thanking me warmly when I gave it to him
     again, for he had returned it to me.

     We endeavored to get the list of those who are to come with the
     illustrious Duchess, but it has not yet been prepared. His Holiness
     said that there would not be many women among the number, as the
     ladies of Rome were not skilful horsewomen.[121] Hitherto the
     Duchess has had five or six young ladies at her court--four very
     young girls and three married women--who will remain with her
     Majesty. She has, however, been advised not to bring them, as many
     of the great ladies in Ferrara will offer her their services. She
     has also a certain Madonna Girolama, Cardinal Borgia's sister, who
     is married to one of the Orsini. She and three of her women will
     accompany her. These are the only ladies of honor she has hitherto
     had. I have heard that she will endeavor to find others in Naples,
     but it is believed that she will be able to secure only a few, and
     that these will merely accompany her. The Duchess of Urbino has
     announced that she expects to come with a mounted escort of fifty
     persons. So far as the men are concerned, his Holiness said that
     there would not be many, as there were no Roman noblemen except the
     Orsini, and they generally were away from the city. Still, he hoped
     to be able to find sufficient, provided the Duke of Romagna did not
     take the field, there being a large number of nobles among his
     followers. His Holiness said that he had plenty of priests and
     scholars to send, but not such persons as were fit for a mission of
     this sort. However, the retinue furnished by your Majesty will
     serve for both, especially as--according to his Holiness--it is
     better for the more numerous escort to be sent by the groom, and
     for the bride to come accompanied by a smaller number. Still I do
     not think her suite will number less than two hundred persons. The
     Pope is in doubt what route her Majesty will travel. He thinks she
     ought to go by way of Bologna, and he says that the Florentines
     likewise have invited her. Although his Holiness has reached no
     decision, the Duchess has informed us that she would journey
     through the Marches, and the Pope has just concluded that she might
     do so. Perhaps he desires her to pass through the estates of the
     Duke of Romagna on her way to Bologna.

     Regarding your Majesty's wish that a cardinal accompany the
     Duchess, his Holiness said that it did not seem proper to him for a
     cardinal to leave Rome with her; but that he had written the
     Cardinal of Salerno, the Legate in the Marches, to go to the seat
     of the Duke in Romagna and wait there, and accompany the Duchess to
     Ferrara to read mass at the wedding. He thought that the cardinal
     would do this, unless prevented by sickness, in which case his
     Holiness would provide another.

     When the Pope discovered, during this conversation, that we had so
     far been unable to secure an audience with the illustrious Duke, he
     showed great annoyance, declaring it was a mistake which could only
     injure his Majesty, and he added that the ambassadors of Rimini had
     been here two months without succeeding in speaking with him, as he
     was in the habit of turning day into night and night into day. He
     severely criticized his son's mode of living. On the other hand, he
     commended the illustrious Duchess, saying that she was always
     gracious, and granted audiences readily, and that whenever there
     was need she knew how to cajole. He lauded her highly, and stated
     that she had ruled Spoleto to the satisfaction of everybody, and he
     also said that her Majesty always knew how to carry her point--even
     with himself, the Pope. I think that his Holiness spoke in this way
     more for the purpose of saying good of her (which according to my
     opinion she deserved) than to avoid saying anything ill, even if
     there were occasion for it. Your Majesty's Ever devoted.

     ROME, _October 6th_.

The Pope seldom allowed an opportunity to pass for praising his
daughter's beauty and graciousness. He frequently compared her with the
most famous women of Italy--the Marchioness of Mantua and the Duchess of
Urbino. One day, while conversing with the ambassadors of Ferrara, he
mentioned her age, saying that in October (1502) she would complete her
twenty-second year, while Cæsar would be twenty-six the same month.[122]

The Pope was greatly pleased with the members of the bridal escort, for
they all were either princes of the house of Este or prominent persons
of Ferrara. He also approved the selection of Annibale Bentivoglio, son
of the Lord of Bologna, and said laughingly to the Ferrarese ambassadors
that, even if their master had chosen Turks to come to Rome for the
bride, they would have been welcome.

The Florentines, owing to their fear of Cæsar, sent ambassadors to
Lucretia to ask her to come by way of their city when she went to
Ferrara; the Pope, however, was determined that she should make the
journey through Romagna. According to an oppressive custom of the day,
the people through whose country persons of quality traveled were
required to provide for them, and, in order not to tax Romagna too
heavily, it was decided that the Ferrarese escort should come to Rome by
way of Tuscany. The Republic of Florence firmly refused to entertain the
escort all the time it was in its territory, although it was willing to
care for it while in the city or to make a handsome present.[123]

In the meantime preparations were under way in Ferrara for the wedding
festivities. The Duke invited all the princes who were friendly to him
to be present. He had even thought of the oration which was to be
delivered in Ferrara when Lucretia was given to her husband. During the
Renaissance these orations were regarded as of the greatest importance,
and he was anxious to secure a speaker who could be depended upon to
deliver a masterpiece. Ercole had instructed his ambassadors in Rome to
send him particulars regarding the house of Borgia for the orator to use
in preparing his speech.[124]

The ambassadors scrupulously carried out their instructions, and wrote
their sovereign as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE AND MASTER: We have spared no efforts
     to learn everything possible regarding the illustrious house of
     Borgia, as your Excellency commanded. We made a thorough
     investigation, and members of our suite here in Rome, not only the
     scholars but also those who we knew were loyal to you, did the
     same. Although we finally succeeded in ascertaining that the house
     is one of the noblest and most ancient in Spain, we did not
     discover that its founders ever did anything very remarkable,
     perhaps because life in that country is quiet and uneventful--your
     Excellency knows that such is the case in Spain, especially in
     Valencia.

     Whatever there is worthy of note dates from the time of Calixtus,
     and, in fact, the deeds of Calixtus himself are those most worthy
     of comment; Platina, however, has given an account of his life,
     which, moreover, is well known to everybody. Whoever is to deliver
     the oration has ample material, therefore, from which to choose.
     We, illustrious Sir, have been able to learn nothing more regarding
     this house than what you already know, and this concerns only the
     members of the family who have been Popes, and is derived chiefly
     from the audience speeches. In case we succeed in finding out
     anything more, we shall inform your Excellency, to whom we commend
     ourselves in all humility.

     ROME, _October 18, 1501_.

When the descendant of the ancient house of Este read this terse
despatch he must have smiled; its candor was so undiplomatic that it
bordered on irony. The doughty ambassadors, however, apparently did not
go to the right sources, for if they had applied to the courtiers who
were intimate with the Borgia--for example, the Porcaro--they would have
obtained a genealogical tree showing a descent from the old kings of
Aragon, if not from Hercules himself.

In the meantime the impatience of the Pope and Lucretia was steadily
increasing, for the departure of the bridal escort was delayed, and the
enemies of the Borgia were already beginning to make merry. The duke
declared that he could not think of sending for Donna Lucretia until the
bull of investiture was in his hands. He complained at the Pope's delay
in fulfilling his promises. He also demanded that the part of the
marriage portion which was to be paid in coin through banking houses in
Venice, Bologna, and other cities be handed over on the bridal escort's
entry into Rome, and threatened in case it was not paid in full to have
his people return to Ferrara without the bride.[125] As it was
impossible for him to bring about the immediate cession of Cento and
Pievi, he asked from the Pope as a pledge that either the bishopric of
Bologna be given his son Ippolito, or that his Holiness furnish a bond.
He also demanded certain benefices for his natural son Don Giulio, and
for his ambassador Gianluca Pozzi. Lucretia succeeded in securing the
bishopric of Reggio for the latter and also a house in Rome for the
Ferrarese envoy.

Another important question was the dowry of jewels which Lucretia was to
receive. During the Renaissance the passion for jewels amounted to a
mania. Ercole sent word to his daughter-in-law that she must not dispose
of her jewels, but must bring them with her; he also said that he
would send her a handsome ornament by the bridal escort, gallantly
adding that, as she herself was a precious jewel, she deserved the most
beautiful gems--even more magnificent ones than he and his own consort
had possessed; it is true he was not so wealthy as the Duke of Savoy,
but, nevertheless, he was in a position to send her jewels no less
beautiful than those given her by the duke.[126]

The relations between Ercole and his daughter-in-law were as friendly as
could be desired, for Lucretia exerted herself to secure the Pope's
consent to his demands. His Holiness, however, was greatly annoyed by
the duke's conduct; he sent urgent requests to him to despatch the
escort to Rome, and assured him that the two castles in Romagna would be
delivered over to him before Lucretia reached Ferrara, but in case she
did arrive there first that everything she asked would be granted--his
love for her was such that he even thought of paying her a visit in
Ferrara in the spring.[127] The Pope suspected, however, that the delay
in sending the bridal escort was due to the machinations of Maximilian.
Even as late as November the emperor had despatched his secretary,
Agostino Semenza, to the duke to warn him not to send the escort to
Rome, adding that he would show his gratitude to Ercole. November 22d
the duke wrote the imperial plenipotentiary a letter in which he stated
that he had immediately sent a courier to his ambassador in Rome; it
would soon be winter, and the time would therefore be unfavorable for
bringing Lucretia; if the Pope was willing, he would postpone the
wedding, but he would not break off with him entirely. His Majesty
should remember that if he did this, the Pope would become his bitterest
enemy, and would persecute him, and might even make war on him. It was,
he stated, for the express purpose of avoiding this that he had
consented to enter into an alliance with his Holiness. He, therefore,
hoped that his Majesty would not expose him to this danger, but that,
with his usual justice, he would appreciate his excuses.[128]

At the same time he instructed his ambassadors in Rome to inform the
Pope of the emperor's threats, and to say to him that he was ready to
fulfil his own obligations and also to urge his Holiness to have the
bulls prepared at once, as further delay was dangerous.

Alexander thereupon fell into a rage; he overwhelmed the ambassadors
with reproaches, and called the duke a "tradesman." On December 1st
Ercole announced to the emperor's messenger that he was unable longer to
delay sending the bridal escort, for, if he did, it would mean a rupture
with the Pope. The same day he wrote to his ambassadors in Rome and
complained of the use of the epithet "tradesman," which the Pope had
applied to him.[129] He, however, reassured his Holiness by informing
him that he had decided to despatch the bridal escort from Ferrara the
ninth or tenth of December.[130]

[Illustration: ERCOLE D'ESTE, DUKE OF FERRARA.]


FOOTNOTES:

[117] Lucretia to Ercole, October 18th; Ercole to Lucretia, October 23d.

[118] Gerardo to Ercole, October 15, 1501.

[119] Ercole to Don Francesco de Roxas, October 24, 1501.

[120] Gerardo Saraceni to Ercole, Rome, October 26, 1501.

[121] Per essere queste romane salvatiche et male apte a cavallo.

[122] Gerardo to Ercole, October 26, 1501.

[123] The orator Manfredo Manfredi to Ercole, Florence, November 22 and
24, 1501.

[124] The duke to his ambassadors in Rome, October 7, 1501.

[125] Ercole to Gerardo Saraceni, November 24, 1501. Other letters of
like import were written by the duke to his plenipotentiaries.

[126] Ercole to Gerardo Saraceni in Rome, October 11, 1501.

[127] Despatch of the Ferrarese ambassadors to Ercole, Rome, October 31,
1501.

[128] Il quale mal effecto volendo nui fugire, seamo condescesi a
contrahere la affinita cum soa Santità. Responsum illmi Dni ducis
Ferrarie D. Augustino Semetie Ces Mtis secretario. Ferrara, November 22,
1501.

[129] Che il procedere del Duca era un procedere da mercatante. Ercole
to Gerardo Saraceni, December 1, 1501.

[130] Ercole to Alexander VI, December 1, 1501.




CHAPTER XXII

ARRIVAL AND RETURN OF THE BRIDAL ESCORT


In the meantime Lucretia's trousseau was being prepared with an expense
worthy of a king's daughter. On December 13, 1501, the agent in Rome of
the Marchese Gonzaga wrote his master as follows: "The portion will
consist of three hundred thousand ducats, not counting the presents
which Madonna will receive from time to time. First a hundred thousand
ducats are to be paid in money in instalments in Ferrara. Then there
will be silverware to the value of three thousand ducats; jewels, fine
linen, costly trappings for horses and mules, together worth another
hundred thousand. In her wardrobe she has a trimmed dress worth more
than fifteen thousand ducats, and two hundred costly shifts, some of
which are worth a hundred ducats apiece; the sleeves alone of some of
them cost thirty ducats each, being trimmed with gold fringe." Another
person reported to the Marchesa Isabella that Lucretia had one dress
worth twenty thousand ducats, and a hat valued at ten thousand. "It is
said," so the Mantuan agent writes, "that more gold has been prepared
and sold here in Naples in six months than has been used heretofore in
two years. She brings her husband another hundred thousand ducats, the
value of the castles (Cento and Pieve), and will also secure the
remission of Ferrara's tribute. The number of horses and persons the
Pope will place at his daughter's disposal will amount to a thousand.
There will be two hundred carriages--among them some of French make, if
there is time--and with these will come the escort which is to take
her."[131]

The duke finally concluded to send the bridal escort, although the bulls
were not ready for him. As he was anxious to make the marriage of his
son with Lucretia an event of the greatest magnificence, he sent a
cavalcade of more than fifteen hundred persons for her. At their head
were Cardinal Ippolito and five other members of the ducal house; his
brothers, Don Ferrante and Don Sigismondo; also Niccolò Maria d'Este,
Bishop of Adria; Meliaduse d'Este, Bishop of Comacchio; and Don Ercole,
a nephew of the duke. In the escort were numerous prominent friends and
kinsmen or vassals of the house of Ferrara, lords of Correggio and
Mirandola; the Counts Rangone of Modena; one of the Pio of Carpi; the
Counts Bevilacqua, Roverella, Sagrato, Strozzi of Ferrara, Annibale
Bentivoglio of Bologna, and many others.

These gentlemen, magnificently clad, and with heavy gold chains about
their necks, mounted on beautiful horses, left Ferrara December 9th,
with thirteen trumpeters and eight fifes at their head; and thus this
wedding cavalcade, led by a worldly cardinal, rode noisily forth upon
their journey. In our time such an aggregation might easily be mistaken
for a troop of trick riders. Nowhere did this brave company of knights
pay their reckoning; in the domain of Ferrara they lived on the duke; in
other words, at the expense of his subjects. In the lands of other lords
they did the same, and in the territory of the Church the cities they
visited were required to provide for them.

In spite of the luxury of the Renaissance, traveling was at that time
very disagreeable; everywhere in Europe it was as difficult then as it
is now in the Orient. Great lords and ladies, who to-day flit across the
country in comfortable railway carriages, traveled in the sixteenth
century, even in the most civilized states of Europe, mounted on horses
or mules, or slowly in sedan-chairs, exposed to all the inclemencies of
wind and weather, and unpaved roads. The cavalcade was thirteen days on
the way from Ferrara to Rome--a journey which can now be made in a few
hours.

Finally, on December 22d, it reached Monterosi, a wretched castle
fifteen miles from Rome. All were in a deplorable condition, wet to the
skin by winter rains, and covered with mud; and men and horses
completely tired out. From this place the cardinal sent a messenger with
a herald to Rome to receive the Pope's commands. Answer was brought that
they were to enter by the Porta del Popolo.

The entrance of the Ferrarese into Rome was the most theatrical event
that occurred during the reign of Alexander VI. Processions were the
favorite spectacles of the Middle Ages; State, Church, and society
displayed their wealth and power in magnificent cavalcades. The horse
was symbolic of the world's strength and magnificence, but with the
disappearance of knighthood it lost its place in the history of
civilization. How the love of form and color of the people of Italy--the
home of processions--has changed was shown in Rome, July 2, 1871, when
Victor Emmanuel entered his new capital. Had this episode--one of the
weightiest in the whole history of Italy--occurred during the
Renaissance, it would have been made the occasion of a magnificent
triumph. The entrance into Rome of the first king of united Italy was
made, however, in a few dust-covered carriages, which conveyed the
monarch and his court from the railway station to their lodgings; yet
in this bourgeois simplicity there was really more moral greatness than
in any of the triumphs of the Cæsars. That the love of parades which
existed in the Renaissance has died out is, perhaps, to be regretted,
for occasions still arise when they are necessary.

Alexander's prestige would certainly have suffered if, on the occasion
of a family function of such importance, he had failed to offer the
people as evidence of his power a brilliant spectacle of some sort. The
very fact that Adrian VI did not understand and appreciate this
requirement of the Renaissance made him the butt of the Romans.

At ten o'clock on the morning of December 23d the Ferrarese reached the
Ponte Molle, where breakfast was served in a nearby villa. The
appearance of this neighborhood must at that time have been different
from what it is to-day. There were casinos and wine houses on the slopes
of Monte Mario--whose summit was occupied even at that time by a villa
belonging to the Mellini--and on the hills beyond the Flaminian Way.
Nicholas V had restored the bridge over the Tiber, and also begun a
tower nearby, which Calixtus III completed. Between the Ponte Molle and
the Porta del Popolo there was then,--just as there is now,--a wretched
suburb.

[Illustration: CASTLE OF S. ANGELO, ROME.]

At the bridge crossing the Tiber they found a wedding escort composed of
the senators of Rome, the governor of the city, and the captain of
police, accompanied by two thousand men, some on foot and some mounted.
Half a bowshot from the gate the cavalcade met Cæsar's suite. First came
six pages, then a hundred mounted noblemen, followed by two hundred
Swiss clothed in black and yellow velvet with the arms of the Pope,
birettas on their heads, and bearing halberds. Behind them rode the Duke
of Romagna with the ambassador of France at his side, who wore a
French costume and a golden sash. After greeting each other mid the
blare of trumpets, the gentlemen dismounted from their horses. Cæsar
embraced Cardinal Ippolito and rode at his side as far as the city gate.
If Valentino's following numbered four thousand and the city officials
two thousand more, it is difficult to conceive, taking the spectators
also into account, how so large a number of people could congregate
before the Porta del Popolo. The rows of houses which now extend from
this gate could not have been in existence then, and the space occupied
by the Villa Borghese must have been vacant. At the gate the cavalcade
was met by nineteen cardinals, each accompanied by two hundred persons.
The reception here, owing to the oration, required over two hours,
consequently it was evening when it was over.

Finally, to the din of trumpets, fifes, and horns, the cavalcade set out
over the Corso, across the Campo di Fiore, for the Vatican, where it was
saluted from Castle S. Angelo. Alexander stood at a window of the palace
to see the procession which marked the fulfilment of the dearest wish of
his house. His chamberlain met the Ferrarese at the steps of the palace
and conducted them to his Holiness, who, accompanied by twelve
cardinals, advanced to meet them. They kissed his feet, and he raised
them up and embraced them. A few moments were spent in animated
conversation, after which Cæsar led the princes to his sister. Leaning
on the arm of an elderly cavalier dressed in black velvet, with a golden
chain about his neck, Lucretia went as far as the entrance of her palace
to greet them. According to the prearranged ceremonial she did not kiss
her brothers-in-law, but merely bowed to them, following the French
custom. She wore a dress of some white material embroidered in gold,
over which there was a garment of dark brown velvet trimmed with sable.
The sleeves were of white and gold brocade, tight, and barred in the
Spanish fashion. Her head-dress was of a green gauze, with a fine gold
band and two rows of pearls. About her neck was a heavy chain of pearls
with a ruby pendant. Refreshments were served, and Lucretia distributed
small gifts--the work of Roman jewelers--among those present. The
princes departed highly pleased with their reception. "This much I
know," wrote El Prete, "that the eyes of Cardinal Ippolito sparkled, as
much as to say, She is an enchanting and exceedingly gracious lady."

The cardinal likewise wrote the same evening to his sister Isabella of
Mantua to satisfy her curiosity regarding Lucretia's costume. Dress was
then an important matter in the eyes of a court; in fact there never was
a time when women's costumes were richer and more carefully studied than
they were during the Renaissance. The Marchioness had sent an agent to
Rome apparently for the sole purpose of giving her an account of the
bridal festivities, and she had directed him to pay special attention to
the dresses. El Prete carried out his instructions as conscientiously as
a reporter for a daily paper would now do.[132] From his description an
artist could paint a good portrait of the bride.

The same evening the Ferrarese ambassadors paid their official visit to
Donna Lucretia, and they promptly wrote the duke regarding the
impression his daughter-in-law had made upon them.

     ILLUSTRIOUS MASTER: To-day after supper Don Gerardo
     Saraceni and I betook ourselves to the illustrious Madonna
     Lucretia, to pay our respects in the name of your Excellency and
     his Majesty Don Alfonso. We had a long conversation regarding
     various matters. She is a most intelligent and lovely, and also
     exceedingly gracious lady. Your Excellency and the illustrious Don
     Alfonso--so we were led to conclude--will be highly pleased with
     her. Besides being extremely graceful in every way, she is modest,
     lovable, and decorous. Moreover, she is a devout and God-fearing
     Christian. To-morrow she is going to confession, and during
     Christmas week she will receive the communion. She is very
     beautiful, but her charm of manner is still more striking. In
     short, her character is such that it is impossible to suspect
     anything "sinister" of her; but, on the contrary, we look for only
     the best. It seems to be our duty to tell you the exact truth in
     this letter. I commend myself to your Highness's merciful
     benevolence. Rome, December 23, 1501, the sixth hour of the night.

  Your Excellency's servant,
  JOHANNES LUCAS.

Pozzi's letter shows how anxious were the duke and his son, even up to
the last. It must have been a humiliation for both of them to have to
confide their suspicions to their ambassador in Rome, and to ask him to
find out what he could regarding the character of a lady who was to be
the future Duchess of Ferrara. The very phrase in Pozzi's letter that
there was nothing "sinister" to be suspected of Lucretia shows how black
were the rumors that circulated regarding her. His testimony, therefore,
is all the more valuable, and it is one of the most important documents
for forming a judgment of Lucretia's character. Had she been afforded a
chance to read it, her mortification would, no doubt, have outweighed
her satisfaction.[133]

The Ferrarese princes took up their abode in the Vatican; other
gentlemen occupied the Belvedere, while the majority were provided for
by the citizens, who were compelled to entertain them. At that time the
popes handled their private matters just as if they were affairs of
state, and met expenses by taxing the court officials, who, in spite of
this, made a good living, and even grew rich by the Pope's mercy. The
merchants likewise were required to bear a part of the expense of these
ecclesiastical functions. Many of the officials grumbled over
entertaining the Ferrarese, and provided for them so badly that the Pope
was compelled to interfere.[134]

During the Christmas festivities the Pope read mass in S. Peter's. The
princes were present, and the duke's ambassador described Alexander's
magnificent and also "saintly" bearing in terms more fitting to depict
the appearance of an accomplished actor.[135]

The Pope now gave orders for the carnival to begin, and there were daily
banquets and festivities in the Vatican.

El Prete has left a naive account of an evening's entertainment in
Lucretia's palace, in which he gives us a vivid picture of the customs
of the day. "The illustrious Madonna," so wrote the reporter, "appears
in public but little, because she is busy preparing for her departure.
Sunday evening, S. Stephen's Day, December 26th, I went unexpectedly to
her residence. Her Majesty was in her chamber, seated by the bed. In a
corner of the room were about twenty Roman women dressed _a la
romanesca_, 'wearing certain cloths on their heads'; the ladies of her
court, to the number of ten, were also present. A nobleman from Valencia
and a lady of the court, Niccola, led the dance. They were followed by
Don Ferrante and Madonna, who danced with extreme grace and animation.
She wore a camorra of black velvet with gold borders and black sleeves;
the cuffs were tight; the sleeves were slashed at the shoulders; her
breast was covered up to the neck with a veil made of gold thread. About
her neck she wore a string of pearls, and on her head a green net and a
chain of rubies. She had an overskirt of black velvet trimmed with fur,
colored, and very beautiful. The trousseaux of her ladies-in-waiting are
not yet ready. Two or three of the women are pretty; one, Catalina, a
native of Valencia, dances well, and another, Angela, is charming.
Without telling her, I picked her out as my favorite. Yesterday evening
(28th) the cardinal, the duke, and Don Ferrante walked about the city
masked, and afterwards we went to the duchess's house, where there was
dancing. Everywhere in Rome, from morning till night, one sees nothing
but courtesans wearing masks, for after the clock strikes the
twenty-fourth hour they are not permitted to show themselves abroad."

Although the marriage had been performed in Ferrara by proxy, Alexander
wished the service to be said again in Rome. To prevent repetition, the
ceremony in Ferrara had been performed only _vis volo_, the exchange of
rings having been deferred.

On the evening of December 30th, the Ferrarese escorted Madonna Lucretia
to the Vatican. When Alfonso's bride left her palace she was accompanied
by her entire court and fifty maids of honor. She was dressed in gold
brocade and crimson velvet trimmed with ermine; the sleeves of her gown
reached to the floor; her train was borne by some of her ladies; her
golden hair was confined by a black ribbon, and about her neck she wore
a string of pearls with a pendant consisting of an emerald, a ruby, and
a large pearl.

Don Ferrante and Sigismondo led her by the hands; when the train set
forth a body of musicians stationed on the steps of S. Peter's began to
play. The Pope, on the throne in the Sala Paolina, surrounded by
thirteen cardinals and his son Cæsar, awaited her. Among the foreign
representatives present were the ambassadors of France, Spain, and
Venice; the German envoy was absent. The ceremony began with the reading
of the mandate of the Duke of Ferrara, after which the Bishop of Adria
delivered the wedding sermon, which the Pope, however, commanded to be
cut short.[136] A table was placed before him, and by it stood Don
Ferrante--as his brother's representative--and Donna Lucretia. Ferrante
addressed the formal question to her, and on her answering in the
affirmative, he placed the ring on her finger with the following words:
"This ring, illustrious Donna Lucretia, the noble Don Alfonso sends thee
of his own free will, and in his name I give it thee"; whereupon she
replied, "And I, of my own free will, thus accept it."

The performance of the ceremony was attested by a notary. Then followed
the presentation of the jewels to Lucretia by Cardinal Ippolito. The
duke, who sent her a costly present worth no less than seventy thousand
ducats, attached special weight to the manner in which it was to be
given her. On December 21st he wrote his son that in presenting the
jewels he should use certain words which his ambassador Pozzi would
give him, and he was told that this was done as a precautionary measure,
so that, in case Donna Lucretia should prove untrue to Alfonso, the
jewels would not be lost.[137] Until the very last, the duke handled the
Borgias with the misgivings of a man who feared he might be cheated. On
December 30th Pozzi wrote him: "There is a document regarding this
marriage which simply states that Donna Lucretia will be given, for a
present, the bridal ring, but nothing is said of any other gift. Your
Excellency's intention, therefore, was carried out exactly. There was no
mention of any present, and your Excellency need have no anxiety."

Ippolito performed his part so gracefully that the Pope told him he had
heightened the beauty of the present. The jewels were in a small box
which the cardinal first placed before the Pope and then opened. One of
the keepers of the jewels from Ferrara helped him to display the gems to
the best advantage. The Pope took the box in his own hand and showed it
to his daughter. There were chains, rings, earrings, and precious stones
beautifully set. Especially magnificent was a string of
pearls--Lucretia's favorite gem. Ippolito also presented his
sister-in-law with his gifts, among which were four beautifully chased
crosses. The cardinals sent similar presents.

After this the guests went to the windows of the salon to watch the
games in the Piazza of S. Peter; these consisted of races and a mimic
battle for a ship. Eight noblemen defended the vessel against an equal
number of opponents. They fought with sharp weapons, and five people
were wounded.

This over, the company repaired to the Chamber of the Parrots, where the
Pope took his position upon the throne, with the cardinals on his left,
and Ippolito, Donna Lucretia, and Cæsar on his right. El Prete says:
"Alexander asked Cæsar to lead the dance with Donna Lucretia, which he
did very gracefully. His Holiness was in continual laughter. The ladies
of the court danced in couples, and extremely well. The dance, which
lasted more than an hour, was followed by the comedies. The first was
not finished, as it was too long; the second, which was in Latin verse,
and in which a shepherd and several children appeared, was very
beautiful, but I have forgotten what it represented. When the comedies
were finished all departed except his Holiness, the bride, and her
brother-in-law. In the evening the Pope gave the wedding banquet, but of
this I am unable to send any account, as it was a family affair."

The festivities continued for days, and all Rome resounded with the
noise of the carnival. During the closing days of the year Cardinal
Sanseverino and Cæsar presented some plays. The one given by Cæsar was
an eclogue, with rustic scenery, in which the shepherd sang the praises
of the young pair, and of Duke Ercole, and the Pope as Ferrara's
protector.[138]

The first day of the new year (1502) was celebrated with great pomp. The
various quarters of Rome organized a parade in which were thirteen
floats led by the gonfalonier of the city and the magistrates, which
passed from the Piazza Navona to the Vatican, accompanied by the strains
of music. The first car represented the triumph of Hercules, another
Julius Cæsar, and others various Roman heroes. They stopped before the
Vatican to enable the Pope and his guests to admire the spectacle from
the windows. Poems in honor of the young couple were declaimed, and four
hours were thus passed.

Then followed comedies in the Chamber of the Parrots. Subsequently a
_moresca_ or ballet was performed in the "sala of the Pope," whose walls
were decorated with beautiful tapestries which had been executed by
order of Innocent VIII. Here was erected a low stage decorated with
foliage and illuminated by torches. The lookers-on took their places on
benches and on the floor, as they preferred. After a short eclogue, a
_jongleur_ dressed as a woman danced the _moresca_ to the accompaniment
of tamborines, and Cæsar also took part in it, and was recognized in
spite of his disguise. Trumpets announced a second performance. A tree
appeared upon whose top was a Genius who recited verses; these over, he
dropped down the ends of nine silk ribbons which were taken by nine
maskers who danced a ballet about the tree. This _moresca_ was loudly
applauded. In conclusion the Pope asked his daughter to dance, which she
did with one of her women, a native of Valencia, and they were followed
by all the men and women who had taken part in the ballet.[139]

Comedies and _moresche_ were in great favor on festal occasions. The
poets of Rome, the Porcaro, the Mellini, Inghirami, and Evangelista
Maddaleni, probably composed these pieces, and they may also have taken
part in them, for it was many years since Rome had been given such a
brilliant opportunity to show her progress in histrionics. Lucretia was
showered with sonnets and epithalamia. It is strange that not one of
these has been preserved, and also that not a single Roman poet of the
day is mentioned as the author of any of these comedies. On January 2d a
bull fight was given in the Piazza of S. Peter's. The Spanish bull fight
was introduced into Italy in the fourteenth century, but not until the
fifteenth had it become general. The Aragonese brought it to Naples, and
the Borgias to Rome. Hitherto the only thing of the sort which had been
seen was the bull-baiting in the Piazza Navona or on the Testaccio.
Cæsar was fond of displaying his agility and strength in this barbarous
sport. During the jubilee year he excited the wonder of all Rome by
decapitating a bull with a single stroke in one of these contests. On
January 2d he and nine other Spaniards, who probably were professional
matadors, entered the enclosure with two loose bulls, where he mounted
his horse and with his lance attacked the more ferocious one
single-handed; then he dismounted, and with the other Spaniards
continued to goad the animals. After this heroic performance the duke
left the arena to the matadors. Ten bulls and one buffalo were
slaughtered.

In the evening the _Menæchmi_ of Plautus and other pieces were
produced in which was celebrated the majesty of Cæsar and Ercole. The
Ferrarese ambassador sent his master an account of these performances
which is a valuable picture of the day.

     This evening the _Menæchmi_ was recited in the Pope's room, and
     the Slave, the Parasite, the Pandor, and the wife of Menæchmus
     performed their parts well. The Menæchmi themselves, however,
     played badly. They had no masks, and there was no scenery, for the
     room was too small. In the scene where Menæchmus, seized by command
     of his father-in-law, who thinks he is mad, exclaims that he is
     being subjected to force, he added: "This passes understanding; for
     Cæsar is mighty, Zeus merciful, and Hercules kind."

     Before the performance of this comedy the following play was given:
     first appeared a boy in woman's clothes who represented Virtue, and
     another in the character of Fortune. They began to banter each
     other as to which was the mightier, whereupon Fame suddenly
     appeared, standing on a globe which rested on a float, upon which
     were the words, "Gloria Domus Borgiæ." Fame, who also called
     himself Light, awarded Virtue the prize over Fortune, saying that
     Cæsar and Ercole by Virtue had overcome Fortune; thereupon he
     described a number of the heroic deeds performed by the illustrious
     Duke of Romagna. Hercules with the lion's skin and club appeared,
     and Juno sent Fortune to attack him. Hercules, however, overcame
     Fortune, seized her and chained her; whereupon Juno begged him to
     free her, and he, gracious and generous, consented to grant Juno's
     request on the condition that she would never do anything which
     might injure the house of Ercole or that of Cæsar Borgia. To this
     she agreed, and, in addition, she promised to bless the union of
     the two houses.

     Then Roma entered upon another float. She complained that
     Alexander, who occupied Jupiter's place, had been unjust to her in
     permitting the illustrious Donna Lucretia to go away; she praised
     the duchess highly, and said that she was the refuge of all Rome.
     Then came a personification of Ferrara--but not on a float--and
     said that Lucretia was not going to take up her abode in an
     unworthy city, and that Rome would not lose her. Mercury followed,
     having been sent by the gods to reconcile Rome and Ferrara, as it
     was in accordance with their wish that Donna Lucretia was going to
     the latter city. Then he invited Ferrara to take a seat by his side
     in the place of honor on the float.

     All this was accompanied by descriptions in polished hexameters,
     which celebrated the alliance of Cæsar and Ercole, and predicted
     that together they would overthrow all the latter's enemies. If
     this prophecy is realized, the marriage will result greatly to our
     advantage. So we commend ourselves to your Excellency's mercy.

  Your Highness's servants,
  JOHANN LUCAS and GERARDUS SARACENUS.

  JANUARY 2, 1502.

Finally the date set for Lucretia to leave--January 6th--arrived. The
Pope was determined that her departure should be attended by a
magnificent display; she should traverse Italy like a queen. A cardinal
was to accompany her as legate, Francesco Borgia, Archbishop of Cosenza,
having been chosen for this purpose. To Lucretia he owed his
cardinalate, and he was a most devoted retainer; "an elderly man, a
worthy person of the house of Borgia," so Pozzi wrote to Ferrara.
Madonna was also accompanied by the bishops of Carniola, Venosa, and
Orte.

Alexander endeavored to persuade many of the nobles of Rome, men and
women, to accompany Lucretia, and he succeeded in inducing a large
number to do so. The city of Rome appointed four special envoys, who
were to remain in Ferrara as long as the festivities lasted--Stefano del
Bufalo, Antonio Paoluzzo, Giacomo Frangipane, and Domenico Massimi. The
Roman nobility selected for the same purpose Francesco Colonna of
Palestrina and Giuliano, Count of Anguillara. There were also Ranuccio
Farnese of Matelica and Don Giulio Raimondo Borgia, the Pope's nephew,
and captain of the papal watch, together with eight other gentlemen
belonging to the lesser nobility of Rome.

Cæsar equipped at his own expense an escort of two hundred cavaliers,
with musicians and buffoons to entertain his sister on the way. This
cavalcade, which was composed of Spaniards, Frenchmen, Romans, and
Italians from various provinces, was joined later by two famous men--Ivo
d'Allegre and Don Ugo Moncada. Among the Romans were the Chevaliers
Orsini; Piero Santa Croce; Giangiorgio Cesarini, a brother of Cardinal
Giuliano; and other gentlemen, members of the Alberini, Sanguigni,
Crescenzi, and Mancini families.

Lucretia herself had a retinue of a hundred and eighty people. In the
list--which is still preserved--are the names of many of her maids of
honor; her first lady-in-waiting was Angela Borgia, _una damigella
elegantisima_, as one of the chroniclers of Ferrara describes her, who
is said to have been a very beautiful woman, and who was the subject of
some verses by the Roman poet Diomede Guidalotto. She was also
accompanied by her sister Donna Girolama, consort of the youthful Don
Fabio Orsini. Madonna Adriana Orsini, another woman named Adriana, the
wife of Don Francesco Colonna, and another lady of the house of Orsini,
whose name is not given, also accompanied Lucretia. It is not likely,
however, that the last was Giulia Farnese.

A number of vehicles which the Pope had ordered built in Rome and a
hundred and fifty mules bore Lucretia's trousseau. Some of this baggage
was sent on ahead. The duchess took everything that the Pope permitted
her to remove. He refused to have an inventory made, as Beneimbene the
notary had advised. "I desire," so he stated to the Ferrarese
ambassadors, "that the duchess shall do with her property as she
wishes." He had also given her nine thousand ducats to clothe herself
and her servants, and also a beautiful sedan-chair of French make, in
which the Duchess of Urbino was to have a seat by her side when she
joined the cavalcade.[140]

While Alexander was praising his daughter's graciousness and modesty, he
expressed the wish that her father-in-law would provide her with no
courtiers and ladies-in-waiting but those whose character was above
question. She had told him--so the ambassadors wrote their master--that
she would never give his Holiness cause to be ashamed of her, and
"according to our view he certainly never will have occasion, for the
longer we are with her, and the closer we examine her life, the higher
is our opinion of her goodness, her decorum, and modesty. We see that
life in her palace is not only Christian, but also religious."[141]

Even Cardinal Ferrante Ferrari ventured to write Ercole--whose servant
he had been--a letter in which he spoke of the duke's daughter-in-law in
unctuous terms and praised her character to the skies.[142]

January 5th the balance of the wedding portion was paid to the Ferrarese
ambassadors in cash, whereupon they reported to the duke that everything
had been arranged, that his daughter-in-law would bring the bull with
her, and that the cavalcade was ready to start.[143]

Alexander had decided at what towns they should stop on their long
journey. They were as follows: Castelnovo, Civitacastellana, Narni,
Terni, Spoleto, and Foligno; it was expected the Duke Guidobaldo or his
wife would meet Lucretia at the last-named place and accompany her to
Urbino. Thence they were to pass through Cæsar's estates, going by way
of Pesaro, Rimini, Cesena, Forli, Faenza, and Imola to Bologna, and from
that city to Ferrara by way of the Po.

As the places through which they passed would be subjected to very great
expense if the entire cavalcade stopped, the retinue was sometimes
divided, each part taking a different route. The Pope's brief to the
Priors of Nepi shows to what imposition the people were subjected.

     DEAR SONS: Greeting and the Apostolic Blessing. As our
     dearly beloved daughter in Christ, the noble lady and Duchess
     Lucretia de Borgia, who is to leave here next Monday to join her
     husband Alfonso, the beloved son and first born of the Duke of
     Ferrara, with a large escort of nobles, two hundred horsemen will
     pass through your district; therefore we wish and command you, if
     you value our favor and desire to avoid our displeasure, to provide
     for the company mentioned above for a day and two nights, the time
     they will spend with you. By so doing you will receive from us all
     due approbation. Given in Rome, under the Apostolic seal, December
     28, 1501, in the tenth year of our Pontificate.[144]

Numerous other places had similar experiences. In every city in which
the cavalcade stopped, and in some of those where they merely rested for
a short time, Lucretia, in accordance with the Pope's commands, was
honored with triumphal arches, illuminations, and processions--all the
expense of which was borne by the commune.

January 6th Lucretia, leaving her child Rodrigo, her brother Cæsar, and
her parents, departed from Rome. Probably only two persons were present
when she took leave of Vannozza. None of those who describe the
festivities in the Vatican mention this woman by name.

The Chamber of the Parrots was the scene of her leave-taking with her
father. She remained with the Pope some time, departing on Cæsar's
entrance. As she was leaving, Alexander called after her in a loud
voice, telling her to be of good cheer, and to write him whenever she
wanted anything, adding that he would do more for her now that she had
gone from him than he had ever done for her while she was in Rome. Then
he went from place to place and watched her until she and her retinue
were lost to sight.[145]

Lucretia set forth from Rome at three o'clock in the afternoon. All the
cardinals, ambassadors, and magistrates of the city accompanied her as
far as the Porta del Popolo. She was mounted on a white jennet
caparisoned with gold, and she wore a riding habit of red silk and
ermine, and a hat trimmed with feathers. She was surrounded by more than
a thousand persons. By her side were the princes of Ferrara and the
Cardinal of Cosenza. Her brother Cæsar accompanied her a short distance,
and then returned to the Vatican with Cardinal Ippolito.

Thus Lucretia Borgia departed, leaving Rome and a terrible past behind
her forever.


FOOTNOTES:

[131] Despatch of Giovanni Lucido, in the archives of Mantua.

[132] The report of this agent, who signs himself El Prete, is preserved
in the archives of Mantua.

[133] The Farrarese agent, Bartolomeo Bresciani, who had been sent to
Rome on matters connected with the Church, is no less complimentary. He
says, la Excell. V. remagnera molto ben satisfacto da questa Illma
Madona per essere dotada de tanti costumi et buntade. (To the duke,
October 30, 1501.) He informed him also that Lucretia often conversed
with a saintly person who had been secluded in the Vatican for eight
years.

[134] Despatch of Gianluca Pozzi to Ercole, Rome, December 25, 1501.

[135] Pozzi to Ercole, Rome, December 25, 1501.

[136] Fu necessario che la abreviasse, Gianluca and Gerardo to Ercole,
Rome, December 30, 1501.

[137] E ciò nello scopo, che se mancasse essa Duchessa verso lo Illmo
Don Alfonso non fosse più obbligato di quanto voleva esserlo circa dette
gioje. Ercole to Cardinal Ippolito, December 21, 1501. There is a letter
of the same date regarding the subject, written by Ercole to Gianluca
Pozzi.

[138] Pozzi to Ercole, January 1, 1502. Archives of Modena.

[139] El Prete to Isabella, Rome, January 2, 1502.

[140] Pozzi to Ercole, Rome, December 28, 1501.

[141] Pozzi and Saraceni, Rome, December 28, 1501.

[142] Rome, January 9, 1502.

[143] La Illma Madama Lucrezia porta tutte le bolle piene et in optima
forma. Pozzi and Gerardo to Ercole, Rome, January 6, 1502.

[144] In the archives of the municipality of Nepi, where I copied the
brief from the records. There is a similar letter in the same form and
of the same date, addressed to the commune of Trevi, in the city
archives of that place. The latter is printed in Tullio Dandolo's Arte
christiána--Passeggiate nell' Umbria, 1866, p. 358.

[145] Beltrando Costabili to Ercole, Rome, January 6, 1502.




BOOK THE SECOND

LUCRETIA IN FERRARA




CHAPTER I

LUCRETIA'S JOURNEY TO FERRARA


Although the escort which was taking the Duchess Lucretia to Ferrara
traveled by easy stages, the journey was fatiguing; for the roads,
especially in winter, were bad, and the weather, even in the vicinity of
Rome, was frequently wet and cold.

Not until the seventh day did they reach Foligno. As the report which
the Ferrarese ambassadors sent their lord from that place contains a
vivid description of the journey, we quote it at length:

     ILLUSTRIOUS AND HONORED MASTER: Although we wrote your
     Excellency from Narni that we would travel from Terni to Spoleto,
     and from Spoleto to this place without stopping, the illustrious
     Duchess and her ladies were so fatigued that she decided to rest a
     day in Spoleto and another in Foligno. We, therefore, shall not
     leave here until to-morrow morning, and shall not arrive at Urbino
     before next Tuesday, that is the eighteenth of the current month,
     for to-morrow we shall reach Nocera, Saturday Gualdo, Sunday
     Gubbio, Monday Cagli, and Tuesday Urbino, where we shall rest
     another day, that is Wednesday. On the twentieth we shall set out
     for Pesaro, and so on from city to city, as we have already written
     your Excellency.

     We feel certain, however, that the duchess will stop frequently to
     rest, consequently we shall not reach Ferrara before the last of
     the present or the first of next month, and perhaps not until the
     second or third. We therefore thought it well to write your
     Excellency from here, letting you know where we were and where we
     expected to be, so that you might arrange matters as you thought
     best. If you wish us not to arrive in Ferrara until the second or
     third, it would not be difficult so to arrange it; but if you think
     it would be better for us to reach the city the last of this month
     or the first of February, write us to that effect, and we will
     endeavor, as we have hitherto done, to shorten the periods of rest.

     I mention this because the illustrious Donna Lucretia is of a
     delicate constitution and, like her ladies, is unaccustomed to the
     saddle, and because we notice that she does not wish to be worn out
     when she reaches Ferrara.

     In all the cities through which her Majesty passes she is received
     with every show of affection and with great honors, and presented
     with numerous gifts by the women. Everything is done for her
     comfort. She was welcomed everywhere and, as she was formerly ruler
     of Spoleto, she was well known to the people. Her reception here in
     Foligno was more cordial and accompanied by greater manifestations
     of joy than anywhere else outside of Rome, for not only did the
     signors of the city, as the officials of the commune are called,
     clad in red silk, come on foot to meet her and accompany her to her
     inn on the Piazza, but at the gate she was confronted by a float
     upon which was a person representing the Roman Lucretia with a
     dagger in her hand, who recited some verses to the effect that her
     Majesty excelled herself in graciousness, modesty, intelligence,
     and understanding, and that therefore she would yield her own place
     to her.

     There was also a float upon which was a cupid, and on the summit,
     with the golden apple in his hand, stood Paris, who repeated some
     stanzas, the gist of which was as follows: he had promised the
     apple to Venus, the only one who excelled both Juno and Pallas in
     beauty; but he now reversed his decision, and presented it to her
     Majesty as she, of all women, was the only one who surpassed all
     the goddesses, possessing greater beauty, wisdom, riches, and power
     than all three united.

     Finally, on the Piazza we discovered an armed Turkish galley coming
     toward us, and one of the Turks, who was standing on the bulwarks,
     repeated some stanzas of the following import: the sultan well knew
     how powerful was Lucretia in Italy, and he had sent him to greet
     her, and to say that his master would surrender everything he had
     taken from the Christians. We made no special effort to remember
     these verses, for they were not exactly Petrarchian, and, moreover,
     the ship did not appear to us to be a very happy idea; it was
     rather out of place.

     We must not forget to tell you that all the reigning Baglione came
     from Perugia and their castles, and were waiting for Lucretia about
     four miles from Foligno, and that they invited her to go to
     Perugia.

     Her Majesty, as we wrote your Excellency from Narni, persists in
     her wish to journey from Bologna to Ferrara by water to escape the
     discomfort of riding and traveling by land.

     His Holiness, our Lord, is so concerned for her Majesty that he
     demands daily and even hourly reports of her journey, and she is
     required to write him with her own hand from every city regarding
     her health. This confirms the statement which has frequently been
     made to your Excellency--that his Holiness loves her more than any
     other person of his blood.

     We shall not neglect to make a report to your Excellency regarding
     the journey whenever an opportunity offers.

     Between Terni and Spoleto, in the valley of the Strettura, one of
     the hostlers of the illustrious Don Sigismondo engaged in a violent
     altercation about some turtle doves with one of his fellows in the
     service of the Roman Stefano dei Fabii, who is a member of the
     duchess's escort. Both grasped their arms, whereupon one
     Pizaguerra, also in the service of the illustrious Don Sigismondo,
     happening to ride by on his horse, wounded Stefano's hostler on the
     head. Thereupon Stefano, who is naturally quarrelsome and
     vindictive, became so angry that he declared he would accompany the
     cavalcade no farther. About this time we reached the castle of
     Spoleto, and he passed the illustrious Don Sigismondo and Don
     Ferrante without speaking to them or even looking at them. The
     whole affair was due to a misunderstanding which we all regretted
     very much, and as Pizaguerra and Don Sigismondo's hostler had fled,
     there was nothing more to be done; the Cardinal of Cosenza, the
     illustrious Madonna, and all the others agreed that Stefano was in
     the wrong. He, therefore, was mollified, and continued on the
     journey. We commend ourselves to your Excellency's mercy. From
     Foligno, January 13, 1502.

  Your Majesty's servants,
  JOHANNES LUCAS and GIRARDUS SARACENUS.

     POSTSCRIPT: The worthy Cardinal of Cosenza, we understand,
     is unwilling to pass through the territory of the illustrious Duke
     of Urbino.

From Foligno the journey was continued by way of Nocera and Gualdo to
Gubbio, one of the most important cities in the duchy of Urbino. About
two miles from that place the Duchess Elisabetta met Lucretia and
accompanied her to the city palace. After this the two remained
constantly in each other's company, for Elisabetta kept her promise and
accompanied Lucretia to Ferrara.

Cardinal Borgia returned to Rome from Gubbio, and the two ladies
occupied the comfortable sedan-chair which Alexander had presented his
daughter. January 18th, when the cavalcade was near Urbino, Lucretia was
greeted by Duke Guidobaldo, who had come with his entire court to meet
her. He accompanied Lucretia to the residence set apart for
her--Federico's beautiful palace--where she and the princes of Este were
lodged, the duke and duchess having vacated it for them. The artful
Guidobaldo had set up the Borgia arms and those of the King of France in
conspicuous places in Urbino and throughout the various cities of his
domain.

Although Lucretia's wedding was regarded by the Montrefeltre with great
displeasure, they now, on account of Ferrara and because of their fear
of the Pope, hastened to show her every honor. They had been acquainted
with Lucretia in Rome when Guidobaldo, Alexander's condottiere,
conducted the unsuccessful war against the Orsini, and they had also
known her in Pesaro. Perhaps they now hoped that Urbino's safety would
be assured by Lucretia's influence and friendship. However, only a few
months were to pass before Guidobaldo and his consort were to be undone
by the fiendishness of their guest's brother and driven from their
domain.

After resting a day, Lucretia and the duchess, accompanied for a short
distance by Guidobaldo, set out from Urbino, January 20th, for Pesaro,
which they reached late in the evening. The road connecting these cities
is now a comfortable highway, traversing a beautiful, undulating
country, but at that time it was little more than a bridlepath;
consequently the travelers were thoroughly fatigued when they reached
their destination.

When Lucretia entered the latter city she must have been overcome by
painful emotions, for she could not fail to have been reminded of
Sforza, her discarded husband, who was now an exile in Mantua, brooding
on revenge, and who might appear at any moment in Ferrara to mar the
wedding festivities. Pesaro now belonged to her brother Cæsar, and he
had given orders that his sister should be royally received in all the
cities she visited in his domain. A hundred children clad in his
colors--yellow and red--with olive branches in their hands, greeted her
at the gates of Pesaro with the cry, "Duca! Duca! Lucretia! Lucretia!"
and the city officials accompanied her to her former residence.[146]

Lucretia was received with every evidence of joy by her former subjects,
and the most prominent of the noble women of the city, among whom was
the matron Lucretia Lopez, once her lady-in-waiting, and now wife of
Gianfrancesco Ardizi.[147]

Lucretia remained a day in Pesaro without allowing herself to be seen.
In the evening she permitted the ladies of her suite to dance with those
of the city, but she herself took no part in the festivities. Pozzi
wrote the duke that she spent the entire time in her chamber "for the
purpose of washing her head, and because she was naturally inclined to
solitude." Her seclusion while in Pesaro may be explained as more likely
due to the gloomy thoughts which filled her mind.[148]

In every town belonging to the Duke of Romagna there was a similar
reception; everywhere the magistrates presented Lucretia with the keys
of the city. She was now accompanied by her brother's lieutenant in
Cesena, Don Ramiro d'Orco,--a monster who was quartered by Cæsar's
orders a few months later.

Passing Rimini and Cesena she reached Forli, January 25th. The salon of
the palace was hung with costly tapestries, and even the ceiling was
covered with many-colored cloth; a tribune was erected for the ladies.
Presents of food, sweetmeats, and wax tapers were offered the duchess.
In spite of the stringent laws which Cæsar's rectors, especially Ramiro,
had passed, bands of robbers made the roads unsafe. Fearing that the
bold bandit Giambattista Carraro might overtake the bridal train after
it had left the boundaries of Cervia, a guard of a thousand men on foot
and a hundred and fifty troopers was furnished by the people, apparently
as an escort of honor.[149]

In Faenza Lucretia announced that she would be obliged to spend Friday
in Imola to wash her head, as she would not have an opportunity to do
this again until the end of the carnival. This washing of the head,
which we have already had occasion to notice as an important part of the
toilet in those days, must, therefore, have been in some manner
connected with dressing the hair.[150] The Ferrarese ambassador spoke of
this practice of Lucretia's as a repeated obstacle which might delay the
entrance of her Majesty into Ferrara until February 2d. Don Ferrante
likewise wrote from Imola that she would rest there a day to put her
clothes in order and wash her head, which, said she, had not been done
for eight days, and she, therefore, was suffering with headache.[151]

On the way from Faenza to Imola the cavalcade stopped at Castle
Bolognese, which had been abandoned by Giovanni Bentivoglio when he was
threatened by Cæsar. They found the walls of the town razed, the moat
filled up, and even its name changed to Cesarina.

After resting a day in Imola the cavalcade set out January 28th for
Bologna. When they reached the borders of the territory belonging to the
city they were met by Bentivoglio's sons and his consort Ginevra, with a
brilliant retinue, and two miles from the city gate Giovanni himself was
waiting to greet them.

The tyrant of Bologna, who owed his escape from Cæsar wholly to the
protection of the French, spared nothing to honor his enemy's sister.
Accompanied by several hundred riders, he led her in triumph through the
city, where the arms of the Borgias, of Cæsar, the Pope, and Lucretia,
and those of France, and of the Este met her eye on every side. The
proud matron Ginevra, surrounded by a large number of noble ladies,
received Lucretia at the portals of her magnificent palace. How this
famous woman, the aunt of Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro, must in her soul
have hated this Borgia! However, it was neither Alexander nor Cæsar, but
Giuliano della Rovere, subsequently Julius II, who was destined, only
four years later, to drive her and all her race from Bologna forever.

January 30th was devoted to gorgeous festivities, and in the evening the
Bentivoglio gave a ball and a banquet.

The following day they accompanied Lucretia for a part of the way, as it
was her purpose to continue her journey to Ferrara, which now was not
far distant, by boat on the canal, which at that time ran from Bologna
to the Po.

The same day--January 31st--towards evening, Lucretia reached Castle
Bentivoglio, which was but twenty miles from Ferrara. She had no sooner
arrived at that place than her consort Alfonso suddenly appeared. She
was greatly overcome, but promptly recovered herself and received him
"with many professions of esteem and most graciously," to all of which
he responded with great gallantry.[152] Hitherto the hereditary Prince
of Ferrara had sullenly held aloof from the wife that had been forced
upon him. Men of that age had not a trace of the tenderness or
sentimentality of those of to-day, but, even admitting this, it is
certainly strange that there is no evidence of any correspondence
between Lucretia and Alfonso during the time the marriage was being
arranged, although a great many letters then passed between the duchess
and Ercole. Either owing to a desire to please his father or to his own
curiosity or cunning, the rough and reticent Alfonso now threw off his
reserve. He came in disguise, remained two hours, and then suddenly left
for Ferrara.

During this short interview he was greatly impressed by his wife.
Lucretia in those two hours had certainly brought Alfonso under the
spell of her personality, even if she had not completely disarmed him.
Not wholly without reason had the gallant burghers of Foligno awarded
the apple of Paris to Lucretia. Speaking of this meeting, one of the
chroniclers of Ferrara says, "The entire people rejoiced greatly, as did
also the bride and her own followers, because his Majesty had shown a
desire to see her and had received her so well--an indication that she
would be accepted and treated still better."[153]

Probably no one was more pleased than the Pope. His daughter immediately
informed him of her reception, for she sent him daily letters giving an
account of her journey; and he also received numerous despatches from
other persons in her train. Up to this time he had felt some misgivings
as to her reception by the Este, but now he was relieved. After she had
left Rome he frequently asked Cardinal Ferrari to warn the duke to treat
his daughter-in-law kindly, remarking, at the same time, that he had
done a great deal for her, and would do still more. He declared that the
remission of Ferrara's tribute would, if paid for in money, require not
less than two hundred thousand ducats, and that the officials of the
chancellery had demanded between five and six thousand ducats merely for
preparing the bulls. The kings of France and Spain had been compelled to
pay the Duke of Romagna a yearly tribute of twenty thousand ducats for
the remission of the taxes of Naples, which consisted only in the
payment of a single white horse. Ferrara, on the other hand, had been
granted everything.[154]

The duke replied to the cardinal January 22d, assuring him that his
daughter-in-law would meet with a most affectionate reception.[155]


FOOTNOTES:

[146] Lucretia's colors were yellow and dark brown (morrelo aperto),
while Alexander's were yellow and black.

[147] Spogli di Giambattista Almerici. i, 284. Ms. in the Oliveriana in
Pesaro.

[148] Si per attendere a lavarse il capo, como anche per essere assai
solitaria et remota di soa natura. Despatch from Rimini, January 22,
1502.

[149] Ferrante to Ercole, Rimini, January 23, 1502.

[150] The expression is lavarsi il capo.

[151] Ferrante to Ercole, Imola, January 27, 1502.

[152] Gianluca to Ercole, January 31, 1502.

[153] Bernardino Zambotto. See Monsignor Giuseppe Antonelli's work,
Lucrezia Borgia in Ferrara, sposa a Don Alfonso d'Este, Memorie
storiche.... Ferrara, 1867.

[154] The ambassador Beltrando Costabili to Duke Ercole, Rome, January
7, 1502.

[155] The duke to his ambassador in Rome, Ferrara, January 22, 1502, in
the Minute Ducali a Costabili Beltrando Oratore a Roma.




CHAPTER II

FORMAL ENTRY INTO FERRARA


February 1st Lucretia continued her journey to Ferrara by the canal.
Near Malalbergo she found Isabella Gonzaga waiting to meet her. At the
urgent request of her father, the marchioness, much against her will,
had come to do the honors during the festivities in his palace. "In
violent anger," so she wrote her husband, who remained at home, she
greeted and embraced her sister-in-law. She accompanied her by boat to
Torre della Fossa, where the canal empties into a branch of the Po. This
river, a majestic stream, flows four miles from Ferrara, and only a
branch--Po di Ferrara--now known as the Canale di Cento, reaches the
city, where it divides into two arms, the Volano and Primaro, both of
which empty into the Adriatic. They are very small canals, and,
therefore, it could have been no pleasure to travel on them, nor was it
an imposing spectacle.

The duke, with Don Alfonso and his court, awaited Lucretia at Torre
della Fossa. When she left the boat the duke saluted her on the cheek,
she having first respectfully kissed his hand. Thereupon, all mounted a
magnificently decorated float, to which the foreign ambassadors and
numerous cavaliers came to kiss the bride's hand. To the strains of
music and the thunder of cannon the cavalcade proceeded to the Borgo S.
Luca, where they all descended. Lucretia took up her residence in the
palace of Alberto d'Este, Ercole's illegitimate brother. Here she was
received by Lucretia Bentivigolio, natural daughter of Ercole, and
numerous ladies of her court. The duke's seneschal brought to her Madonna
Teodora and twelve young women who were to serve her as
ladies-in-waiting. Five beautiful carriages, each drawn by four horses,
a present from her father-in-law, were placed at her disposal. In this
villa, which is no longer in existence, Lucretia spent the night. The
suburb of S. Luca is still there, but the entire locality is so changed
that it would be impossible to recognize it.

The seat of the Este was thronged with thousands of sightseers, some of
whom had been invited by the duke and others drawn thither by curiosity.
All the vassals of the State, but not the reigning princes, were
present. The lords of Urbino and Mantua were represented by the ladies
of their families, and the house of Bentivoglio by Annibale. Rome,
Venice, Florence, Lucca, Siena, and the King of France had sent
ambassadors, who were lodged in the palaces of the nobles. The Duke of
Romagna had remained in Rome and sent a representative. It had been
Alexander's wish that Cæsar's wife, Charlotte d'Albret, should come from
France to attend the wedding festivities in Ferrara and remain a month,
but she did not appear.

With royal extravagance Ercole had prepared for the festivities; the
magazines of the court and the warehouses of the city had been filled
with supplies for weeks past. Whatever the Renaissance had to offer,
that she provided in Ferrara; for the city was the seat of a cultivated
court and the home of a hospitable bourgeoisie, and also a town where
science, art, and industry thrived.

Lucretia's entrance, February 2d, was, therefore, one of the most
brilliant spectacles of the age, and, as far as she herself was
concerned, it was the greatest moment of her life; for she was entering
into the enjoyment of the highest and best of which her nature was
capable.

At two o'clock in the afternoon, the duke and all the ambassadors betook
themselves to Alberto's villa to fetch his daughter-in-law to the city.
The cavalcade set out over the bridge, crossing the branch of the Po, to
pass through the gate of Castle Tedaldo, a fortress no longer in
existence.

At its head were seventy-five mounted archers in the livery of the house
of Este--white and red--who were accompanied by eighty trumpeters and a
number of fifes. Then came the nobility of Ferrara without regard to
rank, followed by the members of the courts of the Marchioness of
Mantua, who remained behind in the palace, and of the Duchess of Urbino.
Behind them rode Alfonso, with his brother-in-law, Annibale Bentivoglio,
at his side, and accompanied by eight pages. He was dressed in red
velvet in the French fashion, and on his head he wore a black velvet
biretta, upon which was an ornament of wrought gold. He wore small red
boots and French gaiters of black velvet. His bay horse was caparisoned
in crimson and gold.

On the way to Ferrara, Don Alfonso did not ride by the side of his
consort as this would have been contrary to the etiquette of the day.
The bridegroom led the procession, near the middle of which was the
bride, while the father-in-law came last. This arrangement was intended
to indicate that Lucretia was the chief personage in the parade. Just
behind Alfonso came her escort, pages, and court officials, among whom
were several Spanish cavaliers; then five bishops, followed by the
ambassadors according to rank; the four deputies of Rome, mounted upon
beautiful horses and wearing long brocade cloaks and black birettas
coming next. These were followed by six tambourines and two of
Lucretia's favorite clowns.

Then came the bride herself, radiantly beautiful and happy, mounted upon
a white jennet with scarlet trappings, and followed by her master of
horse. Lucretia was dressed in a loose-sleeved camorra of black velvet
with a narrow gold border, and a cape of gold brocade trimmed with
ermine. On her head she wore a sort of net glittering with diamonds and
gold--a present from her father-in-law. She did not wear a diadem. About
her neck she had a chain of pearls and rubies which had once belonged to
the Duchess of Ferrara--as Isabella noticed with tears in her eyes. Her
beautiful hair fell down unconfined on her shoulders. She rode beneath a
purple baldachin, which the doctors of Ferrara--that is, the members of
the faculties of law, medicine, and mathematics--supported in turn.

For the purpose of honoring the King of France, the protector of Ferrara
and of the Borgias, Lucretia had summoned the French ambassador, Philipp
della Rocca Berti, to ride at her left, near her, but not under the
baldachin. This was intended to show that it was owing to this powerful
monarch that the bride was entering the palace of the Este.

Behind Lucretia came the duke, in black velvet, on a dark horse with
trappings of the same material. On his right was the Duchess of Urbino
clad in a dark velvet gown.[156]

Then followed nobles, pages, and other personages of the house of Este,
each of whom was accompanied by one of Lucretia's ladies. The only
important member of the family not present was Cardinal Ippolito, who
had remained in Rome, and who, from that city, wrote Lucretia, January
16th, saying he had called on her son Rodrigo and found him asleep.
February 9th he wrote that the Pope had invited Cæsar and himself
together with Cardinal Borgia and the Signora Principessa--this was
Sancia--to supper.[157] Of the women who accompanied Lucretia, only
three were mounted--Girolama Borgia, wife of Fabio Orsini; another
Orsini, who is not described more explicitly; and Madonna Adriana, "a
widowed noblewoman, a kinswoman of the Pope."[158]

Behind them came fourteen floats upon which were seated a number of the
noble women of Ferrara, beautifully dressed, including the twelve young
ladies who had been allotted to Lucretia as maids of honor. Then
followed two white mules and two white horses decked with velvet and
silk and costly gold trappings. Eighty-six mules accompanied the train
bearing the bride's trousseau and jewels. When the good people of
Ferrara saw them slowly wending their way through the streets, they must
have thought that Alfonso had chosen a rich bride. It never occurred to
them that these chests, boxes, and bales which were being carried
through the streets with such ostentation were filled with the plunder
of various cities of Christendom.

At the gate near Castle Tedaldo, Lucretia's horse was frightened by the
discharge of a cannon, and the chief actor was thrown. The bride rose
without assistance, and the duke placed her upon another horse,
whereupon the cortege started again. In honor of Lucretia there were
triumphal arches, tribunes, orations, and mythological scenes. Among the
last was a procession of nymphs, with their queen at their head, riding
upon a bull, with satyrs disporting themselves about her. Sannazzaro may
have thought that the epigram in which he had referred to Giulia Farnese
as Europa on the bull suggested this representation of the Borgia arms.

When the cavalcade reached the Piazza before the church, two
rope-walkers descended from the towers and addressed compliments to the
bride; thus was the ludicrous introduced into public festivities at that
time.

It was now night, and the procession had reached the palace of the duke,
and at the moment it did so all prisoners were given their liberty. At
this point all the trumpeters and fifes were massed.

It is impossible to tell exactly where the palace was situated to which
Lucretia was conducted. The Este had built a number of residences in the
city, which they occupied in turn. Among them were Schifanoja, Diamanti,
Paradiso, Belvedere, Belfiore, and Castle Vecchio. A local chronicler in
the year 1494 mentions, in enumerating the palaces of the lords of the
house of Este, the Palazzo del Cortile and Castle Vecchio as belonging
to the duke; Castle Vecchio to Alfonso and the palace of the Certosa to
Cardinal Ippolito.[159] Ercole, therefore, in the year 1502, was
residing in one of the two palaces mentioned above, which were connected
with each other by a row of structures extending from the old castle to
the Piazza before the church, which ended in the Palazzo della Ragione.
They are still connected, although the locality has greatly changed.

The duke's palace was opposite the church. It had a large court with a
marble stairway, and was therefore called the Palazzo del Cortile. This
court is doubtless the one now known as the Cortile Ducale. It was
entered from the Piazza through a high archway, at the sides of which
were columns which formerly supported statues of Niccolò III and Borso.
The writers who describe Lucretia's entrance into the city say that she
dismounted from her horse at the steps of the marble court (a le scale
del Cortile di Marmo).

Here she was received by the Marchioness Gonzaga and numerous other
prominent ladies. Alfonso's young wife must have smiled--if in the
excitement of the moment she noticed it--when she found that the noble
house of Este had selected such a large number of their bastard
daughters to welcome her. She was greeted at the stairway by Lucretia,
Ercole's natural daughter, wife of Annibale Bentivoglio, and three
illegitimate daughters of Sigismondo d'Este--Lucretia, Countess of
Carrara; the beautiful Diana, Countess of Uguzoni; and Bianca
Sanseverino.[160]

It was night, and lights and torches illuminated the palace. To the
sound of music the young couple was conducted to the reception hall,
where they took their places on a throne. Here followed the formal
introduction of the court officials, and an orator delivered a speech
apparently based upon the information which the duke had instructed his
ambassadors to secure regarding the house of Borgia. It is not known who
was the fortunate orator, but we are familiar with the names of some of
the poets who addressed epithalamia to the beautiful princess. Nicolaus
Marius Paniciatus composed a number of spirituelle Latin poems and
epigrams in honor of Lucretia, Alfonso, and Ercole, which were collected
under the title of "Borgias." Among them are some ardent wishes for the
prosperity of the young couple. Lucretia's beauty is described as
excelling that of Helen because it was accompanied by incomparable
modesty.[161]

Apparently this youthful poet did not have his stanzas printed, for they
exist only in a manuscript in the library of Ferrara. Before Lucretia's
entry the printer Laurentius published an epithalamium by a young
Latinist, the celebrated Celio Calcagnini, who subsequently became
famous as a mathematician. He was a favorite of Cardinal Ippolito, and a
friend of the great Erasmus. The subject matter of the poem is very
simple. Venus leaves Rome and accompanies Lucretia. Mnemosyne admonishes
her daughters, the Muses, to celebrate the noble princess, which they
accordingly do. The princes of the house are not forgotten, for Euterpe
sings the praises of Ercole, Terpsicore lauds Alfonso, and Caliope
recites Cæsar's victories in the Romagna.[162]

Another Ferrarese poet makes his appearance on this occasion, a man of
whom much was expected, Ariosto, who was then twenty-seven years old,
and already known at the court of the Este and in the cultivated circles
of Italy as a Latinist and a writer of comedies. He also wrote an
epithalamium addressed to Lucretia. It is graceful, and not burdened
with mythological pedantry, but it lacks invention. The poet
congratulates Ferrara,--which will henceforth be the envy of all other
cities,--for having won an incomparable jewel. He sympathizes with Rome
for the loss of Lucretia, saying that it has again fallen into
ruins.[163] He describes the young princess as "pulcherrima virgo," and
refers to Lucretia of ancient times.

On the conclusion of the festivities which greeted her on her arrival,
the duke accompanied Lucretia to the apartments which had been prepared
for her. She must have been pleased with her reception by the house of
Este, and the impression made by her own personality was most favorable.
The chronicler Bernardino Zambotto speaks of her as follows: "The bride
is twenty-four years of age (this is incorrect); she has a beautiful
countenance, sparkling and animated eyes; a slender figure; she is keen
and intellectual, joyous and human, and possesses good reasoning powers.
She pleased the people so greatly that they are perfectly satisfied with
her, and they look to her Majesty for protection and good government.
They are truly delighted, for they think that the city will greatly
profit through her, especially as the Pope will refuse her nothing, as
is shown by the portion he gave her, and by presenting Don Alfonso with
certain cities."

Lucretia's face, judging by the medal, must have been fascinating.
Cagnolo of Parma describes her as follows: "She is of medium height and
slender figure. Her face is long, the nose well defined and beautiful;
her hair a bright gold, and her eyes blue; her mouth is somewhat large,
the teeth dazzlingly white; her neck white and slender, but at the same
time well rounded. She is always cheerful and good-humored."[164]

To indicate the color of the eyes, Cagnolo uses the word "bianco," which
in the language of the people still means blue. In the folk songs of
Tuscany collected by Tigri, there is frequent mention of _occhi
bianchi_,--that is, "blue eyes." The Florentine Firenzuola, in his work
on "the perfect beauty of woman," says she must have blond hair and blue
eyes, with the pupil not quite black, although the Greeks and Italians
preferred it so. The most beautiful color for the eyes, according to
this writer, is tané.[165] The poets of Ferrara, who immediately began
to sing the dazzling power of the eyes of their beautiful duchess, did
not mention their color.

This remarkable woman charmed all beholders with her indescribable
grace, to which there was added something of mystery, and not by any
classic beauty or dignity. Vivacity, gentleness, and amiability are the
qualities which all Lucretia's contemporaries discovered in her.[166]
This animated and delicate face, with large blue eyes, and surrounded
with golden hair, suggests the ethereal beauty of Shakespeare's Imogene.

[Illustration: ARIOSTO.

From a painting by Titian.]


FOOTNOTES:

[156] Isabella Gonzaga, who watched the parade from a window of the
palace, describes this scene to the duke. Letter to her husband,
Ferrara, February 2d, in the Archivio Storico Ital. App. ii, 305. Her
report excels in some particulars the picture given by Marino Sanuo
(Diar. vol. iv, fol. 104, sq.). Ordine di le pompe e spectaculi di le
noze de mad. Lucretia Borgia. Reprinted in Rawdon Brown's Ragguaglio
sulla vita e le opere di M. Sanudo, ii, 197, sq.

[157] Letters in the archives of Modena.

[158] This is according to Isabella Gonzaga; Cagnolo's report mentioned,
instead of this woman, another Adriana, the wife of Francesco Colonna of
Palestrina.

[159] Ms. chronicle of Mario Equicola in the library of Ferrara, in the
University, formerly the Paradiso.

[160] Paolo Zerbinati, Memorie, Ms. in the library of Ferrara, p. 3.

[161] The Ms. is in the library of Ferrara: Nicolai Marii Paniciati
ferrariensis, Borgias. Ad. Excell. D. Lucretiam Borgiarm III. Alphonsi
Estensis Sponsam celeber MDII. One epigram is as follows:

    Tyndaridem jactant Heroica secula cujus
  Armavit varies forma superba Duces,
    Haec collata tibi, merito Luoretia cedit,
  Nam tuus omne Helenes lumen obumbrat honor:
    Illa neces populis, diuturnaque bella paravit:
  Tu bona tranquillae pacis opima refers.
    Moribus illa suis speciem temeravit honestam:
  Innumeris speciem dotibus ipsa colis:
    Ore deam præstas: virtute venustior alma:
  Foeda Helenæ facies æquiparata tuæ.

[162] Cælii Calcagnini Ferrariensis. In Illustriss. Divi Alphonsi
Primogeniti Herculis Ducis Ferr. ac Divæ Lucretiæ Borgiæ Nuptias
Epithalamium. Laurentius de Valentia Imprimebat Ferrariæ Deo Opt. Max.
Favente. Calend. Febr. MDII.

[163]

  Est levis hæc jactura tamen, ruat hoc quoque quicquid
  Est reliquum, juvet et nudis habitare sub antris,
  Vivere dura liceat tecum pulcherrima virgo.

Ludovici Areosti Ferrariensis Epithalamion, in vol. i of Carmina
Illustrium Poetarum Italorum, p. 342-346.

[164] Di mediocre statura, gracile in aspetto, di faccia alquanto lunga,
il naso profilato e bello, li capelli aurei, gli occhi bianchi, la bocca
alquanto grande con li denti candidissimi; la gola schietta e bianca
ornata con decente valore, ed in essere continuamente allegra e ridente.
See Lucrezia Borgia in Ferrara. Ferrara, 1867.

[165] Agnolo Firenzuola, vol. i. Della perfetto bellezza di una donna.

[166] Fu essa Lucrezia di venusto e mansueto aspetto, prudente, di
gratissime maniere negli atti, e nel parlare di molta grazia e
allegrezza, says Alfonso's secretary, Bonaventura Pistofilo, in his Vita
di Alfonso I d'Este. The epithets venusta, gentile, graziosa, amabile,
are conferred upon her by all her contemporaries.




CHAPTER III

FÊTES GIVEN IN LUCRETIA'S HONOR


The wedding festivities in Ferrara continued for six days during the
carnival. At the period of the Renaissance, court functions and
festivities, so far as the intellectual part is concerned, were not
unlike those of the present day; but the magnificent costumes, the
highly developed sense of material beauty, and the more elaborate
etiquette of the age which gave birth to Castiglione's _Cortegiano_ lent
these festivities a higher character.

The sixteenth century was far behind our own in many of its
productions--theatrical performances, displays of fireworks, and concert
music. There were illuminations, and mounted torchlight processions; and
rockets were frequently used; but an illuminated garden fête such as the
Emperor of Austria gave for the Shah of Persia at Schönbrunn would at
that time have been impossible. The same might be said of certain forms
of musical entertainment; for example, concerts. Society in that age
would have shuddered at the orchestral music of to-day, and the
ear-splitting drums would have appeared barbarous to the Italians of the
Renaissance, just as would the military parades, which are still among
the favorite spectacles with which distinguished guests are either
honored or intimidated at the great courts of Europe. Even then tourneys
were rare, although there were occasional combats of gladiators, whose
costumes were greatly admired.

The duke and his master of ceremonies had spent weeks in preparing the
program for the wedding festivities, although these did not admit of any
great variety, being limited as they are now to banquets, balls, and
theatrical productions. It was from the last-named form of entertainment
that Ercole promised himself the most, and which, he expected, would win
for him the applause of the cultivated world.

He was one of the most active patrons of the theater during the
Renaissance. Several years before he had commissioned the poets at his
court to translate some of the plays of Plautus and Terence into _terza
rima_, and had produced them. Guarino, Berardo, Collenuccio, and even
Bojordo had been employed in this work by him. As early as 1486 an
Italian version of the _Menæchmi_, the favorite play of Plautus, had
been produced in Ferrara. In February, 1491, when Ercole, with most
brilliant festivities, celebrated the betrothal of his son Alfonso and
Anna Sforza, the _Menæchmi_ and one of the comedies of Terence were
given. The _Amphitryon_, which Cagnolo had prepared for the stage, was
also played.

There was no permanent theater in Ferrara, but a temporary one had been
erected which served for the production of plays which were given only
during the carnival and on other important occasions. Ercole had
arranged a salon in the palace of the Podestà--a Gothic building
opposite the church--which is still standing and is known as the Palazzo
della Ragione. The salon was connected with the palace itself by a
passage way.

A raised stage called the tribune was erected. It was about one hundred
and twenty feet long and a hundred and fifty feet wide. It had houses of
painted wood, and whatever was necessary in the way of scenery, rocks,
trees, etc. It was separated from the audience by a wooden partition in
which was a sheet-metal curtain. On the forward part of the stage--the
orchestra--sat the princes and other important personages, and in the
amphitheater were thirteen rows of cushioned seats, those in the middle
being occupied by the women, and those at the sides by the men. This
space accommodated about three thousand people.

According to Strozzi, Ariosto, Calcagnini, and other humanists of
Ferrara, it was Ercole himself who constructed this theatre. They and
other academicians probably took part in the performances, but the duke
also brought actors from abroad, from Mantua, Siena, and Rome. They
numbered in all no less than a hundred and ten persons, and it was
necessary to build a new dressing-room for them. The theatrical
performances on this brilliant occasion must, therefore, have aroused
great expectations.

The festivities began February 3d, and it was soon apparent that the
chief attraction would be the beauty of three famous women--Lucretia,
Isabella, and the Duchess of Urbino. They were regarded as the three
handsomest women of the age, and it was difficult to decide which was
the fairer, Isabella or Lucretia. The Duchess of Mantua was six years
older than her sister-in-law, but a most beautiful woman, and with
feminine curiosity she studied Lucretia's appearance. In the letters
which she daily wrote to her husband in Mantua, she carefully described
the dress of her rival, but said not a word regarding her personal
charms. "Concerning Donna Lucretia's figure," so she wrote February 1st,
"I shall say nothing, for I am aware that your Majesty knows her by
sight." She was unable to conceal her vanity, and in another letter,
written February 3d, she gave her husband to understand that she hoped,
so far as her own personality and her retinue were concerned, to be able
to stand comparison with any of the others and even to bear away the
prize. One of the ladies of her suite, the Marchesana of Cotrone, wrote
the duke, saying, "The bride is not especially handsome, but she has an
animated face, and in spite of her having such a large number of ladies
with her, and notwithstanding the presence of the illustrious lady of
Urbino, who is very beautiful, and who clearly shows that she is your
Excellency's sister, my illustrious mistress Isabella, according to our
opinion and of those who came with the Duchess of Ferrara, is the most
beautiful of all. There is no doubt about this; compared with her
Majesty, all the others are as nothing. Therefore we shall bring the
prize home to the house of our mistress."[167]

The first evening of the festivities a ball was given in the great salon
of the palace at which the attendance was so large that many were unable
to gain admission. Lucretia was enthroned upon a tribune, and near her
were the princesses of Mantua and Urbino. Other prominent ladies and the
ambassadors also came and took up a position near her. The guests,
therefore, in spite of the crowd, had a chance to admire the beautiful
women, and their gowns and jewels. During the Renaissance, balls were
less formal than they are now. Pleasures then were more natural and
simple; frequently the ladies danced with each other, and sometimes even
alone. The dances were almost exclusively French, for even at that time
France had begun to impose her customs on all the rest of the world;
still there were some Spanish and Italian ones. Lucretia was a graceful
dancer, and she was always ready to display her skill. She frequently
descended from the tribune and executed Spanish and Roman dances to the
sound of the tambourine.[168]

The following day the eagerly expected dramatic performances were given.
First the duke had the actors appear in masks and costumes for the
purpose of reviewing them. The director of the troop then came forward
in the character of Plautus and read the program and the argument of
each piece which was to be rendered during the five evenings. The
selection of comedies by living dramatists in the year 1502 could not
have cost the duke much thought, for there were none of any special
importance. The _Calandra_ of Dovizi, which a few years later caused
such a sensation, was not yet written. It is true Ariosto had already
composed his _Cassaria_ and the _Suppositi_, but he had not yet won
sufficient renown for him to be honored by their presentation at the
wedding festivities.[169] Moreover, the duke would have none but classic
productions. He wanted to set all the world talking; and, in truth,
Italy had never seen any theatrical performances equal to these. We
possess careful descriptions of them which have not yet been
incorporated in the history of the stage. They show more clearly than do
the reports regarding the Vatican theater in the time of Leo X what was
the real nature of theatrical performances during the Renaissance;
consequently, they constitute a valuable picture of the times.

If one could follow the reports of Gagnolo, Zambotto, and Isabella, and
reproduce in imagination the brilliant wedding and the guests in their
rich costumes seated in rows, he would behold one of the fairest and
most illustrious gatherings of the Renaissance. This scene, rich in form
and color, taken in conjunction with the stage, and the performances of
the comedies of Plautus, and with the pantomimes and the _moresche_
which occupied the time between the acts, is so romantic that we might
imagine ourselves translated to Shakespeare's _Midsummer-Night's Dream_,
and that Duke Ercole had changed places with Theseus, Duke of Athens,
and that the comedies were being performed before him and the happy
bridal pair.

According to the program, from February 3d to February 8th--with the
exception of one evening--five of the plays of Plautus were to be given.
The intermissions were to be devoted to music and _moresche_. The
_moresca_ resembled the modern ballet; that is, a pantomime dance. It is
of very ancient origin, and traces of it appear in the Middle Ages. At
first it was a war dance in costume, which character it preserved for a
long time. The name is, I believe, derived from the fact that in all the
Latin countries which suffered from the invasions of the Saracens,
dances in which the participants were armed and which simulated the
battles of the Moor and Christian were executed. The Moors, for the sake
of contrast, were represented as black. Subsequently the meaning of the
term _moresca_ was extended to include the ballet in general, and all
sorts of scenes in which dances accompanied by flutes and violins were
introduced. The subjects were derived from mythology, the age of
chivalry, and everyday life.

There were also comic dances performed by fantastic monsters, peasants,
clowns, wild animals, and satyrs, during which blows were freely dealt
right and left. The classico-romantic ballet appears to have reached a
high development in Ferrara, which was the home of the romantic
epics--the _Mambriano_ and the _Orlando_. It is needless to say that the
ballet possessed great attraction for the public in those days, just as it
now does. The presentation of the comedies of Plautus would have no more
effect upon people of this age than would a puppet show. They lasted
from four to five hours--from six in the evening until midnight.

The first evening the duke conducted his guests into the theater, and
when they had taken their seats, Plautus appeared before the bridal
couple and addressed some complimentary verses to them. After this the
_Epidicus_ was presented. Each act was followed by a ballet, and five
beautiful _moresche_ were given during the interludes of the play. First
entered ten armed gladiators, who danced to the sound of tambourines;
then followed a mimic battle between twelve people in different
costumes; the third _moresca_ was led by a young woman upon a car which
was drawn by a unicorn, and upon it were several persons bound to the
trunk of a tree, while seated under the bushes were four lute players.
The young woman loosed the bonds of the captives, who immediately
descended and danced while the lute players sang beautiful canzone--at
least so says Gagnolo; the cultured Duchess of Mantua, however, wrote
that the music was so doleful that it was scarcely worth listening to.
Isabella, however, judging by her remarkable letters, was a severe
critic, not only of the plays but of all the festivities. The fourth
_moresca_ was danced by ten Moors holding burning tapers in their
mouths. In the fifth there were ten fantastically dressed men with
feathers on their heads, and bearing lances with small lighted torches
at their tips. On the conclusion of the _Epidicus_ there was a
performance by several jugglers.

Friday, February 4th, Lucretia did not appear until the afternoon. In
the morning the duke showed his guests about the city, and they went to
see a famous saint, Sister Lucia of Viterbo, whom the devout Ercole had
brought to Ferrara as a great attraction. Every Friday the five wounds
of Christ appeared on the body of this saint. She presented the
ambassador of France with a rag with which she had touched her scars,
and which Monseigneur Rocca Berti received with great respect. At the
castle the duke showed his guests the artillery, to the study of which
his son Alfonso was eagerly devoted. Here they waited for Lucretia, who,
accompanied by all the ambassadors, soon appeared in the great salon. A
dance was given which lasted until six in the evening. Then followed a
presentation of the _Bacchides_ which required five hours. Isabella
found these performances excessively long and tiresome. Ballets similar
to those which accompanied the _Epidicus_ were given; men dressed in
flesh-colored tights with torches in their hands, which diffused
agreeable odors, danced fantastic figures, and engaged in a battle with
a dragon.

The following day Lucretia did not appear, as she was engaged in writing
letters and in washing her hair, and the guests amused themselves by
wandering about the city. No entertainments were given for the populace.
The French ambassador, in the name of the King of France, sent presents
to the princes of the house. The duke received a golden shield with a
picture of S. Francis in enamel, the work of a Parisian artist, which
was highly valued; to the hereditary Prince Alfonso was given a similar
shield with a portrait of Mary of Magdala, the ambassador remarking that
his Majesty had chosen a wife who resembled the Magdalene in character:
_Quæ multum meruit, quia multum credidit._ Perhaps presenting Alfonso
with a gift suggestive of the Magdalene was an intentional bit of irony
on the part of the French king. In addition to this he received a
written description of a process for casting cannon. A golden shield was
likewise presented to Don Ferrante. Lucretia's gift was a string of gold
beads filled with musk, while her charming maid of honor, Angela, was
honored with a costly chain.

Everything was done to flatter the French ambassador. He was invited to
dinner in the evening by the Marchioness of Mantua, and was placed
between his hostess and the Duchess of Urbino. The evening was passed,
according to Gagnolo, in gallant and cultivated conversation. On leaving
the table the marchioness sang the most beautiful songs to the
accompaniment of the lute, for the entertainment of the French
ambassador. After this she conducted him to her chamber, where, in the
presence of two of her ladies-in-waiting, they held an animated
conversation for almost an hour, at the conclusion of which she drew off
her gloves and presented them to him, "and the ambassador received them
with assurances of his loyalty and his love, as they came from such a
charming source; he told her that he would preserve them until the end
of time, as a precious relic." We may believe Gagnolo, for doubtless the
fortunate ambassador regarded this memento of a beautiful woman as no
less precious than the rag poor Saint Lucia had given him.

Sunday, February 6th, there was a magnificent ceremony in the church;
one of the Pope's chamberlains in the name of his Holiness presented Don
Alfonso with a hat and also a sword which the Holy Father had blessed,
and which the archbishop girded on him at the altar. In the afternoon
the princes and the princesses of the house of Este went to Lucretia's
apartments to fetch her to the banquet hall. They danced for two hours;
Lucretia herself, with one of her ladies-in-waiting, taking part in some
French dances. In the evening the _Miles Gloriosus_ was presented; it
was followed by a _moresca_ in which ten shepherds with horns on their
heads fought with each other.

February 7th there was a tourney in the piazza before the church between
two mounted knights, one of whom was a native of Bologna and the other a
citizen of Imola. No blood was shed. In the evening the _Asinaria_ was
presented, together with a wonderful _moresca_ in which appeared
fourteen satyrs, one of which carried a silvered ass's head in his
hands, in which there was a music-box, to the strains of which the
clowns danced. This play of the satyrs was followed by an interlude
performed by sixteen vocalists,--men and women,--and a virtuoso from
Mantua who played on three lutes. In conclusion there was a _moresca_ in
which was simulated the agricultural work of the peasants. The fields
were prepared, the seed sown, the grain cut and threshed, and the
harvest feast followed. Finally a native dance to the accompaniment of
the bagpipe was executed.

The last day of the festivities, February 8th, also marked the end of
the carnival. The ambassadors, who were soon to depart, presented the
bride with costly gifts consisting of beautiful stuffs and silverware.
The most remarkable present was brought by the representatives of
Venice. The Republic at its own expense had sent two noblemen to the
festivities, Niccolò Dolfini and Andrea Foscolo, both of whom were
magnificently clothed. In those days dress was as costly as it was
beautiful, and the artists who made the clothes for the men and women of
the Renaissance would look with contempt upon those of the present time,
for in that æsthetic age their productions were works of art. The most
magnificent stuffs, velvet, silk, and gold embroidery were used, and
painters did not scorn to design the color schemes and the shapes and
folds of the garments. Dress, therefore, was a most weighty
consideration, and one to which great value was attached, as it
indicated the importance of the wearer. All who have left accounts of
the festivities in Ferrara describe in detail the costumes worn on each
occasion by Donna Lucretia and the other prominent women, and even those
of the men. The reports which the Venetians sent home and the
description in the diary of Marino Sanuto show how great was the
importance attached to these matters. The following is even more
striking evidence: before the two ambassadors of Venice set out for
Ferrara they were required to appear before the whole senate in their
robes of crimson velvet trimmed with fur, and wearing capes of similar
material. More than four thousand persons were present in the great
council hall, and the Piazza of S. Marco was crowded with people who
gazed with wonder on these strange creatures. One of these robes
contained thirty-two and the other twenty-eight yards of velvet.[170]
Following the instructions of the Seignory of Venice, the ambassadors
sent their robes to Duchess Lucretia as a bridal gift.[171] This
wonderful gift was presented in the most naive way imaginable. One of
the noble gentlemen delivered a Latin oration, and the other followed
with a long discourse in Italian; thereupon they retired to an adjoining
room, removed their magnificent robes, and sent them to the bride. This
present and the pedantry of the two Venetians excited the greatest mirth
at the Ferrarese court.[172]

In the evening they danced for the last time, and attended the final
theatrical performance, the _Casina_. Before the comedy began, music
composed by Rombonzino was rendered, and songs in honor of the young
couple were sung. Everywhere throughout the _Casina_, musical interludes
were introduced. During the intermission six violinists, among them Don
Alfonso, the hereditary prince, who was a magnificent amateur performer,
played. The violin seems to have been held in great esteem in Ferrara,
for when Cæsar Borgia was about to set out for France he asked Duke
Ercole for a violin player to accompany him, as they were much sought
after in that country.[173]

The ballet which followed was a dance of savages contending for the
possession of a beautiful woman. Suddenly the god of love appeared,
accompanied by musicians, and set her free. Hereupon the spectators
discovered a great globe which suddenly split in halves and began to
give forth beautiful strains. In conclusion twelve Swiss armed with
halberds and wearing their national colors entered, and executed an
artistic dance, fencing the while.

If this scene, as Cagnolo says, ended the dramatic performances we are
forced to conclude that they were exceedingly dull and spiritless. The
_moresca_ partook of the character of both the opera and ballet. It was
the only new form of spectacle offered during all the festivities.
Compared with those which were given in Rome on the occasion of
Lucretia's betrothal, they were much inferior. Among the former we
noticed several pastoral comedies with allegorical allusions to
Lucretia, Ferrara, Cæsar, and Alexander.

In spite of the outlay the duke had made, his entertainments lacked
novelty and variety, although they probably pleased most of those
present. Isabella, however, did not hesitate to mention the fact that
she was bored. "In truth," so she wrote her husband, "the wedding was a
very cold affair. It seems a thousand years before I shall be in Mantua
again, I am so anxious to see your Majesty and my son, and also to get
away from this place where I find absolutely no pleasure. Your
Excellency, therefore, need not envy me my presence at this wedding; it
is so stiff I have much more cause to envy those who remained in
Mantua." Apparently the noble lady's opinion was influenced by the
displeasure she still felt on account of her brother's marriage with
Lucretia, but it may also have been due partly to the character of the
festivities themselves, for the marchesa in all her letters complains of
their being tiresome.[174]

Soon after the conclusion of the festivities the marchioness returned to
Mantua; her last letter from Ferrara to her husband is dated February
9th. Her first letter from Mantua to her sister-in-law, which was
written February 18th, is as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS LADY: The love which I feel for your Majesty,
     and my hope that you continue in the same good health in which you
     were at the time of my departure, cause me to believe that you have
     the same feelings for me; therefore I inform you--hoping that it
     will be pleasant news to you--that I returned to this city on
     Monday in the best of health, and that I found my illustrious
     consort also well. There is nothing more for me to write but to ask
     your Majesty to tell me how you are, for I rejoice like an own
     sister in your welfare. Although I regard it as superfluous to
     offer you what belongs to you, I will remind you once for all, I
     and mine are ever at your disposal. I am also much beholden to you,
     and I ask you to remember me to your illustrious consort, my most
     honored brother.

Lucretia replied to the marchioness's letter as follows:

     MY ILLUSTRIOUS LADY, SISTER-IN-LAW, AND MOST HONORED
     SISTER: Although it was my duty to anticipate your Excellency
     in the proof of affection which you have given me, this neglect on
     my part only makes me all the more beholden to you. I can never
     tell you with what pleasure and relief I learned that you had
     reached Mantua safely and had found your illustrious husband well.
     May he and your Majesty, with God's help, continue to enjoy all
     happiness, and the increase of all good things, according to your
     desires. In obedience to your Majesty's commands I am compelled,
     and I also desire, to let you know that I, by God's mercy, am well,
     and shall ever be disposed to serve you.

  Your devoted sister, who is anxious to serve you,

  LUCREZIA ESTENSIS DE BORGIA.[175]

  FERRARA, _February 22, 1502_.

These letters, written with diplomatic cunning, are the beginning of the
correspondence of these two famous women which was carried on for
seventeen years, and which shows that Isabella's displeasure gradually
passed away, and that she became a real friend of her sister-in-law.

The duke was heartily glad when his guests finally departed. Madonna
Adriana, Girolama, and the woman described simply as "an Orsini" seemed
in no haste to return to Rome. Alexander had instructed them to remain
until Cæsar's wife arrived. They were to wait for her in Lombardy, and
then accompany her to Rome. The Duchess of Romagna, however, in spite of
the urgent requests of the nuncio, refused to leave France. Her brother,
Cardinal d'Albret, reached Ferrara February 6th, and shortly afterwards
set out for Rome.

Adriana, as a near connection of the Pope and Lucretia, had been treated
with the highest respect at Ercole's court, where she had enjoyed a
close intimacy with the Marchioness Isabella, as is shown by a letter
which the latter addressed to Adriana, February 18th, the same day on
which she wrote Lucretia. It is regarding a certain person whom Adriana
while in Ferrara had recommended to her in her own name and also in that
of Donna Giulia. It, therefore, appears that the anonymous Orsini was
not Giulia Farnese.

Ercole was exceedingly anxious for the women to leave. In a letter,
dated February 14th, to his ambassador in Rome, Costabili, he complains
bitterly about their "useless" stay at his court. "I tell you," so he
wrote, "that these women by remaining here cause a large number of other
persons, men as well as women, to linger, for all wish to depart at the
same time, and it is a great burden and causes heavy expense. The
retinue of these ladies, taken into consideration with the other people,
numbers not far from four hundred and fifty persons and three hundred
and fifty horses." Ercole instructed his ambassador to inform the Pope
of this, also to tell him that the supplies were about exhausted, and
that the Duchess of Romagna would not arrive before Easter, and that he
could stand the expense no longer, as the wedding festivities had
already cost twenty-five thousand ducats. The Pope should therefore
direct the ladies to return. In a postscript to the same letter the duke
says: "After the noble ladies of the Duchess of Romagna had been here
twelve days, I sent them away because they were impertinent, and because
their presence would not do his Holiness or the duchess any good."[176]

The troublesome women finally departed. There is a despatch of the
orator Girardo Saraceni, dated Rome, May 4th, in which he informs the
duke that Monsignor Venosa and Donna Adriana had returned from Ferrara,
and had expressed to the Pope their gratitude for the affectionate
reception which had been accorded them.

February 14th Ercole wrote the Pope a letter whose meaning is perfectly
clear, if we eliminate one or two phrases.

     HOLY FATHER AND MASTER: Before the illustrious Duchess,
     our daughter, came here, it was my firm determination to receive
     her, as was meet, with all friendliness and honor, and to show her
     in every way how great was the affection I felt for her. Now that
     her Majesty is here, I am so pleased with her on account of the
     virtues and good qualities which I have discovered in her that I am
     not only strengthened in that determination, but also am resolved
     to do even more than I had intended, and all the more because your
     Holiness has asked me to do so in the autographic letter which you
     wrote me. Your Holiness need have no fears, for I shall treat the
     Duchess in such a way that your Holiness will see that I regard her
     as the most precious jewel I have in the world.


FOOTNOTES:

[167] Isabella's remarkable letters regarding the marriage festivities
in Ferrara are printed in the Notizie di Isabella Estense by Carlo
d'Arco. Archivio Storico Ital. App. ii. 223, sq. The letter of the
Marchesa of Cotrone of February 1st is in the library of Mantua, and
there are several other letters in the archives of that city written by
her to Gonzaga regarding the festivities.

[168] Qual Madama Sposa danzò molte danze al suono delli suoi Tamburini
alla Romanesca e Spagnuola: report of Niccolò Gagnolo of Parma, who had
accompanied the French ambassador to Ferrara. Zambotto used this
description of the wedding festivities in his chronicle, and it was
subsequently reprinted in Lucrezia Borgia in Ferrara, etc.

[169] The Cassaria was first produced in 1508, and the Suppositi in
1509. Giuseppe Campori, Notizie per la vita di Lod. Ariosto, 2d ed.
Modena, 1871, p. 67.

[170] Despatch of the Ferrarese orator, Bartolomeo Cartari, to Ercole,
Venice, January 25, 1502. Archives of Modena.

[171] Cartari says in the same despatch that the robes he had described
were intended for presents. Li Ambasciatori Veneziani le presentarono
due vesti grandi in forma di palii velluto Cremesino foderati di
ermelini, quali levatesi di sopra loro le presentarono. Cagnolo.

[172] Ano dato materia di ridere ad hogni homo cum suo presente. The
Marchesana of Cotrone to the Marquis of Mantua, Ferrara, February 8th.

[173] Violas arcu pulsantes. Cæsar Borgia to Ercole, Rome, September 3,
1498.

[174] See Isabella's letters of February 3d and 5th.

[175] Zuccheti reproduces the letter.

[176] P.S. Li gentilhomini de lo Illmo. Sig. Duca de Romagna poichè
sono stati qui XII giorni sono stati da me licentiate per essere
impertinente e senza fructo alcuno a la Santità de N.S. et allo Illmo.
Sig. Duca de Romagna. Minute Ducali a Costabili Beltrando, February 14,
1502.




CHAPTER IV

THE ESTE DYNASTY--DESCRIPTION OF FERRARA


On entering the castle of the Este, Lucretia found a new environment,
new interests--one might almost say a new world. She was a princess in
one of the most important Italian States, and in a strange city, which,
during the latter half of the century, had assumed a place of the first
importance, for the spirit of Italian culture had there developed new
forms. She had been received with the highest honors into a family
famous and princely; one of the oldest and most brilliant in the
peninsula. It was a piece of supreme good fortune that had brought her
to this house, and now she would endeavor to make herself worthy of it.

The family of Este, next to that of Savoy, was the oldest and most
illustrious in Italy, and it forced the latter into the background by
assuming the important position which the State of Ferrara, owing to its
geographical position, afforded it.

The history of the Este is briefly as follows:

These lords, whose name is derived from a small castle between Padua and
Ferrara, and who first appeared about the time of the Lombard invasion,
were descended from a family whose remote ancestor was one Albert. The
names Adalbert and Albert assume in Italian the form Oberto, from which
we have the diminutives Obizzo and Azzo. In the tenth century there
appears a Marquis Oberto who was first a retainer of King Berengar and
later of Otto the Great. It is not known from what domain he and his
immediate successors derived their title of marquis; they were, however,
powerful lords in Lombardy as well as in Tuscany. One of Oberto's
ancestors, Alberto Azzo II, who is originally mentioned as Marchio de
Longobardia, governed the territory from Mantua to the Adriatic and the
region about the Po, where he owned Este and Rovigo. He married
Kunigunde, sister of Count Guelf III of Swabia, and in this way the
famous German family of Guelf became connected with the Oberti and drawn
into Italian politics. When Alberto Azzo died in the year 1096--more
than a hundred years old--he left two sons, Guelf and Folco, who were
the founders of the house of Este in Italy and the Guelf house of
Braunschweig in Germany, for Guelf inherited the property of his
maternal grandfather, Guelf III, in whom the male line of the house
became extinct in the year 1055. He went to Germany, where he became
Duke of Bavaria and founded the Guelf line.

Folco inherited his father's Italian possessions, and in the great
struggle of the German emperor with the papacy, the Margraves of Este
were aggressive and determined soldiers. At first they were simply
members of the Guelf faction, but subsequently they became its leaders,
and thus were able to establish their power in Ferrara.

The origin of the city is lost in the mists of antiquity. By the gift of
Pipin and Charles it passed to the Church. It was also included in the
deed of Matilda. In the war between the Pope and the Emperor, occasioned
by this gift of Matilda, Ferrara succeeded in regaining its independence
as a republic.

The Este first appeared there about the end of the twelfth century.
Folco's grandson, Azzo V, married Marchesella Adelardi, who was the heir
of the leader of the Guelfs in that city, where Salinguerra was the head
of the Ghibellines. From that time the Margraves of Este possessed great
influence in Ferrara. They were likewise leaders of the Guelf party in
the north of Italy.

In the year 1208 Azzo VI succeeded in driving Salinguerra out of
Ferrara, and the city having wearied of the long feud made the victor
its hereditary Podestà. This is the first example of a free republic
voluntarily submitting to a lord. In this way the Este established the
first tyranny on the ruins of a commune. The brave Salinguerra, one of
the greatest captains of Italy in the time of the Hohenstaufen,
repeatedly drove Azzo VI and his successor, Azzo VII, from Ferrara, but
he himself was finally defeated in 1240 and cast into prison, where he
died. Thenceforth the Este ruled Ferrara.

About the time of the removal of the papacy to Avignon they were
expelled from the city by the Church, but they returned on the
invitation of the citizens who had risen against the papal legate. John
XXII issued a diploma of investiture by the terms of which they were to
hold Ferrara as a fief of the Church on payment of an annual tribute of
ten thousand gold ducats. The Este now set themselves up as tyrants in
Ferrara, and in spite of numerous wars maintained the dynasty for a
great many years. This dominion was not, like that in many other Italian
States, due to a lucky stroke on the part of an upstart, but it was
ancient, hereditary, and firmly established.

It was due to a succession of remarkable princes, beginning with
Aldobrandino, Lord of Ferrara, Modena, Rovigo, and Comacchio, that
Ferrara succeeded in winning the important position she held at the
beginning of the sixteenth century. Aldobrandino was followed by his
brothers, Niccolò, from 1361 to 1388, and Alberto until 1393. After that
his son Niccolò III, a powerful and bellicose man, ruled until the year
1441. As his legitimate children Ercole and Sigismondo were minors, he
was succeeded by his natural son Lionello. This prince not only
continued the work begun by his father, but also beautified Ferrara. In
the year 1444 the great Alfonso of Naples gave him his daughter Maria as
wife, and the Este thus entered into close relations with the royal
house of Aragon. Lionello was intelligent and liberal, a patron of all
the arts and sciences, a "prince of immortal name." In the year 1450 he
was succeeded by his brother Borso, illegitimate like himself, as an
effort was being made to displace the legitimate sons of Niccolò II.

Borso was one of the most magnificent princes of his age. Frederick II,
when he stopped in Ferrara on his return from his coronation in Rome,
made him Duke of Modena and Reggio, and Count of Rovigo and Comacchio,
all of which territories belonged to the empire. The Este thereupon
adopted for their arms, instead of the white eagle they had hitherto
borne, the black eagle of the empire, to which were added the lilies of
France, the use of which had been granted them by Charles VII. April 14,
1471, Paul VII in Rome created Borso Duke of Ferrara. Soon after
this--May 27th--this celebrated prince died unmarried and childless.

He was succeeded by Ercole, the legitimate son of Niccolò II, the direct
line of the Este thereby reacquiring the government of Ferrara, the
importance of the State having been greatly increased by the efforts of
the two illegitimate sons. In June, 1473, amid magnificent festivities,
Ercole married Eleonora of Aragon, daughter of Ferdinand of Naples.
Twenty-nine years--years of conflict--had passed when the second Duke of
Ferrara married his son to Lucretia with similar pomp. By putting an end
to the war with Venice and Pope Sixtus IV, in the year 1482, Ercole had
succeeded in saving his State from the great danger which threatened it,
although he had been forced to relinquish certain territory to the
Venetians. This danger, however, might arise again, for Venice and the
Pope continued to be Ferrara's bitterest enemies. Political
considerations, therefore, compelled her to form an alliance with
France, whose king already owned Milan and might permanently secure
possession of Naples. For the same reason he had married his son to
Lucretia on the best terms he was able to make. She, therefore, must
have been conscious of her great importance to the State of Ferrara, and
this it was which gave her a sense of security with regard to the noble
house to which she now belonged.

The Duke presented the young couple Castle Vecchio for their residence,
and there Lucretia established her court. This stronghold, which is
still in existence, is one of the most imposing monuments of the Middle
Ages. It overlooks all Ferrara, and may be seen for miles around. Its
dark red color; its gloominess, which is partly due to its architectural
severity; its four mighty towers--all combine to cause a feeling of
fear, especially on moonlight nights, when the shadows of the towers
fall on the water in the moat, which still surrounds the castle as in
days of old. The figures of the great ones who once lived in the
stronghold--Ugo and Parisina Malatesta, Borso, Lucretia Borgia and
Alfonso, Renée of France, and Calvin, Ariosto, Alfonso II, the
unfortunate Tasso and Eleonora--seem to rise before the beholder.

[Illustration: CASTLE VECCHIO AT FERRARA.]

The Marchese Niccolò, owing to an uprising of the citizens began Castle
Vecchio in the year 1385, and his successor completed it and decorated
the interior. It is connected by covered passage-ways with the palace
opposite the church. Before Ercole extended Ferrara on the north, the
castle marked the boundary of the city. One of the towers, called the
Tower of the Lions, protected the city gate. A branch of the Po, which
at that time flowed near by, supplied the moat--over which there were
several drawbridges--with water.

In Lucretia's time only the main features of the stronghold were the
same as they are now; the cornices of the towers are of a later date,
and the towers themselves were somewhat lower; the walls were embattled
like those of the Gonzaga castle in Mantua. Cannon, cast under the
direction of Alfonso, were placed at various points. There is an
interior quadrangular court with arcades, and there Lucretia was shown
the place where Niccolò II had caused his son Ugo and his stepmother,
the beautiful Parisina, to be beheaded. This gruesome deed was a warning
to Alexander's daughter to be true to her husband.

A wide marble stairway led to the two upper stories of the castle, one
of which, the lower, consisting of a series of chambers and salons, was
set aside for the princes. In the course of time this has suffered so
many changes that even those most thoroughly acquainted with Ferrara do
not know just where Lucretia's apartments were.[177] Very few of the
paintings with which the Este adorned the castle are left. There are
still some frescoes by Dossi and another unknown master.

The castle was always a gloomy and oppressive residence. It was in
perfect accord with the character of Ferrara, which even now is
forbidding. Standing on the battlements, and looking across the broad,
highly cultivated, but monotonous fields, whose horizon is not
attractive, because the Veronese Alps are too far distant, and the
Apennines, which are closer, are not clearly defined; and gazing down
upon the black mass of the city itself, one wonders how Ariosto's
exuberant creation could have been produced here. Greater inspiration
would be found in the sky, the land, and the sea of idyllic Sorrento,
which was Tasso's birthplace, but this is only another proof of the
theory that the poet's fancy is independent of his environment.

Ferrara is situated in an unhealthful plain which is traversed by a
branch of the Po and several canals. The principal stream does not
contribute to the life of the city or its suburbs, as it is several
miles distant. The town is surrounded by strong walls in which are four
gates. In addition to Castle Vecchio on the north, there was, in
Lucretia's time, another at the southwest--Castle Tealto or
Tedaldo--which was situated on one of the branches of the Po, and which
had a gate opening into the city and a pontoon bridge connecting it with
the suburb S. Giorgio. Lucretia had entered by this gate. Nothing is now
left of Castle Tedaldo, as it was razed at the beginning of the
seventeenth century, when the Pope, having driven out Alfonso's
successors, erected the new fortress.

Ferrara has a large public square, and regular streets with arcades. The
church, which faces the principal piazza, and which was consecrated in
the year 1135, is an imposing structure in the Lombardo-Gothic style.
Its high façade is divided in three parts and gabled, and it has three
rows of half Roman and half Gothic arches supported on columns. With its
ancient sculptures, black with time, it presents a strange appearance of
mediæval originality and romance. In Ferrara there is now nothing else
so impressive on first sight as this church. It seems as if one of the
structures of Ariosto's fairy world had suddenly risen before us.
Opposite one side of the castle, the Palazzo del Ragione is still
standing, and there are also two old towers, one of which is called the
Rigobello. Opposite the façade was the Este palace in which Ercole
lived, and which Eugene IV occupied when he held the famous council in
Ferrara. In front of it rose the monuments of the two great princes of
the house of Este, Niccolò III and Borso. One is an equestrian statue,
the other a sitting figure; both were placed upon columns, and therefore
are small. The crumbling pillars by the entrance archway are still
standing, but the statues were destroyed in 1796.

The Este vied with the other princes and republics in building churches
and convents, of which Ferrara still possesses a large number. In the
year 1500 the most important were: S. Domenico, S. Francesco, S. Maria
in Vado, S. Antonio, S. Giorgio before the Porta Romana, the convent
Corpus Domini, and the Certosa. All have been restored more or less, and
although some of them are roomy and beautiful, none have any special
artistic individuality.

As early as the fifteenth century there were numerous palaces in Ferrara
which are still numbered among the attractions of the gloomy city, and
which are regarded as important structures in the history of
architecture, from the early Renaissance until the appearance of the
rococo style. Many of them, however, are in a deplorable state of
decay. Marchese Alberto built the Palazzo del Paradiso (now the
University) and Schifanoja at the end of the sixteenth century. Ercole
erected the Palazzo Pareschi. He also restored a large part of Ferrara
and extended the city by adding a new quarter on the north, the
Addizione Erculea, which is still the handsomest part of Ferrara. The
city is traversed by two long, wide streets--the Corso di Porta Po, with
its continuation, the Corso di Porta Mare, and the Strada dei Piopponi.
Strolling through these quiet streets one is astonished at the long rows
of beautiful palaces of the Renaissance, reminders of a teeming life now
passed away. Ercole laid out a large square which is surrounded by noble
palaces, and which is now known as the Piazza Ariostea, from the
monument of the great poet which stands in the center. This is,
doubtless, the most beautiful memorial ever erected to a poet. The
marble statue stands upon a high column and looks down upon the entire
city. The history of the monument is interesting. Originally it was
intended that an equestrian statue of Ercole on two columns should
occupy this position. When the columns were being brought down the Po on
a raft, one of them rolled overboard and was lost; the other was used in
the year 1675 to support the statue of Pope Alexander VII, which was
pulled down during the revolution of 1796 and replaced with a statue of
Liberty, the unveiling of which was attended by General Napoleon
Bonaparte. Three years later the Austrians overthrew the statue of
Liberty, leaving the column standing, and in the year 1810 a statue of
the Emperor Napoleon was placed upon it. This fell with the emperor. In
the year 1833 Ferrara set Ariosto's statue upon the column, where it
will remain in spite of all political change.

Magnificent palaces rose in Ercole's new suburb. His brother Sigismondo
erected the splendid Palazzo Diamanti, now Ferrara's art gallery, while
the Trotti, Castelli, Sacrati, and Bevilacqua families built palaces
there which are still in existence. Ferrara was the home of a wealthy
nobility, some of whom belonged to the old baronial families. In
addition there were the Contrarii, Pio, Costabili, the Strozzi,
Saraceni, Boschetti, the Roverella, the Muzzarelli, and Pendaglia.

The Ferrarese aristocracy had long ago emerged from the state of
municipal strife and feudal dependence, and had set up their courts. The
Este, especially the warlike Niccolò III, had subjugated the barons, who
originally lived upon their estates beyond the city walls, and who were
now in the service of the ruling family, holding the most important
court and city offices; they were also commanders in the army. They took
part, probably more actively than did the nobility of the other Italian
States, in the intellectual movement of the age, which was fostered by
the princes of the house of Este. Consequently many of these great lords
won prominent places in the history of literature in Ferrara.

The university, which had flourished there since the middle of the
fifteenth century, was, excepting those of Padua and Bologna, the most
famous in Italy. Founded by the Margrave Alberto in 1391, and
subsequently remodeled by Niccolò III, it reached the zenith of its fame
in the time of Lionello and Borso. The former was a pupil of the
celebrated Guarino of Verona, and was himself acquainted with all the
sciences. The friend and idol of the humanists of his age, he collected
rare manuscripts and disseminated copies of them. He founded the
library, and Borso continued the work begun by him.

As early as 1474 the University of Ferrara had forty-five well paid
professors, and Ercole increased their number. Printing was introduced
during his reign. The earliest printer in Ferrara after 1471 was the
Frenchman Andreas, called Belforte.[178]

Like the city, the people seemed to have been of a serious cast of mind,
which led to speculation, criticism, and the cultivation of the exact
sciences. From Ferrara came Savonarola, the fanatical prophet who
appeared during the moral blight which characterized the age of the
Borgias, and Lucretia must frequently have recalled this man in whom her
father, by the executioner's hand, sought to stifle the protestations of
the faithful and upright against the immorality of his rule.

Astronomy and mathematics, and especially the natural sciences and
medicine, which at that time were part of the school of philosophy, were
extensively cultivated in Ferrara. It is stated that Savonarola himself
had studied medicine; his grandfather Michele, a famous physician of
Padua, had been called to Ferrara by Niccolò II.[179] Niccolò Leoniceno,
a native of Vincenza, at whose feet many of the most famous scholars and
poets had sat, enjoyed great renown in Ferrara about 1464 as a
physician, mathematician, philosopher, and philologist. He was still the
pride of the city when Lucretia arrived there, as the great
mathematician, Domenico Maria Novara, was then teaching in Bologna,
where Copernicus had been his pupil.

Many famous humanists, who at the time of Lucretia's arrival were still
children or youths--for example, the Giraldi and genial Celio
Calcagnini, who dedicated an epithalamium to her on her appearance in
the city--were members of the Ferrarese university. All of these men
were welcome at the court of the Este because they were accomplished and
versatile. It was not until later, after the sciences had been
classified and their boundaries defined, that the graceful learning of
the humanists degenerated into pedantry.

It was, however, especially the art of poetry which gave Ferrara, in
Lucretia's time, a peculiarly romantic cast. This it was which first
attracted attention to the city as one of the main centers of the
intellectual movement. Ferrara produced numerous poets who composed in
both tongues--Latin and Italian. Almost all the scholars of the day
wrote Latin verses; most of them, however, it must be admitted, were
lacking in poetic fire. Some of the Ferrarese, however, rose to high
positions in poetry and are still remembered; preeminent were the two
Strozzi, father and son, and Antonio Tebaldeo. The poets, however, who
originated the romantic epic in Italian were much more important than
the writers of Latin verse. The brilliant and sensuous court of Ferrara,
together with the fascinating romance of the house of Este--which really
belongs to the Middle Ages--and the charming nobility and modern
chivalry, all contributed to the production of the epic, while the city
of Ferrara, with its eventful history and its striking style of
architecture, was a most favorable soil for it. Monuments of Roman
antiquity are as rare in Ferrara as they are in Florence; everything is
of the Middle Ages. Lucretia did not meet Bojardo, the famous author of
the _Orlando Inamorato_, at the court of his friend Ercole, but the
blind singer of the _Mambriano_, Francesco Cieco, probably was still
living. We have seen how Ariosto, who was soon to eclipse all his
predecessors, greeted Lucretia on her arrival.

The graphic arts had made much less progress in Ferrara than had poetry
and the sciences; but while no master of the first rank, no Raphael or
Titian appeared, there were, nevertheless, some who won a not
unimportant place in the history of Italian culture. The Este were
patrons of painting; they had their palaces decorated with frescoes,
some of which, still considered noteworthy on account of their
originality, are preserved in the Palazzo Schifanoja, where they were
rediscovered in the year 1840. About the middle of the fifteenth
century, Ferrara had its own school, the chief of which was Cosimo Tura.
It produced two remarkable painters, Dosso Dossi and Benvenuto Tisio,
the latter of whom, under the name of Garofalo, became famous as one of
Raphael's greatest pupils. The works of these artists, who were
Lucretia's contemporaries--Garofalo being a year younger--still adorn
many of the churches, and are the chief attractions in the galleries of
the city.

Such, broadly sketched, was the intellectual life of Ferrara in the year
1502. We, therefore, see that in addition to her brilliant court and her
political importance as the capital of the State, she possessed a highly
developed spiritual life. The chroniclers state that her population at
that time numbered a hundred thousand souls; and at the beginning of the
sixteenth century--her most flourishing period--she was probably more
populous than Rome. In addition to the nobility there was an active
bourgeoisie engaged in commerce and manufacturing, especially weaving,
who enjoyed life.

[Illustration: BENVENUTO GAROFALO.

From an engraving by G. Batt. Cecchi.]


FOOTNOTES:

[177] Cittadella (Guida del Forestiere in Ferrara, Ferrara, 1873)
ridicules the story of the looking-glass that disclosed the love of Ugo
and Parisina. See his Castello di Ferrara, Turin, 1873, and the
description of the castle in the Notizie storico-artistiche sui primarii
palazzi d'Italia, Firenze, Cennini, 1871.

[178] Luigi Napoleone Cittadella, La Stampa in Ferrara. Ferrara, 1873.

[179] See first part of Villari's well known biography of Savonarola.




CHAPTER V

DEATH OF ALEXANDER VI


Alexander carefully followed everything that took place in Ferrara. He
never lost sight of his daughter. She and his agents reported every mark
of favor or disfavor which she received. Following the excitement of the
wedding festivities there were painful days for Lucretia, as she was
forced to meet envy and contempt, and to win for herself a secure place
at the court.

Alexander was greatly pleased by her reports, especially those
concerning her relations with Alfonso. He never for a moment supposed
that the hereditary prince loved his daughter. All he required was that
he should treat her as his wife, and that she should become the mother
of a prince. With great satisfaction he remarked to the Ferrarese
ambassador on hearing that Alfonso spent his nights with Lucretia,
"During the day he goes wherever he likes, as he is young, and in doing
this he does right."[180]

Alexander also induced the duke to grant his daughter-in-law a larger
allowance than he had agreed to give her. The sum stipulated was six
thousand ducats. Lucretia was extravagant, and needed a large income.
The amount she received from her father-in-law did not, however, exceed
ten thousand ducats.

In the meantime Cæsar was pursuing his own schemes, the success of which
was apparently insured by his alliance with Ferrara and the sanction of
France. The youthful Astorre Manfredi having been strangled in the
castle of S. Angelo by his orders, Valentino set out for Romagna, June
13th, where he succeeded in ensnaring the unsuspecting Guidobaldo of
Urbino and in seizing his estates, June 21st. Guidobaldo fled and found
an asylum in Mantua, whence he and his wife eventually went to Venice.

Cæsar now turned toward Camerino, where he surprised the Varano,
destroying all but one of them. He reported these doings to the court of
Ferrara, and the duke did not hesitate to congratulate him for a crime
which had resulted in the overthrow of princes who were not only
friendly to himself but were also closely connected with him. From
Urbino Cæsar wrote his sister as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS LADY AND DEAREST SISTER: I know nothing could
     be better medicine for your Excellency in your present illness than
     the good news which I have to impart. I must tell you that I have
     just had information that Camerino will yield. We trust that on
     receiving this news your condition will rapidly improve, and that
     you will inform us at once of it. For your indisposition prevents
     us from deriving any pleasure from this and other news. We ask you
     to tell the illustrious Duke Don Alfonso, your husband, our
     brother-in-law, at once, as, owing to want of time, we have not
     been able to write him direct.

     Your Majesty's brother, who loves you better than he does himself,

  CÆSAR.

  URBINO, _July 20, 1502_.

Shortly after this he surprised his sister by visiting her in the palace
of Belfiore, whither he came in disguise with five cavaliers. He
remained with her scarcely two hours, and then hastily departed,
accompanied by his brother-in-law Alfonso as far as Modena, intending to
go to the King of France, who was in Lombardy.

[Illustration: Reduced facsimile of a letter written by Alexander VI to
his daughter, Lucretia.]

In the meantime Alexander had arrived at a decision regarding the
seizure of Camerino which conflicted with Cæsar's plans, and which shows
that the father's will was not wholly under his son's control. September
2, 1502, Alexander bestowed Camerino as a duchy upon the Infante
Giovanni Borgia, whom he sometimes described as his own son and at
others as Cæsar's. Giovanni had already been invested with the title of
Nepi, and Francesco Borgia, Cardinal of Cosenza, as the child's
guardian, administered these estates. There are coins of this ephemeral
Duke of Camerino still in existence.[181]

September 5th Lucretia gave birth to a still-born daughter, to the great
disappointment of Alexander, who desired an heir to the throne. She was
sick unto death, and her husband showed the deepest concern, seldom
leaving her for a moment. September 7th Valentino came to see her. The
secretary Castellus sent a report of this visit to Ercole, who was in
Reggio, whither he had gone to meet Cæsar, who was returning from
Lombardy. "To-day," he wrote, "at the twentieth hour, we bled Madama on
the right foot. It was exceedingly difficult to accomplish it, and we
could not have done it but for the Duke of Romagna, who held her foot.
Her Majesty spent two hours with the duke, who made her laugh and
cheered her greatly." Lucretia had a codicil added to her will, which
she had made before leaving for Ferrara, in the presence of her
brother's secretary and some monks. She, however, recovered. Cæsar
remained with her two days and then departed for Imola. When Ercole
returned he found his daughter-in-law attended by Alexander's most
skilful physician, the Bishop of Venosa, and out of all danger.[182]

As Lucretia felt oppressed in Castle Vecchio, and yearned for the free
air, she removed October 8th, accompanied by the entire court, to the
convent of Corpus Domini. Her recovery was so rapid that she was able
again to take up her residence in the castle, October 22d, to the great
joy of every one, as Duke Ercole wrote to Rome. Alfonso even went to
Loretto in fulfilment of a vow he had made for the recovery of his wife.
The solicitude which was displayed for Lucretia on this occasion shows
that she had begun to make herself beloved in Ferrara.[183]

In this same month of October occurred the disaffection of Cæsar's
condottieri which nearly ended in his overthrow. In consequence of the
desertion of his generals, the country about Urbino rose, and Guidobaldo
even succeeded in reentering his capital city, October 18th. The
protection of France and the lack of decision on the part of his
enemies, however, saved the Duke of Romagna from the danger which
threatened him. December 31st he relieved himself of the barons by the
well-known coup of Sinigaglia. This was his masterstroke. He had
Vitellozzo and Oliverotto strangled forthwith; the Orsini--Paolo,
father-in-law of Girolama Borgia, and Francesco, Duke of Gravina, who
had once been mentioned as a possible husband for Lucretia--suffered the
same fate January 18, 1503.

The Duke of Ferrara congratulated Cæsar, as did also the Gonzaga. Even
Isabella did not hesitate to write a graceful letter to the man that had
driven her dear sister-in-law,--whose husband had been forced to flee a
second time,--from Urbino. The Gonzaga, who were anxious to marry the
little hereditary Prince Federico to his daughter Luisa, were
endeavoring to secure this end with the help of Francesco Trochio in
Rome. Isabella's contemptible letter to Cæsar is as follows:

     TO HIS HIGHNESS, THE DUKE OF VALENTINO.

     ILLUSTRIOUS SIR: The happy progress of which your
     Excellency has been good enough to inform us in your amiable letter
     has caused us all the liveliest joy, owing to the friendship and
     interest which you and my illustrious husband feel for each other.
     We, therefore, congratulate you in his and our own name for the
     good fortune which has befallen you, and for your safety, and we
     thank you for informing us of it and for your offer to keep us
     advised of future events, which we hope will be no less favorable,
     for, loving you as we do, we hope to hear from you often regarding
     your plans so that we may be able to rejoice with you at the
     success and advancement of your Excellency. Believing that you,
     after the excitement and fatigue which you have suffered while
     engaged in your glorious undertakings, will be disposed to give
     some time to recreation, it seems proper to me to send you by our
     courier, Giovanni, a hundred masks. We, of course, know how slight
     is this present in proportion to the greatness of your Excellency,
     and also in proportion to our desires; still it indicates that if
     there were anything more worthy and more suitable in this our
     country, we certainly would send it you. If the masks, however,
     are not as beautiful as they ought to be, your Highness will know
     that this is due to the makers in Ferrara, who, as it has been for
     years against the law to wear masks, long ago ceased making them.
     May, however, our good intentions and our love make up for their
     shortcomings. So far as our own affairs are concerned there is
     nothing new to tell you until your Excellency informs us as to the
     decision of his Holiness, our Master, concerning the articles of
     guaranty upon which we, through Brognolo, have agreed. We,
     therefore, look forward to this, and hope to reach a satisfactory
     conclusion. We commend ourselves to your service.

  JANUARY 15, 1503.

Cæsar replied to the marchioness from Aquapendente as follows:

     MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LADY, FRIEND, AND HONORED SISTER: We have
     received your Excellency's present of the hundred masks, which,
     owing to their diversity and beauty, are very welcome, and because
     the time and place of their arrival could not have been more
     propitious. If we neglected to inform your Excellency of all our
     plans and of our intended return to Rome, it was because it was
     only to-day that we succeeded in taking the city and territory
     adjacent to Sinigaglia together with the fortress, and punished our
     enemies for their treachery; freed Città di Castello, Fermo,
     Cisterna, Montone, and Perugia from their tyrants, and rendered
     them again subject to his Holiness, our Master; and deposed
     Pandolfo Petrucci from the tyranny which he had established in
     Siena, where he had shown himself such a determined enemy of
     ourselves. The masks are welcome especially because I know that the
     present is due to the affection which you and your illustrious
     husband feel for us, which is also shown by the letter which you
     send with it. Therefore we thank you a thousand times, although the
     magnitude of your and your husband's deserts exceeds the power of
     words. We shall use the masks, and they are so beautiful that we
     shall be saved the trouble of providing ourselves with any other
     adornment. On returning to Rome we will see that his Holiness, our
     Master, does whatever is necessary to further our mutual interests.
     We, in compliance with your Excellency's request, will grant the
     prisoner his liberty. We will inform your Illustrious Majesty at
     once, so that you may rejoice in it the moment he is free. We
     commend ourselves to you. From the papal camp near Aquapendente,
     February 1st.

     Your Excellency's friend and brother, the Duke of Romagna, etc.

  CÆSAR.

Cæsar was then near the zenith of his desires--a king's throne in
central Italy. This project, however, was never realized; Louis XII
forbade him further conquests. The Orsini (the cardinal of this house
had just been poisoned in the castle of S. Angelo) and other barons
whose estates were in the vicinity of Rome rose for a final struggle,
and Cæsar was compelled to hasten back to the papal city. Alexander and
his son now turned toward Spain, as Gonsalvo had defeated the French in
Naples and had entered the capital of the kingdom May 14th. Louis XII,
however, despatched a new army under La Tremouille to recapture Naples.
The Marquis of Mantua was likewise in his pay, and in August, 1503, the
army entered the Patrimonium Petri.

Alexander and Cæsar were suddenly taken sick at the same moment. The
Pope died August 18th. It has been affirmed and also denied that both
were poisoned, and proofs equally good in support of both views have
been adduced; it is, therefore, a mooted question.

Aside from her grief due to affection, the death of Lucretia's father
was a serious event for her, as it might weaken her position in Ferrara.
Alexander's power was all that had given her a sense of security, and
now she could no longer feel certain of the continuance of the affection
of her father-in-law or of that of her husband. Well might Alfonso now
recall the words Louis XII had uttered to the effect that on the death
of Alexander he would not know who the lady was whom he had married. The
king one day asked the Ferrarese plenipotentiary at his court how
Madonna Lucretia had taken the Pope's death. When the ambassador replied
that he did not know, Louis remarked, "I know that you were never
satisfied with this marriage; this Madonna Lucretia is not Don Alfonso's
real wife."[184]

       *       *       *       *       *

Lucretia would have been frightened had she read a letter which Ercole
wrote to Giangiorgio Seregni, then his ambassador in Milan, which at
that time was under French control, and in which he disclosed his real
feelings on the Pope's demise.

     GIANGIORGIO: Knowing that many will ask you how we are
     affected by the Pope's death, this is to inform you that he was in
     no way displeasing to us. At one time we wished, for the honor of
     God, our Master, and for the general good of Christendom, that God
     in his goodness and foresight would provide a worthy shepherd, and
     that his Church would be relieved of this great scandal. Personally
     we had nothing to wish for; we were concerned chiefly with the
     honor of God and the general welfare. We may add, however, that
     there was never a Pope from whom we received fewer favors than from
     this one, and this, even after concluding an alliance with him. It
     was only with the greatest difficulty that we secured from him what
     he had promised, but beyond this he never did anything for us. For
     this we hold the Duke of Romagna responsible; for, although he
     could not do with us as he wished, he treated us as if we were
     perfect strangers. He was never frank with us; he never confided
     his plans to us, although we always informed him of ours. Finally
     as he inclined to Spain, and we remained good Frenchmen, we had
     little to look for either from the Pope or his Majesty. Therefore
     his death caused us little grief, as we had nothing but evil to
     expect from the advancement of the above-named duke. We want you to
     give this our confidential statement to Chaumont, word for word, as
     we do not wish to conceal our true feelings from him--but speak
     cautiously to others about the subject and then return this letter
     to our worthy councilor Gianluca.

  BELRIGUARDO, _August 24, 1503_.

This statement was very candid. In view of the advantages which had
accrued to Ercole's State through the marriage with Lucretia, he might
be regarded as ungrateful; he had, however, never looked upon this
alliance as anything more than a business transaction, and so far as his
relations with Cæsar were concerned his view was entirely correct.

Let us now hear what another famous prince--one who was in the
confidence of the Borgias--says regarding the Pope's death. At the time
of this occurrence the Marquis of Mantua was at his headquarters with
the French army in Isola Farnese, a few miles from Rome. From there,
September 22, 1503, he wrote his consort, Isabella, as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS LADY AND DEAREST WIFE: In order that your
     Majesty may be familiar with the circumstances attending the Pope's
     death, we send you the following particulars. When he fell sick, he
     began to talk in such a way that anyone who did not know what was
     in his mind would have thought that he was wandering, although he
     was perfectly conscious of what he said; his words were, "I come;
     it is right; wait a moment." Those who know the secret say that in
     the conclave following the death of Innocent he made a compact with
     the devil, and purchased the papacy from him at the price of his
     soul. Among the other provisions of the agreement was one which
     said that he should be allowed to occupy the Holy See twelve years,
     and this he did with the addition of four days. There are some who
     affirm that at the moment he gave up his spirit seven devils were
     seen in his chamber. As soon as he was dead his body began to
     putrefy and his mouth to foam like a kettle over the fire, which
     continued as long as it was on earth. The body swelled up so that
     it lost all human form. It was nearly as broad as it was long. It
     was carried to the grave with little ceremony; a porter dragged it
     from the bed by means of a cord fastened to the foot to the place
     where it was buried, as all refused to touch it. It was given a
     wretched interment, in comparison with which that of the cripple's
     dwarf wife in Mantua was ceremonious. Scandalous epigrams are every
     day published regarding him.

The reports of Burchard, of the Venetian ambassador Giustinian, of the
Ferrarese envoy Beltrando, and of numerous others describe Alexander's
end in almost precisely the same way, and the fable of the devil or
"babuino" that carried Alexander's soul off is also found in Marino
Sanuto's diary. The highly educated Marquis of Gonzaga, with a
simplicity equal to that of the people of Rome, believed it.

The Mephisto legend of Faust and Don Juan, which was immediately
associated with Alexander's death--even the black dog running about
excitedly in St. Peter's is included--shows what was the opinion of
Alexander's contemporaries regarding the terrible life of the Borgia,
and the extraordinary success which followed him all his days.
Alexander's moral character is, however, so incomprehensible that even
the keenest psychologists have failed to fathom it.

In him neither ambition nor the desire for power, which, in the majority
of rulers, is the motive of their crimes, was the cause of his evil
deeds. Nor was it hate of his fellows, nor cruelty, nor yet a vicious
pleasure in doing evil. It was, however, his sensuality and also his
love for his children--one of the noblest of human sentiments. All
psychological theory would lead us to expect that the weight of his sins
would have made Alexander a gloomy man with reason clouded by fear and
madness, like Tiberius or Louis XI; but instead of this we have ever
before us the cheerful, active man of the world--even until his last
years. "Nothing worries him; he seems to grow younger every day," wrote
the Venetian ambassador scarcely two years before his death.

It is not his passions or his crimes that are incomprehensible, for
similar and even greater crimes have been committed by other princes
both before and after him, but it is the fact that he committed them
while he was Pope. How could Alexander VI reconcile his sensuality and
his cruelty with the consciousness that he was the High Priest of the
Church, God's representative on earth? There are abysses in the human
soul to the depths of which no glance can penetrate. How did he overcome
the warnings, the qualms of conscience, and how was it possible for him
constantly to conceal them under a joyous exterior? Could he believe in
the immortality of the soul and the existence of a divine Being?

When we consider the utter abandon with which Alexander committed his
crimes, we are forced to conclude that he was an atheist and a
materialist. There is a time in the life of every philosophic and
unhappy soul when all human endeavor seems nothing more than the
despairing, purposeless activity of an aggregation of puppets. But in
Alexander VI we discover no trace of a Faust, nothing of his supreme
contempt of the world, of his Titanic skepticism; but we find, on the
contrary, that he possessed an amazingly simple faith, coupled with a
capacity for every crime. The Pope who had Christ's mother painted
with the features of the adulteress Giulia Farnese believed that he
himself enjoyed the special protection of the Virgin.

[Illustration: CARDINAL BEMBO.

From an engraving by G. Benaglia.]

Alexander's life is the very antithesis of the Christian ideal. To be
convinced of this it is only necessary to compare the Pope's deeds with
the teachings of the Gospel. Compare his actions with the Commandments:
"Thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not
bear false witness."

The fact that Rodrigo Borgia was a pope must seem to all the members of
the Church the most unholy thing connected with it, and one which they
have reason bitterly to regret. This fact, however, can never lessen the
dignity of the Church--the greatest production of the human mind--but
does it not destroy a number of transcendental theories which have been
associated with the papacy?

The execrations which all Italy directed against Alexander could
scarcely have reached Lucretia's ears, but she doubtless anticipated
them. Her distress must have been great. Her entire life in Rome
returned and overwhelmed her. Her father had been the cause, first, of
all her unhappiness, and subsequently of all her good fortune. Filial
affection and religious fears must have assailed her at one and the same
time. Bembo describes her suffering. This man, subsequently so famous,
came to Ferrara in 1503, a young Venetian nobleman of the highest
culture and fairest presence. He was warmly received by Lucretia, for
whom he conceived great admiration. The accomplished cavalier wrote her
the following letter of condolence:

     I called upon your Majesty yesterday partly for the purpose of
     telling you how great was my grief on account of your loss, and
     partly to endeavor to console you, and to urge you to compose
     yourself, for I knew that you were suffering a measureless sorrow.
     I was able to do neither the one nor the other; for, as soon as I
     saw you in that dark room, in your black gown, lying weeping, I was
     so overcome by my feelings that I stood still, unable to speak, not
     knowing what to say. Instead of giving sympathy, I myself was in
     need of it, therefore I departed, completely overcome by the sad
     sight, mumbling and speechless, as you noticed or might have
     noticed. Perhaps this happened to me because you had need of
     neither my sympathy nor my condolences; for, knowing my devotion
     and fidelity, you would also be aware of the pain which I felt on
     account of your sorrow, and you in your wisdom may find consolation
     within and not look to others for it. The best way to convey to you
     an idea of my grief is for me to say that fate could cause me no
     greater sorrow than by afflicting you. No other shot could so
     deeply penetrate my soul as one accompanied by your tears.
     Regarding condolence, I can only say to you, as you yourself must
     have thought, that time soothes and lessens all our griefs. So high
     is my opinion of your intelligence and so numerous the proofs of
     your strength of character that I know that you will find
     consolation, and will not grieve too long. For, although you have
     now lost your father, who was so great that Fortune herself could
     not have given you a greater one, this is not the first blow which
     you have received from an evil and hostile destiny. You have
     suffered so much before that your soul must now be inured to
     misfortune. Present circumstances, moreover, require that you
     should not give any one cause to think that you grieve less on
     account of the shock than you do on account of any anxiety as to
     your future position. It is foolish for me to write this to you,
     therefore I will close, commending myself to you in all humility.
     Farewell. In Ostellato.[185]

  AUGUST 22, 1503.


FOOTNOTES:

[180] Maxime intendendo che continuano dormire insieme la nocte. Se ben
intende ch'el Sig. Don Alfonso el dì va a piacere in diversi loci come
giovene; il quale, dice S. Stà. fa molto bene. Beltrando Costabili to
the duke, Rome, April 1, 1502.

[181] Silver carlins. Obverse: JOANNES. BOR. DVX. CAMERINI; the Borgia
arms surrounded with lilies and the crest of the Lenzuoli. Reverse: S.
VENANTIVS DE CAMERI. They are described in the Periodico di Numismatica
e Sfragistica per la Storia d'Italia diretto dal March. C. Strozzi,
Flor. 1870, A. III, Fascic. ii, 70-77, by G. Amati, and also in A. IV,
fasc. vi, 259-265, by M. Santoni. Both writers erroneously describe this
Giov. Borgia as the son of the Duke of Gandia, and Amati even confuses
Valence in Dauphiné with Valencia in Spain.

[182] In the state archives of Modena there are several letters
regarding Lucretia's illness written by the Ferrarese physicians
Ludovicus Carrus and J. Castellus.

[183] The duke to Costabili, his ambassador in Rome, October 9-23, 1502.

[184] Despatch of Bartolomeo Cavalieri to Ercole, Macon, September 8,
1503.

[185] Bembo, Opp. iii, 309.




CHAPTER VI

EVENTS FOLLOWING THE POPE'S DEATH


After Lucretia's first transports had passed she may well have blessed
her good fortune, for to what danger would she have been exposed if she
now, instead of being Alfonso's wife, was still forced to share the
destiny of the Borgias! She was soon able to convince herself that her
position in Ferrara was unshaken. She owed this to her own personality
and to the permanent advantages which she had brought to the house of
Este. She saw, however, that the lives of her kinsmen in Rome were in
danger; there were her sick brother, her child Rodrigo, and Giovanni,
Duke of Nepi; while the Orsini, burning with a desire to wipe out old
scores, were hastening thither to avenge themselves for the blood of
their kinsmen.

She besought her father-in-law to help Cæsar and to preserve his estates
for him. Ercole thought that it would be more to his own advantage for
Cæsar to hold the Romagna than to have it fall into the hands of Venice.
He, therefore, sent Pandolfo Collenuccio thither to urge the people to
remain true to their lord. To his ambassador in Rome he confided his joy
that Cæsar was on the road to recovery.[186]

With the exception of the Romagna, the empire of Alexander's son at once
began to crumble away. The tyrants he had expelled returned to their
cities. Guidobaldo and Elisabetta hastened from Venice to Urbino and
were received with open arms. Still more promptly Giovanni Sforza had
returned from Mantua to Pesaro. The Marquis Gonzaga had sent him the
first news of Alexander's death and of Cæsar's illness, and Sforza
thanked him in the following letter:

     ILLUSTRIOUS SIR AND HONORED BROTHER: I thank your
     Excellency for the good news which you have given me in your
     letter, especially regarding the condition of Valentino. My joy is
     great because I believe my misfortunes are now at an end. I assure
     you that if I return to my country, I shall regard myself as your
     Excellency's creature, and you may dispose of my person and my
     property as you will. I ask you, in case you learn anything more
     regarding Valentino, and especially of his death, that you will
     send me the news, for by so doing you will afford me great joy. I
     commend myself to you at all times.

  MANTUA, _August 25, 1503_.

As early as September 3d, Sforza was able to inform the Marquis that he
had entered Pesaro amid the acclamations of the people. He immediately
had a medal struck in commemoration of the happy event. On one side is
his bust and on the other a broken yoke with the words PATRIA
RECEPTA.[187] Filled with the desire for revenge he punished the rebels
of Pesaro by confiscating their property, casting them into prison, or
by putting them to death. He had a number of the burghers hanged at the
windows of his castle. Even Collenuccio, who had placed himself under
the protection of Lucretia and the duke, in Ferrara, was soon to fall
into his hands. With flattering promises Giovanni induced him to come to
Pesaro, and then on the ground of the complaint he had addressed to
Cæsar Borgia, which Sforza claimed he had only just discovered, he cast
him into prison. Collenuccio, not wholly guiltless as far as his former
master and friend was concerned, resigned himself to his fate and died
in July, 1504.[188]

Meanwhile Lucretia was anxiously following the course of events in Rome.
None of her letters to Cæsar written at this time are preserved, nor are
any of Cæsar's to her. The only ones we have are those which he
exchanged with the Duke of Ferrara, who continued to write him.
September 13th Ercole wrote congratulating him on his recovery, and
informing him that he had sent a messenger to the people of Romagna
urging them to remain true to him.

Cæsar was in Nepi when he received this letter, having gone there
September 2d after he had arranged with the French ambassador in Rome,
on the suggestion of the cardinal, to place himself under the protection
of France. He was accompanied by his mother, Vannozza, his brother
Giuffrè, and, doubtless, also by his little daughter Luisa and the two
children Rodrigo and Giovanni, the latter of whom was Duke of Nepi.
There he was safe, as the French army was camped in the neighborhood.
Just as if nothing had happened, he wrote letters to the Marquis
Gonzaga, who was then at his headquarters in Campagnano. He even sent
him some hunting dogs as a present. There is also in existence a letter
written by Giuffrè to the same Gonzaga, dated Nepi, September 18th.
While here Cæsar learned that his protector and friend, Amboise, had
not been elected pope as he had hoped, but that Piccolomini had been
chosen. September 22d this cardinal, senile and moribund, ascended the
papal throne, assuming the name Pius III. He was the happy father of no
less than twelve children, boys and girls, who would have been brought
up in the Vatican as princes but for his early death. He permitted Cæsar
to return to Rome and even showed him some favor; but scarcely had the
Borgia appeared--October 3d--when the Orsini rose in their wrath and
clamored for the death of their enemy. He and the two children took
refuge in Castle S. Angelo, and October 18th Piccolomini died.

The two children now had no protector but Cæsar and the cardinals whom
Alexander had appointed as their guardians. On the death of the Pope
their duchies crumbled away. The Gaetani returned from Mantua and again
took possession of Sermoneta and all the other estates which had been
bestowed upon the little Rodrigo. Ascanio Sforza demanded either Nepi or
the position of chamberlain, and the last Varano again secured Camerino.

Rodrigo was Duke of Biselli, and as such under the protection of Spain,
Alexander having succeeded in obtaining, May 20, 1502, from Ferdinand
and Isabella of Castile, a diploma by virtue of which the royal house of
Spain confirmed the Borgia family in the possession of all their
Neapolitan estates. In this act Cæsar and his heirs, Don Giuffrè of
Squillace; Don Juan, son of the murdered Gandia; Lucretia, as Duchess of
Biselli, and her son and heir Rodrigo are explicitly named.[189] There
is likewise in the Este archives an instrument which was drawn up in
Lucretia's chancellery, referring to the control of Rodrigo's property,
and also others regarding the little Giovanni.[190] The two children,
Rodrigo and Giovanni, during their early years were reared together.
Lucretia provided for them from Ferrara, as is shown by the record of
her household expenses in 1502 and 1503. There are numerous entries for
velvet and silk and gold brocade which she bought for the purpose of
clothing the children.[191]

In spite of the protection of Spain, Lucretia's son's life was in danger
in Rome, and it was her duty to have the child brought to her; but this
she neglected to do, either because she did not dare to do so, or she
was not strong enough to bring it about, or because she perhaps feared
that the child would be in still greater danger in Ferrara. The Cardinal
of Cosenza, Rodrigo's guardian, suggested to her that she sell all his
personal property and send him to Spain, where he would be safe. In a
letter she informed her father-in-law of this, and he replied as
follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS LADY, OUR DEAREST DAUGHTER-IN-LAW AND
     DAUGHTER: We have received your Majesty's letter, and also the
     one which his Eminence the Cardinal of Cosenza addressed to you and
     which you sent us; this we return to you with our letter; no one
     but ourselves read it. We note the unanimity with which your
     Majesty and the cardinal write. His advice shows such solicitude
     that it is at once apparent that it is due to his affection and
     wisdom. We have considered everything carefully, and it seems to us
     that your Majesty can and ought to do what the worthy monsignor
     suggests. In fact I think your Majesty is bound to do as he advises
     on account of the affection which he displays for you and the
     illustrious Don Rodrigo, your son, who, I am told, owes his life to
     the cardinal. Although Don Rodrigo will be at a distance from you,
     it is better for him to be away and safe than for him to be near
     and in danger, as the cardinal thinks he would be. Your mutual love
     would in no way suffer by this separation. When he grows up he can
     decide, according to circumstances, whether it is best for him to
     return to Italy or remain away. The cardinal's suggestion to
     convert his personal property into money to provide for his support
     and to increase his income--as he states he is anxious to do--is a
     good idea. In brief, as we have said, it seems to us that you had
     best consent. Nevertheless, if your Majesty, who is perfectly
     competent to decide this, determine otherwise, we are perfectly
     willing. Farewell.

  HERCULES, Duke of Ferrara, etc.

  CODEGORIO, _October 4, 1503_.

In the meantime, November 1, 1503, Della Rovere ascended the papal
throne as Julius II. The Rovere, the Borgias, and the Medici, each gave
the Church two popes, and they impressed upon the papacy the political
form of the modern state. In the entire annals of the Church there are
no other families which have so deeply affected the course of history.
Their names suggest innumerable political and moral revolutions. Della
Rovere now released Cæsar, whose bitterest enemy he had once been. It
was apparent that Valentino's destruction was imminent.

Elsewhere we may read how Julius II first used Cæsar for the purpose of
assuring his election by means of his influence on the Spanish
cardinals, and how he subsequently--after the surrender of the
fortresses in the Romagna--cast him aside. Cæsar threw himself into
the arms of Spain, going from Ostia to Naples in October, 1504, where
the great Captain Gonsalvo represented Ferdinand the Catholic. Don
Giuffrè accompanied him. Cardinals Francesco Remolini of Sorrento and
Ludovico Borgia had preceded him to Naples to escape a prosecution with
which they were threatened. There Gonsalvo broke the safe-conduct which
he had given Cæsar. May 27th he seized him in the name of King Ferdinand
and confined him in the castle of Ischia.

[Illustration: JULIUS II.

From an engraving published in 1580.]

We hear nothing of the fate of the Borgia children; apparently they
remained under the protection of the Spanish cardinals in Rome or
Naples. Cæsar, saving nothing, and barely escaping with his life, set
out for Spain. He had previously placed his valuables in the hands of
his friends in Rome to keep for him or to send to Ferrara. December 31,
1503, Duke Ercole wrote his ambassador in Rome to take charge of Cæsar's
chests when the Cardinal of Sorrento should send them to him, and
forward them to Ferrara as the property of the Cardinal d'Este.[192]
Cardinal Remolini died in May, 1507, and Julius II confiscated in his
house twelve chests and eighty-four bales which contained tapestries,
rich stuffs, and other property belonging to Cæsar.[193] The Pope
ordered the Florentines to return certain other property of Cæsar's
consisting of gold, silver, and similar valuables which he had sent to
their city. The Florentine Signory,[194] however, stated that they would
have nothing to do with the matter.

The removal of Cæsar to Spain caused great excitement. No one, neither
Gonsalvo, the Pope, nor King Ferdinand was willing to assume the
responsibility for it. It was even stated that it was due to Gandia's
widow, who was at the Castilian court endeavoring to secure the arrest
of her husband's murderer.[195] The Spanish cardinals and Lucretia
exerted themselves to obtain Cæsar's release. The first news of him came
from Spain in October, 1504. Costabili wrote to Ferrara: "The affairs of
the Duke of Valentino do not appear to be in such a desperate condition
as has been represented, for the Cardinal of Salerno has a letter of the
third instant from Requesenz, the duke's majordomo, which his Majesty
despatched before he reached there, and letters from several cardinals
to his Majesty of Spain. Requesenz writes that the duke was confined
with one servant in the castle of Seville, which, although very strong,
is roomy. He was soon furnished with eight servants. He also writes that
he has spoken to the king regarding freeing Cæsar, and that his Majesty
stated that he had not ordered the duke's confinement but had given
instructions for him to be brought to Spain on account of certain
charges which Gonsalvo had made against him. If these were found to be
untrue he would do as the cardinal requested concerning Cæsar. However,
nothing could be done until the queen recovered. He made the same answer
to the ambassador of the King and Queen of Navarre, who endeavored to
secure the duke's release, and consequently Requesenz hoped that he
would soon be set free."[196]

From this letter of Requesenz it appears that Cæsar was first taken to
Seville and from there was sent to the castle of Medina del Campo in
Castile. The King of France turned a deaf ear to his petitions. No one
in Italy wanted him set free. His sister was the only person in the
peninsula who took any interest in the overthrown upstart, and her
appeals found little support among the Este. It was well known that if
Cæsar returned to Italy he would only cause uneasiness at the court of
Ferrara, and would in all probability make it the center of his
intrigues. The Gonzaga alone appeared not to have entirely withdrawn
their favor from him, although, instead of wishing, as they once had
done, to establish a matrimonial alliance with him, they now connected
themselves with the Rovere, the Marquis of Mantua marrying his young
daughter Leonora to Julius's nephew, Francesco Maria della Rovere, heir
of Urbino, April 9, 1505.[197] It was especially Isabella who, owing to
her affection for her sister-in-law Lucretia, seconded her appeals to
her husband. In the archives of the house of Gonzaga are several letters
written by Lucretia to the marquis in the interests of her brother.

[Illustration: Reduced facsimile of a letter written by Lucretia Borgia
to Marchese Gonzaga.]

August 18, 1505, she wrote him from Reggio that she had taken steps in
Rome to induce the Pope to permit Cardinal Petro Isualles to go to the
Spanish court to endeavor to secure Cæsar's freedom, and she hoped to
succeed. She, therefore, asked the marquis himself to request the Pope
to allow the cardinal to undertake this mission. She wrote to him again
from Belriguardo thanking him for his promise to despatch an agent to
Spain, and she sent him a letter for King Ferdinand and another for her
brother. It is not known whether the cardinal actually undertook this
journey to Madrid, but it is hardly likely that Julius would have
allowed him to do so.


FOOTNOTES:

[186] Minute Ducali a Costabili Beltrando, Ferrara, August 28, 1503.

[187] One of these medals is preserved in the cabinet of the Oliveriana
in Pesaro. It is reproduced in the Nuova Raccolta delle Monete e Zecche
d'Italia di Guidantonio Zanetti, p. 1.

[188] See Giulio Perticari, Op. Bol. 1839, vol. ii. Intorno la morte di
Pandolfo Collenuccio. Perticari's opinion is too one-sided and
optimistic. The beautiful elegy which he states Collenuccio wrote
shortly before his death was written at a much happier time.

[189] The document is in the Este archives.

[190] This is the record already mentioned, Liber Arrendamentorum
terrarum ad IIImos Dominos Rodericum Borgiam de Aragonia, Sermoneti,
etc., et Johannem Borgiam Nepesini Duces, infantes spectantium. Biselli,
1502

[191] Raxo pavonazo trovato in Guardaroba. De dito raso se ne fodrato
dui ziponi e dui boniti per Don Rodrigo e Don Joanne (Braccia 6). De
dito raso se ne posto in la capa de Don Rodrigo--Tela d'oro. De dita
tela se ne posto a fodrare due cape de raxo pavonazo per Don Rodrigo e
Don Joane--braza 12. Dite peze de fuxo doro tirato se ne pose per
commission de la Signora nei saioni de Don Rodrigo e Don Joanne, etc.
Estratti dall' inventario di roba di Lucrezia Borgia, 1502-1503.
Archives of Modena.

[192] Ercole to his ambassador in Rome, December 31, 1503.

[193] Costabili to Ercole, May 6, 1507.

[194] Manfredo Manfredi's despatch to Ercole, Florence, August 20, 1504.

[195] Perche la mogliera del Duca di Candia, che fu morto dal Duca
Valentino ha procurato questo acto de tencione et vendicta et che Lei è
parente del Re di Spagna. Letter of Giovanni Alberto della Pigna to
Ercole, Venice, June 18, 1504.

[196] Costabili's despatch to Duke Ercole, Rome, October 27, 1504.

[197] The contract is in Beneimbene's protocol-book.




CHAPTER VII

COURT POETS--GIULIA BELLA AND JULIUS II--THE ESTE DYNASTY ENDANGERED


During the year, when Lucretia, filled with a sister's love, was
grieving over the fate of her terrible brother, a great change occurred
in her own circumstances, she having become Duchess of Ferrara, January
25, 1505. Her husband, Alfonso, in compliance with his father's wishes,
had undertaken a journey to France, Flanders, and England for the
purpose of becoming acquainted with the courts of those countries. He
was to return to Italy by way of Spain, but while he was at the court of
Henry VII of England he received despatches informing him that his
father was sick. He hastened back to Ferrara, and Ercole died shortly
after his return.

Alfonso ascended the ducal throne at a time when a strong hand and high
intelligence were required to save his State from the dangers which
threatened it. The Republic of Venice had already secured possession of
a part of Romagna, and was planning to cut Ferrara off from the mouth of
the Po; at the same time Julius II was scheming to take Bologna, and if
he succeeded in this he would doubtless also attack Ferrara. In view of
these circumstances it was a fortunate thing for the State that its
chief was a practical, cool-headed man like Alfonso. He was neither
extravagant nor fond of display, and he cared nothing for a brilliant
court. He was indifferent to externals, even to his own clothing. His
chief concern was to increase the efficiency of the army, build
fortresses, and cast cannon. When the affairs of state left him any
leisure he amused himself at a turning-lathe which he had set up, and
also in painting majolica vases, in which art he was exceedingly
skilful. He had no inclination for the higher culture--this he left to
his wife.

The small collection of books which Lucretia brought with her from Rome
shows that she possessed some education and an inclination to take part
in the intellectual movement of Ferrara. We have a catalogue of these
books, of the years 1502 and 1503, which shows what were Lucretia's
tastes. According to this list she possessed a number of books, many of
which were beautifully bound in purple velvet, with gold and silver
mountings: a breviary; a book with the seven psalms and other prayers; a
parchment with miniatures in gold, called _De Coppelle ala Spagnola_;
the printed letters of Saint Catharine of Siena; the Epistles and
Gospels in the vulgar tongue; a religious work in Castilian; a
manuscript collection of Spanish canzone with the proverbs of Domenico
Lopez; a printed work entitled _Aquilla Volante_; another, called
_Supplement of Chronicles_, in the vulgar tongue; the _Mirror of Faith_,
in Italian; a printed copy of Dante, with a commentary; a work in
Italian, on philosophy; the _Legend of the Saints_ in the vulgar tongue;
an old work, _De Ventura_; a _Donatus_; a _Life of Christ_ in Spanish; a
manuscript of Petrarch on parchment, in duodecimo. From this catalogue
it is evident that Lucretia's studies were not very profound. Her books
were confined to religious works and belles-lettres.[198]

[Illustration: ALPHONSO D'ESTE, DUKE OF FERRARA.]

Lucretia established her ducal court in accordance with the dictates of
her own fancy. She was now the soul and center of the intellectual life
of Ferrara. Her cultivated intellect, her beauty, and the irresistible
joyousness of her being charmed all who came into her presence. The
opposition which the members of the house of Este at first had shown her
had disappeared, and, especially in the case of Isabella Gonzaga, had
changed into affection, as is proved by the extensive correspondence
which the two women maintained up to the time of Lucretia's death. In
the archives of the house of Gonzaga there are several hundred of her
letters to the Marchesa of Mantua.

Her relations with the house of Urbino were no less pleasant, and they
continued so even after the death of Guidobaldo in April, 1508, for his
successor was Francesco Maria della Rovere, son-in-law of Isabella
Gonzaga. She was frequently visited by these princes, and she enjoyed
the friendship of a number of remarkable men--Baldassar Castiglione,
Ottaviano Fregoso, Aldus Manutius, and Bembo.

Bembo, who was in love with the beautiful duchess, constantly sang her
praises, and, August 1, 1504, he dedicated to her his dialogue on love,
the _Asolani_, in a letter in which he celebrated her virtues. His
friend Aldo first spent some time in Ferrara at the court of Ercole, and
subsequently went to the Pio at Carpi; finally he settled in Venice,
where he printed the _Asolani_ in the year 1505 and dedicated it to
Lucretia. There is no doubt about Bembo's passion for the duchess, but
it would be a fruitless undertaking to endeavor to prove, from the
evidences of affection which the beautiful woman bestowed upon him,
that it passed the bounds of propriety. The belief that it did is due to
the letters which Bembo wrote her, and which are printed in his works,
and still more to those which Lucretia addressed to him. From 1503 to
1506--in which year he removed to the court of Guidobaldo--the
intellectual Venetian enjoyed the closest friendship with Lucretia. He
corresponded with her while he was living with his friends the Strozzi
in Villa Ostellato. These letters, especially those addressed to an
"anonymous friend," by which designation he clearly meant Lucretia, are
inspired by friendship, and display a tender confidence. Lucretia's
letters to Bembo are preserved in the Ambrosiana in Milan, where they
and the lock of blond hair near them are examined by every one who
visits the famous library. The letters are written in her own hand, and
there is no doubt of their authenticity; concerning the lock of hair
there is some uncertainty; still it may be one of the pledges of
affection which the happy Bembo carried away with him. Lucretia's
letters to Bembo were first examined and described by Baldassare
Oltrocchi, and subsequently by Lord Byron; in 1859 they were published
in Milan by Bernardo Gatti.[199] There are nine in all--seven in Italian
and two in Spanish. They are accompanied by a Castilian canzone.

It seems certain that she felt more than mere friendship for Bembo, for
she was young, and he was an accomplished cavalier, fair, amiable, and
witty, who cast the rough Alfonso completely in the shade. He excited
the latter's jealousy, and the danger which threatened him may have
been the cause of his removal to Urbino. Lucretia kept up her friendly
relations with him until the year 1513.

Several other poets in Ferrara devoted their talents to her
glorification. The verses which the two Strozzi addressed to her are
even more ardent than those of Bembo--perhaps because their authors
possessed greater poetical talent. Tito, the father, experienced the
same feelings for the beautiful duchess as did his genial son Ercole,
and he expressed them in the same poetical forms and imagery. This very
similarity indicates that their devotion was merely æsthetic. Tito sang
of a rose which Lucretia had sent him, but his son excelled him in an
epigram on the _Rose of Lucretia_, which could hardly have been the same
one his father had received.[200]

Tito, in his epigram, described himself as senescent, and consequently
not likely to be wounded by Cupid's darts, but he, nevertheless, was
ensnared by Lucretia's charms. "In her," so he says, "all the majesty of
heaven and earth are personified, and her like is not to be found on
earth." He addressed an epigram to Bembo, with whose passion for
Lucretia he was acquainted, in which he derives the name Lucretia from
"_lux_" and "_retia_," and makes merry over the _net_ in which Bembo was
caught.[201]

His son Ercole describes her as a Juno in good works, a Pallas in
decorum, and a Venus in beauty. In verses in imitation of Catullus he
sang of the marble Cupid which the duchess had set up in her salon,
saying that the god of Love had been turned into stone by her glance. He
compared Lucretia's beautiful eyes with the sun, that blinds whosoever
ventures to look at it; like Medusa, whose glance turned the beholder to
stone, yet in this case "the pains of love still continued immortalized
in the stone."

Is it possible to believe that these poets would have written such
verses if they had considered Lucretia Borgia guilty of the crimes
which, even after her father's death, had been ascribed to her by
Sannazzaro?

Antonio Tebaldeo, Calcagnini, and Giraldi sang of Lucretia's beauty and
virtue. Marcelle Filosseno dedicated a number of charming sonnets to
her, in which he compared her with Minerva and Venus. Jacopo Caviceo,
who in the last years of his life (he died in 1511) was vicar of the
bishopric of Ferrara, dedicated to her his wonderful romance
"Peregrino," with an inscription in which he describes her as beautiful,
learned, wise, and modest. The number of poets who threw themselves at
her feet was certainly large, and she doubtless received their flattery
with the same satisfied vanity with which a beautiful woman of to-day
would accept such offerings. Some of these poets may really have been in
love with her, while others burned their incense as court flatterers;
all, doubtless, were glad to find in her an ideal to serve as a platonic
inspiration for their rhymes and verses.

Ariosto excepted, these poets are to us nothing more than names in the
history of literature. The great poet's relations with the princely
house of Ferrara began about 1503, when he entered the service of
Cardinal Ippolito. Soon after this--in the year 1505--he began his great
epic, and the beautiful duchess appears to have had very little
influence on his work. He refers to her occasionally, especially in a
stanza for which she owed the poet little thanks if she foresaw his
immortality--the eighty-third stanza in the forty-second canto of the
_Orlando Furioso_, in which he places Lucretia's portrait in the temple
to woman. The inscription under her portrait says that her fatherland,
Rome, on account of her beauty and modesty must regard her as excelling
Lucretia of old.[202]

A recent Italian writer, speaking of Ariosto's adulation, says, "However
much of it may be looked upon as court flattery, and as due to the
poet's obligations to the house of Este, we know that the art of
flattery had also its laws and bounds, and that one who ascribed such
qualities to a prince who was known to be entirely lacking in them would
be regarded as little acquainted with the world and with court manners,
for he would cause the person to be publicly ridiculed. In this case the
praise would degenerate into satire and the incautious flatterer would
fare badly."[203] Flattery has always been the return which court poets
make for their slavery. Ariosto and Tasso were no more free from it than
were Horace and Virgil. When the poet of the _Orlando Furioso_
discovered that Cardinal Ippolito was beginning to treat him coldly, he
thought to strike out everything he had said in his praise. Although it
was probably merely the name Lucretia which Ariosto and other poets
used--comparing it with the classic ideal of feminine honor--it is,
nevertheless, difficult wholly to reject the interpretation of
Lucretia's modern advocates, for, even when this comparison was not
made, other admirers--Ariosto especially--praised the beautiful duchess
for her decorum. This much is certain: her life in Ferrara was regarded
as a model of feminine virtue.

There was a young woman in her household who charmed all who came in
contact with her until she became the cause of a tragedy at the court.
This was the Angela Borgia whom Lucretia had brought with her from Rome,
and who had been affianced to Francesco Maria Rovere. It is not known
when the betrothal was set aside, although it may have been shortly
after Alexander's death. The heir of Urbino married, as has been stated,
Eleonora Gonzaga. Among Angela's admirers were two of Alfonso's
brothers, who were equally depraved, Cardinal Ippolito and Giulio, a
natural son of Ercole. One day when Ippolito was assuring Angela of his
devotion, she began to praise the beauty of Giulio's eyes, which so
enraged his utterly degenerate rival that he planned a horrible revenge.
The cardinal hired assassins and commanded them to seize his brother
when he was returning from the hunt, and to tear out the eyes which
Donna Angela had found so beautiful. The attempt was made in the
presence of the cardinal, but it did not succeed as completely as he had
wished. The wounded man was carried to his palace, where the physicians
succeeded in saving one of his eyes. This crime, which occurred November
3, 1505,[204] aroused the whole court. The unfortunate Giulio demanded
that it be paid in kind, but the duke merely banished the cardinal. The
injured man brooded on revenge, and the direst consequences followed.

Ariosto, the wicked cardinal's courtier, fell into difficulties from
which he escaped in a way not altogether honorable, which lessens the
worth of the praise he bestowed upon Lucretia. He wrote a poem in which
he endeavored to clear the murderer by blackening Giulio's character and
concealing the motive for the crime. In this same eclogue he poured
forth the most ardent praise of Lucretia. He lauded not only her beauty,
her good works, and her intellect, but above all her modesty, for which
she was famous before coming to Ferrara.[205]

A year later, December 6, 1506, Lucretia married Donna Angela to Count
Alessandro Pio of Sassuolo, and by a remarkable coincidence her son
Giberto subsequently became the husband of Isabella, a natural daughter
of Cardinal Ippolito.

In November, 1505, an event occurred in the Vatican which aroused great
interest on the part of Lucretia, and likewise caused her most painful
memories. Giulia Farnese, the companion of her unhappy youth, made her
appearance there under circumstances which must have overcome her. We
know nothing of the life of Alexander's mistress during the years
immediately preceding and following his death. She and her husband,
Orsini, were living in Castle Bassanello, to which her mother Adriana
had also removed. At least Giulia was there in 1504, about which time
one of the Orsini committed one of those crimes with which the history
of the great families of Italy is filled. Her sister, Girolama Farnese,
widow of Puccio Pucci, had entered into a second marriage--this time
with Count Giuliano Orsini of Anguillara--and had been murdered by her
stepson, Giambattista of Stabbia, because, as it was alleged, she had
tried to poison him. Giulia buried her deceased sister in 1504, at
Bassanello.

She must have gone to Rome the following year and taken up her abode in
the Orsini palace. Her husband was not living, and Adriana may also have
been dead, for she was not present at the ceremony in the Vatican in
November, 1505, when Giulia, to the great astonishment of all Rome,
married her only daughter, Laura, to the nephew of the Pope, Niccolò
Rovere, brother of Cardinal Galeotto.

Laura passed among all those who were acquainted with her mother's
secrets as the child of Alexander VI and natural sister of the Duchess
of Ferrara. When she was only seven years old her mother had betrothed
her to Federico, the twelve-year-old son of Raimondo Farnese; this was
April 2, 1499. This alliance was subsequently dissolved to enable her to
enter into a union as brilliant as her heart could possibly desire.

The consent of Julius II to the betrothal of his nephew with the bastard
daughter of Alexander VI is one of the most astonishing facts in the
life of this pope. It perhaps marks his reconciliation with the Borgia.
He had hated the men of this family while he was hostile to them, but
his hatred was not due to any moral feelings. Julius II felt no contempt
for Alexander and Cæsar, but, on the other hand, it is more likely that
he marveled at their strength as did Macchiavelli. We do not know that
he had any personal relations with Lucretia Borgia after he ascended
the papal throne, although this certainly would have been probable owing
to the position of the house of Este. On one occasion he deeply offended
Lucretia when, in reinstating Guglielmo Gaetani in possession of
Sermoneta by a bull dated January 24, 1504, he applied the most
uncomplimentary epithets to Alexander VI, describing him as a "swindler"
who had enriched his own children by plundering others.[206] This
especially concerned Lucretia, for she had been mistress of Sermoneta,
which had subsequently been given to her son Rodrigo.

Later, after Alfonso ascended the ducal throne, the relations between
the Pope and Lucretia must have become more friendly. She kept up a
lively correspondence with Giulia Farnese, and doubtless received from
her the news of the betrothal of her daughter to a member of the Pope's
family.[207]

The betrothal took place in the Vatican, in the presence of Julius II,
Cardinal Alessandro Farnese, and the mother of the young bride. This was
one of the greatest triumphs of Giulia's romantic life--she had overcome
the opposition of another pope, and one who had been the enemy of
Alexander VI, and the man who had ruined Cæsar. She, the adulteress, who
had been branded by the satirists of Rome and of all Italy as mistress
of Alexander VI, now appeared in the Vatican as one of the most
respectable women of the Roman aristocracy, "the illustrious Donna
Giulia de Farnesio," Orsini's widow, for the purpose of betrothing the
daughter of Alexander and herself to the Pope's nephew, thereby
receiving absolution for the sins of her youth. She was still a
beautiful and fascinating woman, and at most not more than thirty years
of age.

This good fortune and the rehabilitation of her character (if, in view
of the morals of the time, we may so describe it) she owed to the
intercession of her brother the cardinal. Political considerations
likewise induced the Pope to consent to the alliance, for, in order to
carry out his plan for extending the pontifical States, it was necessary
for him to win over the great families of Rome. He secured the support
of the Farnese and of the Orsini; in May, 1506, he married his own
natural daughter Felice to Giangiordano Orsini of Bracciano, and in July
of the same year he gave his niece, Lucretia Gara Rovere, sister of
Niccolò, to Marcantonio Colonna as wife.

Again Giulia Farnese vanished from sight, and neither under Julius II
nor Leo X does she reappear. March 14, 1524, she made a will which was
to be in favor of her nieces Isabella and Costanza in case her daughter
should die without issue. March 23d the Venetian ambassador in Rome,
Marco Foscari, informed his Signory that Cardinal Farnese's sister,
Madama Giulia, formerly mistress of Pope Alexander VI, was dead. From
this we are led to assume that she died in Rome. No authentic likeness
of Giulia Bella has come down to us, but tradition says that one of the
two reclining marble figures which adorn the monument of Paul
III--Farnese--in St. Peter's, Justice, represents his sister, Giulia
Farnese, while the other, Wisdom, is the likeness of his mother,
Giovanella Gaetani.

Giulia's daughter was mistress of Bassanello and Carbognano. She had one
son, Giulio della Rovere, who subsequently became famous as a
scholar.[208]

In the meantime the attempt against Giulio d'Este had been attended by
such consequences that the princely house of Ferrara found itself
confronted by a grave danger. Giulio complained to Alfonso of injustice,
while the cardinal's numerous friends considered his banishment too
severe a punishment. Ippolito had a great following in Ferrara. He was a
lavish man of the world, while the duke, owing to his utilitarian ways
and practical life, repelled the nobility. A party was formed which
advocated a revolution. The house of Este had survived many of these
attempts. One had occurred when Ercole ascended the throne.

Giulio succeeded in winning over to his cause certain disaffected nobles
and conscienceless men who were in the service of the duke; among them
Count Albertino Boschetti of San Cesario; his son-in-law, the captain of
the palace guard; a chamberlain; one of the duke's minstrels, and a few
others. Even Don Ferrante, Alfonso's own brother, who had been his proxy
when he married Lucretia in Rome, entered into the conspiracy. The plan
was, first to despatch the cardinal with poison; and, as this act would
be punished if the duke were allowed to live, he was to be destroyed at
a masked ball, and Don Ferrante was to be placed on the throne.

The cardinal, who was well served by his spies in Ferrara, received news
of what was going on and immediately informed his brother Alfonso. This
was in July, 1506. The conspirators sought safety in flight, but only
Giulio and the minstrel Guasconi succeeded in escaping, the former to
Mantua and the latter to Rome. Count Boschetti was captured in the
vicinity of Ferrara. Don Ferrante apparently made no effort to escape.
When he was brought before the duke he threw himself at his feet and
begged for mercy; but Alfonso in his wrath lost control of himself, and
not only cast him from him but struck out one of his eyes with a staff
which he had in his hand. He had him confined in the tower of the
castle, whither Don Giulio, whom the Marchese of Mantua had delivered
after a short resistance, was soon brought. The trial for treason was
quickly ended, and sentence of death passed upon the guilty. First
Boschetti and two of his companions were beheaded in front of the
Palazzo della Ragione. This scene is faithfully described in a
contemporaneous Ferrarese manuscript on criminology now preserved in the
library of the university.

The two princes were to be executed in the court of the castle, August
12th. The scaffold was erected, the tribunes were filled, the duke took
his place, and the unfortunate wretches were led to the block. Alfonso
made a signal--he was about to show mercy to his brothers. They lost
consciousness and were carried back to prison. Their punishment had been
commuted to life imprisonment. They spent years in captivity, surviving
Alfonso himself. Apparently it caused him no contrition to know that his
miserable brothers were confined in the castle where he dwelt and held
his festivities. Such were the Este whom Ariosto in his poem lauded to
the skies. Not until February 22, 1540, did death release Don Ferrante,
then in the sixty-third year of his age. Don Giulio was granted his
freedom in 1559, and died March 24, 1561, aged eighty-three.


FOOTNOTES:

[198] Another list of the year 1516 contains a number of magnificently
bound breviaries and books of offices, but there are no additional works
of a secular nature. For this catalogue I am indebted to Foucard, who
copied it from an inventory of the personal property of Lucretia Borgia
in the archives of Modena.

[199] Dissertazione del Sig. Dottor Baldassare Oltrocchi sopra i primi
amori di Pietro Bembo, indirizzata al sig. Conte Giammaria Mazzucchelli
Bresciana. In the Nuova Raccolta d'Opuscoli Scientifici del Calogerà,
vol. iv. Lettere di Lucrezia Borgia a messer Pietro Bembo dagli
autografi conservati in un Codice della Bibl. Ambrosiana. Milano eoi
Tipi dell' Ambrosiana, 1859.

[200]

  Laeto nata solo, dextrâ, rosa, pollice carpta;
    Unde tibi solito pulcrior, unde color?
  Num te iterum tinxit Venus? an potius tibi tantum
    Borgia purpureo praebuit ore decus?

[201]

    Ad Bembum de Lucretia.
  Si mutatur in X. C. tertia nominis hujus
    Littera lux fiet, quod modo luc fuerat.
  Retia subsequitur, cui tu hæc subiunge paraque,
    Subscribens lux hæc retia, Bembe, parat.

[202]

  La prima inscrizion ch'agli occhi occorre,
    Con lungo honor Lucrezia Borgia noma,
  La cui bellezza ed onestà preporre
    Debbe all' antiqua la sua patria Roma.
  I duo che voluto han sopra sè torre
    Tanto eccellente ed onorata soma,
  Noma lo scritto: Antonio Tebaldeo,
    Ercole Strozza: un Lino, e un Orfeo.

[203] See the Marquis Giuseppe Campori's work: Una Vittima della Storia,
Lucrezia Borgia, in the Nuova Antologia, August 31, 1866.

[204] Frizzi Storia di Ferrara, iv, 205.

[205] Cose tutte che sono in ontà del vero, says Antonio Cappelli.
Introduction to his Lettere di Lodovico Ariosto, Bologna, 1866. The
eclogue is in Ariosto's Opere Minori i. 267. Angela Borgia is mentioned
in the last canto (stanza 4) of the Orlando.

[206] The bull is in the archives of the house of Gaetani.

[207] As late as January 15, 1519, a few months before her death,
Lucretia wrote to Giulia. The 13th of that month, Pietro Torelli, the
Ferrarese ambassador in Florence, reported that he had received a letter
for Giulia and would attend to it. Archives of Modena.

[208] Fioravanti Martinelli Carbognano illustrado, Rome, 1644.




CHAPTER VIII

ESCAPE AND DEATH OF CÆSAR


It was at the time of this great tragedy in Ferrara, which must have
vividly reminded Lucretia of her own experiences in the papal city, that
Julius II left Rome for the purpose of carrying out his bold plans for
reestablishing the pontifical states by driving out the tyrants who had
succeeded in escaping Cæsar's sword. Alfonso, as a vassal of the Church,
sent him some troops, but he did not take part personally in the
expedition. Guidobaldo of Urbino, who had adopted Francesco Maria Rovere
as his son and heir, and the Marchese Gonzaga served in the army of
Julius II. September 12, 1506, the Pope entered Perugia, whose tyrants,
the Baglioni, surrendered. November 11th he made his entry into Bologna,
Giovanni Bentivoglio and his wife Ginevra having fled with their
children. There Julius halted, casting longing looks at Romagna,
formerly Cæsar's domain, but now occupied by the Venetian army.

It is a curious coincidence that it was at this very moment that the
Duke of Romagna, who had vanished from the stage, again appeared. In
November Lucretia received news that her brother had escaped from his
prison in Spain, and she immediately communicated the fact to the
Marchese Gonzaga, who, as field marshal of the Church, was in
Bologna.[209]

Lucretia had frequently exerted herself to secure Cæsar's freedom and
had remained in constant communication with him by messenger. Her
petitions, however, had produced no effect upon the King of Spain.
Finally, owing to favorable circumstances, Cæsar succeeded in effecting
his escape. Zurita says that Ferdinand the Catholic intended to remove
him from his prison in the spring of 1506 to Aragon, and then to take
him to Naples, whither he was going to place the affairs of the kingdom
in order, and to assure himself of Gonsalvo, whose loyalty he suspected.
His son-in-law, the Archduke Philip, with whom he was at variance on
account of his pretensions to the kingdom of Castile, refused to allow
Cæsar to be released from Medina, a Castilian place. While Ferdinand was
absent on his journey, Philip died at Burgos, September 5, 1506, and
Cæsar took advantage of this opportunity and the king's absence to
escape. This he did with the help of the Castilian party, who hoped to
profit by the services of the famous condottiere.

October 25th he escaped from the castle of Medina to the estates of the
Count of Benavente, where he remained. Some of the barons who wished to
place the government of Castile in the hands of Maximilian, Philip's
father, were anxious to send him to Flanders as their messenger to the
emperor's court. As this plan fell through, Cæsar betook himself to
Pamplona to his brother-in-law, the King of Navarre, who had become
embroiled in this Castilian intrigue and was at war with his rebellious
constable the Count of Lerin.

From that place Cæsar wrote the Marchese of Mantua, and this is the
last letter written by him which has been discovered.

     ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE: I inform you that after innumerable
     disappointments it has pleased God, our Master, to free me and to
     release me from prison. How this happened you will learn from my
     secretary Federigo, the bearer. May this, by God's never-failing
     mercy, redound to his great service. At present I am with the
     illustrious King and Queen of Navarre in Pamplona, where I arrived
     December 3d, as your Majesty will learn from the above-named
     Federigo, who will also inform you of all that has occurred. You
     may believe whatever he tells you in my name, just as if I myself
     were speaking to you.

     I commend myself to your Excellency forever. From Pamplona,
     December 7, 1506. Your Majesty's friend and younger brother,

  CÆSAR.

The letter has a wafer bearing the combined arms of Cæsar with the
inscription _Cæsar Borgia de Francia Dux Romandiolæ_. One shield has the
Borgia arms, with the French lilies, and a helmet from which seven
snarling dragons issue; the other the arms of Cæsar's wife, with the
lilies of France, and a winged horse rising from the casque.

Cæsar's secretary reached Ferrara the last day of December. This same
Federigo had been in that city once before,--during July of the year
1506, and had been sent back to Spain by the duchess.[210] He now
returned to Italy, not for the purpose of bringing the news of his
master's escape, but to learn how matters stood and to ascertain whether
there was any prospect of restoring the Duke of Romagna. His majordomo,
Requesenz, who was in Ferrara in January, had come for the same
purpose. No time, however, could have been less favorable for such
schemes than the year 1506, for Julius II had just taken possession of
Bologna. The Marchese Gonzaga, upon whose good will Cæsar still
reckoned, was commander of the papal army, which--it was believed--was
planning an expedition into the Romagna. This was the only country where
there was the slightest possibility of Cæsar's succeeding in reacquiring
his power, for his good government had left a favorable impression on
the Romagnoles, who would have preferred his authority to that of the
Church. Zurita, the historian of Aragon, is correct when he says:
"Cæsar's escape caused the Pope great anxiety, for the duke was a man
who would not have hesitated to throw all Italy in turmoil for the
purpose of carrying out his own plans; he was greatly beloved, not only
by the men of war, but also by many people in Ferrara and in the States
of the Church--something which seldom falls to the lot of a tyrant."

Cæsar's messenger ventured to Bologna in spite of the presence of the
Pope, and there the latter had him seized. This was reported to
Lucretia, who immediately wrote to the Marchese of Gonzaga as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS BROTHER-IN-LAW AND HONORED BROTHER: I have
     just learned that by command of his Holiness our Federigo, the
     chancellor of the duke, my brother, has been seized in Bologna; I
     am sure he has done nothing to deserve this, for he did not come
     here with the intention of doing or saying anything that would
     displease or injure his Holiness--his Excellency would not
     countenance or risk anything of this sort against his Holiness. If
     Federigo had been given any order of this nature he would have
     first informed me of it, and I should never have permitted him to
     give any ground for complaint, for I am a devoted and faithful
     servant of the Pope, as is also my illustrious husband. I know of
     no other reason for his coming than to inform us of the duke's
     escape. Therefore I consider his innocence as beyond question. This
     apprehension of the courier is especially displeasing to me because
     it will injure my brother, the duke, making it appear that he is
     not in his Holiness's favor, and the same may be said of myself. I,
     therefore, urgently request your Excellency--of course if you are
     disposed to do me a favor--to use every means to induce his
     Holiness to release the messenger promptly, which I trust he will
     do out of his own goodness, and owing to the mediation of your
     Excellency. There is no way your Majesty could give me greater
     pleasure than by doing this, for the sake of my own honor and every
     other consideration, and in no way could I become more beholden to
     you. Therefore, I commend myself again to you with all my heart.
     Your Majesty's Sister and Servant,

  THE DUCHESS OF FERRARA.

  FERRARA, _January 15, 1507_.

Cæsar had sent his former majordomo, Don Jaime de Requesenz, from
Pamplona to the King of France to ask him to allow him to return to his
court and enter his service. To this, however, Louis XII would not
listen. The messenger met with a severe rebuff when he demanded in
Cæsar's name the duchy of Valentinois and the revenue which he had
formerly enjoyed as a prince of the French house.[211]

Death soon put an end to the hopes of the famous adventurer. While in
the service of his brother-in-law, the King of Navarre, he conducted the
siege of the castle of Viana, which was defended by the king's vassal
Don Loys de Beamonte, Count of Lerin. There he fell, bravely fighting,
March 12, 1507. This place is situated in the diocese of Pamplona, and,
as Zurita remarks, Cæsar's death by a curious coincidence occurred on
the anniversary of the day on which to him had been given the bishopric
of Pamplona. There he was interred with high honors. Like Nero he was
only thirty-one years of age at the time of his demise.

The fall of this terrible man, before whom all Italy had once trembled,
and whose name was celebrated far and wide, relieved Julius II of a
pretender who in time might have been a hindrance to him; for Cæsar, as
an ally and a condottiere of Venice, would have spared no effort to
force him into a war with the Republic for the possession of Romagna, or
into a war with France on his withdrawal from the League of Cambray, and
the revengeful Louis XII would certainly have brought Cæsar back to the
Romagna for the purpose of availing himself both of his former
connections in that country, and also of his great talents as a soldier.

The news of Cæsar's death reached Ferrara while the duke was absent, in
April, 1507, by way of Rome and Naples. His counselor Magnanini and
Cardinal Ippolito withheld the news from the duchess, who was near her
confinement. She was merely told that her brother had been wounded in
battle. Greatly distressed, she betook herself to one of the convents in
the city, where she spent two days in prayer before returning to the
castle. As soon as the talk regarding Cæsar's death reached her ears she
despatched her servant Tullio for Navarre, but on the way he received a
report of the burial and turned back to Ferrara. Grasica, one of
Cassar's equerries, also came to Ferrara and gave a full report of the
circumstances attending the death of his master, at whose interment in
Pamplona he had been present. The cardinal therefore decided to tell
Lucretia the truth, and gave her her husband's letter containing the
news of Cæsar's death.[212]

The duchess displayed more self-control than had been expected. Her
sorrow was mingled with the bitter recollection of all she had
experienced and suffered in Rome, the memory of which had been dulled
but not wholly obliterated by her life in Ferrara. Twice the murder of
her young husband Alfonso must have come back to her in all its
horror--once on the death of her father and again on that of her
terrible brother. If her grief was not inspired by the overwhelming
memories of former times, the sight of Lucretia weeping for Cæsar Borgia
is a beautiful example of sisterly love--the purest and most noble of
human sentiments.

Valentino certainly did not appear to his sister or to his
contemporaries in the form in which we now behold him, for his crimes
seem blacker and blacker, while his good qualities and that
which--following Macchiavelli--we may call his political worth, are
constantly diminishing. To every thinking man the power which this young
upstart, owing to an unusual combination of circumstances, acquired is
merely a proof of what the timid, short-sighted generality of mankind
will tolerate. They tolerated the immature greatness of Cæsar Borgia,
before whom princes and states trembled for years, and he was not the
last bold but empty idol of history before whom the world has tottered.

Although Lucretia may not have had a very clearly defined opinion of her
brother, neither her memory nor her sight could have been wholly dulled.
She herself forgave him, but she must, nevertheless, have asked herself
whether the incorruptible Judge of all mankind would forgive him--for
she was a devout and faithful Catholic according to the religious
standards of the age. She doubtless had innumerable masses said for his
soul, and assailed heaven with endless prayers.

Ercole Strozzi sought to console her in pompous verse; in 1508 he
dedicated to her his elegy on Cæsar. This fantastic poem is remarkable
as having been the production of this man, and it might be defined as
the poetic counterpart of Macchiavelli's "Prince." First the poet
describes the deep sorrow of the two women, Lucretia and Charlotte,
lamenting the deceased with burning tears, even as Cassandra and
Polyxena bewailed the loss of Achilles. He depicts the triumphant
progress of Cæsar, who resembled the great Roman by his deeds as well as
in name. He enumerated the various cities he had seized in Romagna, and
complained that an envious Fate had not permitted him to subjugate more
of them, for if it had, the fame of the capture of Bologna would not
have fallen to Julius II. The poet says that the Genius of Rome had once
appeared to the people and foretold the fall of Alexander and Cæsar,
complaining that all hope of the savior of the line of Calixtus,--whom
the gods had promised,--would expire with them. Eratus had told the poet
of these promises made in Olympus. Pallas and Venus, one as the friend
of Cæsar and Spain, the other as the patron of Italy, unwilling that
strangers should rule over the descendants of the Trojans, had
complained to Jupiter of his failure to fulfil his promise to give Italy
a great king who would be likewise her savior. Jupiter had reassured
them by saying that fate was inexorable. Cæsar like Achilles had to die,
but from the two lines of Este and Borgia, which sprang from Troy and
Greece, the promised hero would come. Pallas thereupon appeared in Nepi,
where, after Alexander's death, Cæsar lay sick of the pest, in his camp,
and, in the form of his father, informed him of his approaching end,
which he, conscious of his fame, must suffer like a hero. Then she
disappeared in the form of a bird and hastened to Lucretia in Ferrara.
After the poet described Cæsar's fall in Spain he sought to console the
sister with philosophic platitudes, and then with the assurance that she
was to be the mother of the child who was destined for such a great
career.[213]

According to Zurita, Cæsar left but one legitimate child, a daughter,
who was living with her mother under the protection of the King of
Navarre. Her name was Luisa; later she married Louis de la Tremouille,
and on his death Philipp of Bourbon, Baron of Busset. Her mother,
Charlotte d'Albret, having suffered much in life, gave herself up to
holy works. She retired from the world, and died March 11, 1504. Two
natural children of Cæsar, a son Girolamo and a daughter Lucretia were
living in Ferrara, where the latter became a nun and died in 1573, she
being at the time abbess of San Bernardino.[214] As late as February,
1550, an illegitimate son of Cæsar's appeared in Paris. He was a priest,
and he announced that he was the natural son of the Duke of Romagna, and
called himself Don Luigi. He had come from Rome to ask assistance of the
King of France, because, as he said, his father had met his death while
he was in the service of the French crown in the kingdom of Navarre.
They gave him a hundred ducats, with which he returned to Rome.[215]


FOOTNOTES:

[209] In the record of her household expenses, under date of November
20, 1506, there is the following entry: A Garzia Spagnolo per andare a
Venezia per la nova del Duca Valentino che era fugito de progione.
November 27, she wrote to Gonzaga.

[210] Record of Lucretia's household expenses for the year 1506
(Archives of Modena): July 31, 1506, a Federigo Cancelliere del Duca
Valentino per andare per le poste in Spagna dal Duca.

[211] Despatch of the Ferrarese ambassador to France, Manfredo Manfredi,
to Duke Alfonso, January, 1507.

[212] Letters of Hieronymus Magnaninus to his master, Alfonso, Ferrara,
April 11 to 22, archives of the Este.

[213] Cæsaris Borgiæ Ducis Epicedium per Herculem Strozzam ad Divam
Lucretiam Borgiam Ferrariæ Ducem. In Strozzi Poetæ Pater et Filius,
Paris, 1530.

[214] See Cittadella's genealogy of the house of Borgia.

[215] Letter of Giulio Alvarotti from France, February 14, 1550, in the
archives of Modena.




CHAPTER IX

MURDER OF ERCOLE STROZZI--DEATH OF GIOVANNI SFORZA AND OF LUCRETIA'S
ELDEST SON


Alfonso's hopes of having an heir had twice been disappointed by
miscarriages, but April 4, 1508, his wife bore him a son, who was
baptized with the name of his grandfather.

Ercole Strozzi regarded the birth of this heir to the throne as the
fulfilment of his prophesy. In a _genethliakon_ he flatters the duchess
with the hope that the deeds of her brother Cæsar and of her father
Alexander would be an incentive to her son--both would remind him of
Camillus and the Scipios as well as of the heroes of Greece.

Only a few weeks after this the genial poet met with a terrible end. His
devotion to Lucretia was doubtless merely that of a court gallant and
poet celebrating the beauty of his patroness. The real object of his
affections was Barbara Torelli, the youthful widow of Ercole
Bentivoglio, who gave him the preference over another nobleman. Strozzi
married her in May, 1508.

Thirteen days later, on the morning of June 6th, the poet's dead body
was found near the Este palace, which is now known as the Pareschi,
wrapped in his mantle, some of his hair torn out by the roots, and
wounded in two and twenty places. All Ferrara was in an uproar, for she
owed her fame to Strozzi, one of the most imaginative poets of his time,
the pet of everybody, the friend of Bembo and Ariosto, the favorite of
the duchess and of the entire court. On his father's death he had
succeeded to his position as chief of the twelve judges of Ferrara. He
was still in the flower of his youth, being only twenty-seven years old.

This terrible event must have reminded Lucretia of the day when her
brother Gandia was slain. The mystery attending these crimes has never
been dispelled. "No one named the author of the murder, for the pretor
was silent," says Paul Jovius in his eulogy of the poet. But who, except
those who had the power to do so could have compelled the court to
remain silent?

Some have ascribed the deed to Alfonso, stating that he destroyed
Strozzi on account of his passion for the latter's wife; others claim
that he simply revenged himself for the favor which Lucretia had shown
the poet. Recent writers who have endeavored to fathom the mystery and
who have availed themselves of authentic records of the time regard
Alfonso as the guilty one.[216] One of the strongest proofs of his guilt
is found in the fact that the duke, who not only had punished the
conspirators against his own life so cruelly, and who had always shown
himself an unyielding supporter of the law, allowed the matter to drop.

Lucretia has even been charged with the murder on the ground of her
jealousy of Barbara Torelli, or owing to her fear that Strozzi might
disclose her relations with Bembo, especially as he had hoped to obtain
the cardinal's hat through the influence of the duchess, in which he was
disappointed. None of the later historians has given any credence to
this theory. Ariosto did not believe it, for if he did how could he have
made Ercole Strozzi the herald of her fame in the temple of honor in
which he placed the women of the house of Este? Even if he wrote this
stanza before the poet's death--which is not probable--he would
certainly have changed it before the publication of the poem, which was
in 1516.

Nor did Aldo Manuzio believe in Lucretia's guilt, for in 1513 he
dedicated to her an edition of the poems of the two Strozzi, father and
son, accompanied by an introduction in which he praises her to the
skies.

In the meantime Julius II had formed the League of Cambray, which was to
crush Venice, and which Ferrara had also joined. The war kept Alfonso
away from his domain much of the time, and consequently he made Lucretia
regent during his absence. In former days she had occasionally acted as
regent in the Vatican and in Spoleto--but in a different way. In 1509
she saw the war clouds gathering about Ferrara, for it was in that year
that her husband and the cardinal attacked the Venetian fleet on the Po.
August 25th of this same year Lucretia bore a second son, Ippolito.

The war which convulsed the entire peninsula immediately drew Ferrara
into the great movement which did not subside until Charles V imposed a
new order of things on the affairs of Italy. Lucretia's subsequent life,
therefore, was largely influenced by politics. Her first peaceful years
in Ferrara, like her youth, were past. She now devoted herself to the
education of her children, the princes of Este, and to affairs of state
whenever her husband entrusted them to her. She was a capable woman; her
father was not mistaken in his opinion of her intellect. She made
herself felt as regent in Ferrara. She was regent for the first time
in May, 1506, and she acquitted herself most creditably. The Jews in
Ferrara were being oppressed, and Lucretia had a law passed to protect
them, and all who transgressed it were severely punished. In the
dedication of the poems of the Strozzi addressed to her by Aldo, he
lauds, among her other good qualities, not only her fear of God, her
benevolence to the poor, and her kindness toward her relatives, but also
her ability as a ruler, saying that she made an excellent regent, whose
sound opinions and perspicacity were greatly admired by the burghers.
Even if we make allowances for the flattery, there is still much truth
in what he says.

[Illustration: ALDO MANUZIO.

From an engraving by Angustin de St. Aubin.]

Owing to these facts it is not strange that Lucretia's personality was
quite obliterated or eclipsed by the political history of Ferrara during
this period. The chroniclers of the city make no mention of her except
on the occasion of the birth of her children, and Paul Jovius speaks of
her only two or three times in his biography of Alfonso, although in
each case with the greatest respect. The personal interest which the
early career of this woman had excited died out with the change in her
life. Even her letters to Alfonso and those to her friend Isabella
Gonzaga contain little of importance to her biographers. No one now
questioned her virtues; even the Emperor Maximilian, who had endeavored
to prevent her marriage with Alfonso, acknowledged them. One day in
February, 1510, in Augsburg, while in conversation with the Ferrarese
ambassador, Girolamo Cassola--having discussed the ladies and the
festivities of Augsburg at length--he questioned the ambassador about
the women of Italy, and especially about those of Ferrara, whereupon
"much was said regarding the good qualities of our duchess. I spoke of
her beauty, her graciousness, her modesty, and her virtues. The emperor
asked me what other beauties there were in Ferrara, and I named Donna
Diana and Donna Agnola, one the sister and the other the wife of Ercole
d'Este." Such was the report the ambassador sent to Ferrara.[217]

Lucretia's nature had become more composed, thanks to the stability of
the world to which she now belonged and owing to the important duties
she now had, and only rarely was it disturbed by any reminder of her
experiences in Rome. The death of Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro, however, in
1510, served to recall her early life.

On returning to his State, Sforza had been confirmed in its possession
as a vassal of the Church by a bull of Julius II. He endeavored to rule
wisely, made many improvements, and strengthened the castle of Pesaro.
He was a cultivated man given over to the study of philosophy. Ratti, a
biographer of the house of Sforza, mentions a catalogue which he
compiled of the entire archives of Pesaro. In 1504 he married a noble
Venetian, Ginevra, of the house of Tiepolo, whose acquaintance he had
made while in exile. November 4, 1505, she bore him a son,
Costanzo.[218]

What were his exact relations with the Este, with whom he was connected,
we do not know, although they, doubtless, were not altogether pleasant.
Sforza could not have found much pleasure in life, for his famous house
was fast becoming extinct, and he could not foresee a long future for
his race. He died peacefully July 27, 1510, in the castle of Gradara,
where he had been in the habit of spending much of his time alone.

As his son was still a small child his natural brother Galeazzo, who
had married Ginevra, a daughter of Ercole Bentivoglio, assumed the
government of Pesaro. Giovanni's child died August 15, 1512, whereupon
Pope Julius II withdrew his support from Galeazzo, and forced the last
of the Sforza of Pesaro to enter into an agreement by which, October 30,
1512, he surrendered the castle and domain to Francesco Maria Rovere,
who had been Duke of Urbino since the death of Guidobaldo in April,
1508. Pesaro therefore was united with this State. Galeazzo died in
Milan in 1515, having made the Duke Maximilian Sforza his heir. The line
of the lords of Pesaro thus became extinct, for Giovanni Sforza had left
only a natural daughter, Isabella, who in 1520 married Sernigi Cipriano,
a noble Florentine, and who died in Rome in 1561, famous for her culture
and intellect. Her epitaph may still be read on a stone in the wall of
the passageway behind the tribune in the Lateran basilica.[219]

The death of Lucretia's first husband must have vividly reminded her of
the wrong she had done him, because she had now reached the age when
frivolity no longer dulled conscience; but the times were so troublous
that she directed her thoughts into other channels. August 9, 1510, a
few days after the death of Sforza, Julius II placed Alfonso under his
ban and declared that he had forfeited all his Church fiefs. The Pope
again took up the plans of his uncle Sixtus, who, in conjunction with
the Venetians, had schemed to wrest Ferrara from the Este. After the
Venetians had appeased him by withdrawing from the cities of Romagna, he
had made peace with the Republic, and commanded Alfonso to withdraw from
the League and to cease warring against Venice. The duke refused, and
this was the reason for the ban. Ferrara thereupon, together with
France, found itself drawn into a ruinous war which led to the famous
battle of Ravenna, April 1, 1512, which was won by Alfonso's artillery.

It was during this war, and on the occasion of the attempt of Julius II
to capture Ferrara by surprise, that the famous Bayard made the
acquaintance of Lucretia. After the French cavaliers, with their
companions in arms, the Ferrarese, had captured the fortress they
returned in triumph to Ferrara where they were received with the
greatest honors. In remembrance of this occasion the biographer Bayard
wrote in praise of Lucretia as follows: "The good duchess received the
French before all the others with every mark of favor. She is a pearl in
this world. She daily gave the most wonderful festivals and banquets in
the Italian fashion. I venture to say that neither in her time nor for
many years before has there been such a glorious princess, for she is
beautiful and good, gentle and amiable to everyone, and nothing is more
certain than this, that, although her husband is a skilful and brave
prince, the above-named lady, by her graciousness, has been of great
service to him."[220]

Owing to the death of Gaston de Foix at the battle of Ravenna, the
victory of the French turned to defeat and the rout of the Pope into
victory. Alfonso finding himself defenseless, hastened to Rome in July,
1512, to ask forgiveness from Julius, and, although this was accorded
him, he was saved from destruction, or a fate similar to Cæsar Borgia's,
only by secret flight. With the help of the Colonna, who conducted him
to Marino, he reached Ferrara in disguise.

These were anxious days for Lucretia; for, while she was trembling for
the life of her husband, she received news of the death, abroad, of her
son. August 28, 1512, the Mantuan agent Stazio Gadio wrote his master
Gonzaga from Rome, saying news had reached there that the Duke of
Biselli, son of the Duchess of Ferrara and Don Alfonso of Aragon, had
died at Bari, where he was living under the care of the duchess of that
place.[221] Lucretia herself gave this information to a person whose
name is not known, in a letter dated October 1st, saying, "I am wholly
lost in bitterness and tears on account of the death of the Duke of
Biselli, my dearest son, concerning which the bearer of this will give
you further particulars."[222]

We do not know how the unfortunate Rodrigo spent the first years
following Alexander's death and Cæsar's exile in Spain, but there is
ground for believing that he was left in Naples under the guardianship
of the cardinals Ludovico Borgia and Romolini of Sorrento. By virtue of
a previous agreement, the King of Spain recognized Lucretia's son as
Duke of Biselli, and there is an official document of September, 1505,
according to which the representative of the little duke placed his oath
of allegiance in the hands of the two cardinals above named.[223]
Rodrigo may have been brought up by his aunt, Donna Sancia, for she was
living with her husband in the kingdom of Naples, where Don Giuffrè had
been confirmed in the possession of his property. Sancia died childless
in the year 1506, just as Ferdinand the Catholic appeared in Naples. The
king, consequently, appropriated a large part of Don Giuffrè's estates,
although the latter remained Prince of Squillace. He married a second
time and left several heirs. Of his end we know nothing. One of his
grandchildren, Anna de Borgia, Princess of Squillace, the last of her
race, brought these estates to the house of Gandia by her marriage with
Don Francesco Borgia at the beginning of the seventeenth century.

It may have been on the death of Sancia that Rodrigo was placed under
the protection of another aunt, Isabella d'Aragona, his father's eldest
sister, the most unfortunate woman of the age, wife of Giangaleazzo of
Milan, who had been poisoned by Ludovico il Moro. The figure of Isabella
of Milan is the most tragic in the history of Italy of the period
beginning with the invasion of Charles VIII--an epoch filled with a
series of disasters that involved every dynasty of the country. For she
was affected at one and the same time by the fall of two great houses,
that of Sforza and that of Aragon. The saying of Caracciolo in his work,
_De varietate fortunæ_, regarding the Sforza, namely, that there is no
tragedy however terrible for which this house would not furnish an
abundance of material may well be applied to both these families.
Isabella had beheld the fall of her once mighty house, and she had seen
her own son Francesco seized and taken to France by Louis XII, where he
died, a priest, in his early manhood. She herself had retired to Bari, a
city which Ludovico il Moro had given up to her in 1499, and of which
she remained duchess until her death, February 11, 1524.

Donna Isabella had taken Lucretia's son to herself, and from the records
of the household expenses of the Duchess of Ferrara it appears that he
was with her in Bari in March, 1505, for on the twenty-sixth of that
month there is the following entry: "A suit of damask and brocade which
her Majesty sent her son Don Rodrigo in Bari as a present."[224] April
3d his mother sent his tutor, Baldassare Bonfiglio, who had come to
Naples, back to him. This man is named in the register under date of
February 25, 1506, as tutor of Don Giovanni. It appears, therefore, that
this child also was in Bari, and was being educated with his playfellow
Rodrigo. In October, 1506, we find the little Giovanni in Carpi, where
he was probably placed at the court of the Pio. From there Lucretia had
him brought to the court of Ferrara on the date mentioned. She therefore
was allowed to have this mysterious infante, but not her own child
Rodrigo, with her. In November, 1506, Giovanni must again have been in
Carpi, for Lucretia sent him some fine linen apparel to that place.[225]

Both children were together again in Bari in April, 1508, for in the
record of the household expenses the expenditures for both, beginning
with May of that year, are given together, and a certain Don Bartolommeo
Grotto is mentioned as instructor to both.[226] The son of Lucretia and
of the murdered Alfonso, therefore, died in the home of Donna Isabella
in Bari, which was not far from his hereditary duchy of Biselli.

We have a letter written by this unhappy Princess Isabella a few weeks
after the death of the youthful Rodrigo, to Perot Castellar, Governor of
Biselli:

     MONSIGNOR PEROT: We write this merely to ask you to compel
     those of Corato to pay us what they have to pay, from the revenue
     of the illustrious Duke of Biselli, our nephew of blessed memory,
     for shortly a bill will come from the illustrious Duchess of
     Ferrara, and in case the money is not ready we might be caused
     great inconvenience. Those of Corato may delay, and we might be
     compelled to find the money at once. Therefore you must see to it
     that we are not subjected to any further inconvenience, and that we
     are paid immediately; for by so doing you will oblige us, and we
     offer ourselves to your service.

  ISABELLA OF ARAGON, Duchess of Milan, alone in
  misfortune.[227]

  BARI, _October 14, 1592_.

Rodrigo's[228] mother laid claim to the property he left, which, as is
shown by certain documents, she recovered from Isabella d'Aragona as
guardian of the deceased, to the amount of several thousand ducats. To
do this she was forced to engage in a long suit, and as late as March,
1518, she sent her agent, Giacomo Naselli, to Rome and Naples regarding
it. His report to Cardinal Ippolito is still in existence.

Whatever were the circumstances which had compelled Lucretia to send her
son away, on whom, as we have shown, she always lavished her maternal
care, the unfortunate child's experience will always be a blot on her
memory.


FOOTNOTES:

[216] Campori; Una Vittima della Storia; Antonio Capelli, Lettere di L.
Ariosto, Introduction, p. lxi. Also W. Gilbert, Lucrezia Borgia, Duchess
of Ferrara, ii, 240.

[217] Despatch of Girolamo Cassola, Augsburg, February 27, 1510.
Archives of Modena.

[218] This he announced to the Marchese Gonzaga from Pesaro, November 4,
1505. Archives of Mantua.

[219] Copies of the following instruments concerning the last Sforza of
Pesaro are in the archives of Florence: will of Giovanni Sforza, July
24, 1510; agreement between Galeazzo and the Papal Legate, October 30,
1512; Galeazzo's will, March 23, 1515; Isabella's marriage contract,
Pesaro, September 29, 1520. The epitaph in the Lateran is as follows:
Isabellas Sfortiæ Joannis Pisaurensium P. Feminæ Sui Temporis Prudentia
Ac Pietate Insigni Exec. Test. P. Vix. Ann LVII. M. VII. D. III Obiit
Ann. MDLXI. XI Kal. Febr. Consensu Nobilium De Mutis De Papazurris.
Above is a profile in marble.

[220] J'ose bien dire que, de son temps, ni beaucoup avant, il ne s'est
point trouvé de plus triomphante princesse, car elle était belle, bonne,
douce et courtoise, à toutes gens. Le Loyal Serviteur Histoire du bon
Chevalier, le seigneur de Bayard, chap. xlv.

[221] Despatch of this ambassador in the archives of Mantua.

[222] Per trovarmi tuttavia involta in lachryme et amaritudine per la
morte del Duca di Biselli mio figliolo carrissimo.

[223] The instrument is in the Liber Arrendamentorum, from Lucretia's
chancellery.

[224] El quale zipon de Dernascho e brochato, sua Signoria el manda a
donare a don Rodrigo suo figliolo a Barri.

[225] October 24, 1506. Spesa per un nocchiero, che ha condotto Don
Giovanni Borgia de Finale a Ferrara. November 5, 1506. Tela di renso
sottile per far camicie mandato a Carpi al sig. Don Giovanni Borgia.

[226] May 15, 1508. Berette per Don Giovanni e Don Rodrigo Borgia. May
25th. Spesa per guanti a Don Giovanni e Don Rodrigo Borgia. October
16th. Bartolommeo Grotto, maestro de li ragazzi, per pagare certi libri
zoè Donati e regule per detti ragazzi. December 15. Per un Virgilio
comprato da Don Bartolommeo Grotto a don Giovanni.

[227] Unica in disgracia.

[228] Letters in the Este archives show that there was another Don
Rodrigo Borgia, who, in the year 1518, was described as the "brother" of
the Duchess Lucretia, and was then under the care of tutors in Salerno.
His guardians were Madama Elisabetta--who may have been his mother--and
her daughter Giulia. Lucretia, to whom the letters of Giovanni Cases
(Rome, May 12, September 3, 1518) and another by Don Giorgio de Ferrara
(Rome, December, 1518,) are addressed, seems to have acted as a mother
to this child. This second Rodrigo died, a young clerk, in 1527. August
30th of that year the Ferrarese ambassador in Naples, Baldassare da
Fino, wrote from Posilipo as follows: Lo Illmo et Rev. Signor Don
Rodrico de Casa Borgia, stando in Ciciano, cum la Signora Madama sua
matre, sono da 15 giorni che, prima vexato da Febre continua, se ne
morse--a sheet without any address, in the archives of Modena. Again, in
January, 1535, this deceased son of Alexander VI is mentioned in a
report sent from Rome, which contains the following words: Era venuta
nuovamente un Vescovo fratello di Don Roderico Borgia, figliuolo che fu
di Papa Alessandro.... Avvisi di Roma. State archives of Modena.




CHAPTER X

EFFECTS OF THE WAR--THE ROMAN INFANTE


The war about Ferrara, thanks to Alfonso's skill and the determined
resistance of the State, had ended. Julius II had seized Modena and
Reggio, which was a great loss to the State of Ferrara, and consequently
the history of that country for many years hence is taken up with her
efforts to regain these cities. Fortunately for Alfonso, Julius II died
in February, 1513, and Leo X ascended the papal throne. Hitherto he had
maintained friendly relations with the princes of Urbino and Ferrara,
who continued to look for only amicable treatment from him; but both
houses were destined to be bitterly deceived by the faithless Medici,
who deceived all the world. Alfonso hastened to attend Leo's coronation
in Rome, and, believing a complete reconciliation with the Holy See
would soon be effected, he returned to Ferrara.

There Lucretia had won universal esteem and affection; she had become
the mother of the people. She lent a ready ear to the suffering and
helped all who were in need. Famine, high prices, and depletion of the
treasury were the consequences of the war; Lucretia had even pawned her
jewels. She put aside, as Jovius says, "the pomps and vanities of the
world to which she had been accustomed from childhood, and gave herself
up to pious works, and founded convents and hospitals. This was due as
much to her own nature as it was to her past life and the fate she
had suffered. Most women who have lived much and loved much finally
become fanatics; bigotry is often only the last form which feminine
vanity assumes. The recollection of a world of vice, and of crimes
committed by her nearest kinsmen, and also of her own sins, must have
constantly disturbed Lucretia's conscience. Other women who, like her,
were among the chief characters in the history of the Borgias developed
precisely the same frame of mind and experienced a similar need of
religious consolation. Cæsar's widow ended her life in a convent;
Gandia's did the same; Alexander's mistress became a fanatic; and if we
had any record of the adulteress Giulia Farnese we should certainly find
that she passed the closing years of her life either as a saint in a
convent or engaged in pious works."

[Illustration: LEO X.

From an engraving published in 1580.]

The year 1513, following the war in Ferarra, marked a decided change in
Lucretia's life, for from that time it took a special religious turn. It
did not, however, degenerate into bigotry or fanaticism; this was
prevented by the vigorous Alfonso and her children, and by her court
duties. The war had deprived Ferrara of much of its brilliancy, although
it was still one of the most attractive of the princely courts of Italy.
During the following years of peace Alfonso devoted himself to the
cultivation of the arts. The most famous masters of Ferrara--Dossi,
Garofalo, and Michele Costa--worked for him in the castle, in
Belriguardo, and Belfiore. Titian, who was frequently a guest in
Ferrara, executed some paintings for him, and the duke likewise gave
Raphael some commissions. He even founded a museum of antiquities. In
Lucretia's cabinet there was a Cupid by Michael Angelo. The predilection
of the duchess for the fine arts, however, was not very strong; in this
respect she was not to be compared with her sister-in-law, Isabella of
Mantua, who maintained constant relations with all the prominent artists
of the age and had her agents in all the large cities of Italy to keep
her informed regarding noteworthy productions in the domain of the arts.

From 1513 Ferrara's brilliancy was somewhat dimmed by the greater fame
of the court of Leo X. The passion of this member of the Medici family
for the arts attracted to Rome the most brilliant men of Italy, among
whom were the poets Tebaldeo, Sadoleto, and Bembo--the last became Leo's
secretary. Both the Strozzi were dead. Aldo, upon whose career as a
printer and scholar during his early years Lucretia had not been without
influence, was living in Venice, and from there he kept up a literary
correspondence with his patroness. Celio Calcagnini remained true to
Ferrara. The university continued to flourish. Lucretia was very
friendly with the noble Venetian, Trissino, Ariosto's not altogether
successful rival in epic poetry. There are in existence five letters
written by Trissino to Lucretia in her last years.[229] Ferrara's pride,
however, was Ariosto, and Lucretia knew him when he was at the zenith of
his fame. He, however, dedicated his poem neither to her nor to Alfonso,
but to the unworthy Cardinal Ippolito, in whose service a combination of
circumstances had placed him. No princely house was ever glorified more
highly than was the house of Este by Ariosto, for the _Orlando Furioso_
will cause it to be remembered for all time; so long as the Italian
language endures it will hold an immortal place in literature. Lucretia
too was given a position of honor in the poem; but however beautiful the
place which she there holds, Ariosto ought to have bestowed greater
praise on her if she was the inspiration which he required for his great
work.

Lucretia's relations with her husband, which had never been based upon
love, and which were not of a passionate nature, apparently continued to
grow more favorable for her. In April, 1514, she had borne him a third
son, Alessandro, who died at the age of two years; July 4, 1515, she
bore a daughter, Leonora, and November 1, 1516, another son, Francesco.
With no little satisfaction Alfonso found himself the father of a number
of children--all his legitimate heirs. He was engrossed in his own
affairs, but, nevertheless, he was highly pleased with the esteem and
admiration now bestowed upon his wife. While the admiration she excited
in former years was due to her youthful beauty, it was now owing to her
virtues. She who was once the most execrated woman of her age had won a
place of the highest honor. Caviceo even ventured, when he wished to
praise the famous Isabella Gonzaga, to say that she approached the
perfection of Lucretia. Her past, apparently, was so completely
forgotten that even her name, Borgia, was always mentioned with respect.

About this time Lucretia was reminded of her life in Rome by a member of
her family who was very near to her, Giovanni Borgia, the mysterious
Infante of Rome, formerly Duke of Nepi and Camerino, and companion in
destiny of the little Rodrigo who died in Bari. He had disappeared from
the stage in 1508, and where he was during several succeeding years we
do not know; but in 1517, a young man of nineteen or twenty, he came
from Naples to Romagna, where he was shipwrecked. His baggage had been
saved by the commune of Pesaro, and was claimed by a representative of
Lucretia, December 2d; in the legal document Giovanni Borgia was
described as her "brother." Other instruments show that he remained at
his sister's court as late as December, 1517.[230] Her husband,
therefore, did not refuse to allow her to shelter her kinsman. In
December, 1518, Don Giovanni went to France, where the Duke Alfonso had
him presented to the king. Lucretia had given him presents to take to
the king and queen.[231]

He remained at the French court some time for the purpose of making his
fortune, in which, however, he did not succeed.

Thereupon the Infante of Rome again disappeared from view until the year
1530, when we find him in Rome, laying claim to the Duchy of Camerino.
The last Varano, Giammaria, had returned thither on Cæsar's overthrow,
and had been recognized by Julius II as a vassal of the Church. In
April, 1515, Leo X made him Duke of Camerino and married him to his own
niece, the beautiful Catarina Cibò. Giammaria died in August, 1527,
leaving as his sole heir his daughter Giulia, who was not yet of age. An
illegitimate son of the house of Varano laid claim to Camerino, and he
was ready to enforce his demands with arms, but he was frustrated in his
attempt by a suit brought by Giovanni Borgia, the first duke, who was
supported by Alfonso of Ferrara in his efforts. He furnished him with
several documents dating from the time of Alexander VI which referred to
his rights to Camerino, and which had been placed by Lucretia in the
chancellery of the house of Este. Don Giovanni had even gone to Charles
V, in Bologna, where the famous congress had been sitting since
December, 1529. The emperor had advised him to endeavor to secure his
rights by process of law in Rome, through the Pope. From that city, in
1530, the infante wrote a letter to Duke Alfonso, in which he informed
him of his affairs, and asked him to have further search made in the
archives of the Este for documents concerning himself.

Don Giovanni began suit. In a voluminous document dated June 29, 1530,
he describes himself not only as Domicellus Romanus Principalis, but
also as "orator of the Pope." From this it appears that he--one of the
illegitimate sons of Alexander VI--was a prominent gentleman in Rome,
and was even in the Pope's service. The Roman Ruota decided the suit
against Giovanni, who had to pay the costs. In a brief dated June 7,
1532, Clement VII commanded him to cease annoying Giulia Varano and her
mother with any further claims.[232] From that time we hear nothing more
of this Borgia except from a letter written in Rome, November 19, 1547,
apparently by a Ferrarese agent to Ercole II, then reigning duke. In it
he mentions the death of Don Giovanni. The letter is as follows:

     Don Giovanni Borgia has just died in Genoa; it is said he left many
     thousand ducats in Valencia. Here (in Rome) he had a little
     clothing, two horses, and a vineyard worth about three hundred
     ducats. As he left no will the property will be divided between
     your Excellency, your brothers, and among others the nobles of the
     Mattei family here, the Duke of Gandia, and the children of the
     Duke of Valentino, provided their rights are not prejudiced by the
     fact that they are natural children. I will not omit to inform
     myself regarding the money in Valencia, and will report to your
     Excellency.[233]


FOOTNOTES:

[229] Printed in the Italian edition of Roscoe's Life of Leo X, vii,
300.

[230] Cittadella N 31. She endeavored to secure the Prebend of S. Jacopo
for him. In her record of household expenses there are entries of
purchases of clothing for him, beginning with December 23, 1517.

[231] Two golden bracelets--per donare alla Regina de Franza, 27 Aprile,
1518; other articles of personal adornment--mandati per lo Illmo D.
Joanne Borgia al Re de Franza (November 16, 1518). The ambassadors Carlo
da Correggio and Pistofilo Bonaventura informed Lucretia of his
favorable reception at the court of France, in letters dated December,
1518, and January to March, 1519. State archives of Modena.

[232] Documents in the State archives of Florence, among the papers
regarding Urbino. CI. I. Div. C. Fil. xiv. In 1534 Giulia Varano married
Guidobaldo II of Urbino and brought him Camerino, which, however, he was
compelled to relinquish in 1539 to Paul III, who gave it to his nephew
Octavio Farnese.

[233] Copia di una lettera da Roma di 19 Novembre, 1547. State archives
of Modena.




CHAPTER XI

LAST YEARS AND DEATH OF VANNOZZA


In the same year that this her father's last son appeared at her court
Lucretia also learned of the death of her mother. Vannozza was already a
widow when Alexander VI died. During his last illness she had placed
herself under the protection of the troops of her son Cæsar. This she
was able to do as he himself was sick at the same time. There are
documents in existence which show that immediately after Alexander's
death, and while the papal throne was vacant, she was living in the
palace of the Cardinal of S. Clemente in the Borgo. As Cæsar was
compelled to betake himself to Nepi she accompanied him thither, and on
the election of Piccolomini she returned to the papal city.

She did not follow her sons to Naples, but remained in Rome, where
affairs became normal after the election of Rovere to the papacy. The
retainers of the Borgia feared that certain suits would be brought
against them. March 6, 1504, a chamberlain of Cardinal S. Angelo, who
had been poisoned, was condemned to death, and in a loud voice he
proclaimed that he had committed the murder on the explicit command of
Alexander and Cæsar.[234] Cardinals Romolini and Ludovico Borgia at once
fled to Naples. Don Micheletto, the man who executed Cæsar's bloody
orders, was a prisoner in the castle of S. Angelo. The Venetian
ambassador, Giustinian, informed his government in May, 1504, that
Micheletto was charged with having caused the death of a number of
persons, among them the Duke of Gandia, Varano of Camerino, Astorre and
Ottaviano Manfredi, the Duke of Biselli, the youthful Bernardino of
Sermoneta, and the Bishop of Cagli. Micheletto was brought before the
representatives of the Senate for examination. He was placed upon the
rack and confessed, among other things, that it was the Pope Alexander
himself who had given the command for the murder of the youthful Alfonso
of Biselli. This the magistrate immediately reported to Ferrara.[235]

As Cæsar was out of the way, Vannozza was still able to reckon on the
protection of certain powerful friends, especially the Farnese, the
Cesarini, and several cardinals. She feared her property would be
confiscated, for the title to much of it was questionable. Early in 1504
Ludovico Mattei charged her with having stolen, in March, 1503, through
her paid servants, eleven hundred and sixty sheep while Cæsar was
carrying on his war against the Orsini. These sheep had been sent by
Maria d'Aragona, wife of Giovanni Giordano Orsini, to Mattei's pastures
for safety. Vannozza was found guilty.[236]

She endeavored in every way to save her property. December 4, 1503, she
gave the Church of S. Maria del Popolo a deed of her house on the Piazza
Pizzo di Merlo and of her family chapel, reserving the use of it during
her life. The Augustinians on their part bound themselves to say a mass
for Carlo Canale March 24th, another October 13th for Giorgio di Croce,
and a third on the day of Vannozza's own death. In this instrument she
calls herself widow of Carlo Canale of Mantua, apostolic secretary of
the deceased Alexander VI, and she speaks of Giorgio di Croce as her
first husband. This deed was executed in the Borgo of St. Peter's in the
residence of Agapitus of Emelia.[237] From this it appears that at the
close of December Vannozza was still living in the Borgo, and under the
protection of her son's own chancellor, while Cæsar himself was a
prisoner in the Torre Borgia in the Vatican, and not until he left Rome
forever did she remove from the Borgo.

April 1, 1504, a dwelling on the Piazza of the Holy Apostles in the
Trevi quarter, which was situated in a district where the Colonna were
all-powerful, was specified as her residence. The Colonna had suffered
less than others from Cæsar, and by virtue of an agreement made with him
they were enabled to retain their property after the death of Alexander.
Vannozza had sold certain other houses which she owned to the Roman
Giuliano de Lenis, and April 1, 1504, he annulled the sale, declaring
that it was only through fear of force in consequence of the death of
Alexander that it had taken place.[238]

As she now had nothing more to fear, she again took up her abode in the
house on the Piazza Branca, as is shown by an instrument of November,
1502, in which she is described as "Donna Vannozza de Cataneis of the
Regola Quarter," where this house was situated. This document is
regarding a complaint which the goldsmith Nardo Antonazzi of this same
quarter had lodged against her.

The artist demanded payment for a silver cross which he had made for
Vannozza in the year 1500; he charged her with having appropriated this
work of art without paying for it, which, he stated, frequently happened
"at the time when the Duke of Valentino controlled the whole city and
nearly all of Italy." We have not all the documents bearing on the case,
but from the statements of witnesses for the accused it appears that she
had grounds for bringing a suit for libel.[239]

While Vannozza may not have been actually placed in possession of the
castle of Bleda near Viterbo by Alexander VI, some of its appanages were
allotted to her. July 6, 1513, she complained to the Cardinal-Vicar
Rafael Riario that the commune of the place was withholding certain sums
of money which, she claimed, belonged to her. This document, which is on
parchment, is couched in pompous phraseology and is addressed to all the
magistrates of the world by name and title.[240]

Vannozza lived to witness the changes in affairs in the Vatican under
three of Alexander's successors. There the Rovere and the Medici
occupied the place once held by her own all-powerful children. She saw
the Papacy changing into a secular power, and she must have known that
but for Alexander and Cæsar it could never have done this. If,
perchance, she saw from a distance the mighty Julius II, for example,
when he returned to Rome after seizing Bologna, entering the city with
the pomp of an emperor, this woman, lost in the multitude, must have
exclaimed with bitter irony that her own son Cæsar had a part in this
triumph, and that he had been instrumental in raising Julius II to the
Papacy. It must have been a source of no little satisfaction to her to
know that this pope recognized her son's importance when he wrote to the
Florentines in November, 1503, saying that "on account of the preeminent
virtues and great services of the Duke of Romagna" he loved him with a
father's love. She may also have been acquainted with Macchiavelli's
"Prince," in which the genial statesman describes Cæsar as the ideal
ruler.

Although the power of the Borgias had passed away and their children
were either dead or scattered, their greatness was felt in the city as
long as Vannozza lived. Her past experiences caused her to be looked
upon as one of the most noteworthy personalities of Rome, where every
one was curious to make her acquaintance. If we may compare two persons
who differed in greatness, but whose destinies and positions were not
dissimilar, it might be said that Vannozza at that time occupied the
same position in Rome in which Letitia Bonaparte found herself after the
overthrow of her powerful offspring.

She looked with pride on her daughter, the Duchess of Ferrara, "la plus
triomphante princesse," as the biographer Bayard calls her. She never
saw her again, for she would scarcely have ventured to undertake a
journey to Ferrara, but she continued to correspond with her. In the
archives of the house of Este are nine letters written by Vannozza in
the years 1515, 1516, and 1517. Seven of them are addressed to Cardinal
Ippolito and two to Lucretia. These letters are not in her own
handwriting but are dictated. They disclose a powerful will, a cast of
mind that might be described as rude and egotistical, and an insinuating
character. They are devoted chiefly to practical matters and to
requests of various sorts. On one occasion she sent the cardinal a
present of two antique columns which had been exhumed in her vineyard.
She also kept up her intercourse with her son Giuffrè, Prince of
Squillace. In 1515 she had received his ten-year-old son into her house
in Rome apparently for the purpose of educating him.[241]

An expression which Vannozza used in signing her letters defines her
attitude and position,--"The fortunate and unfortunate Vannozza de
Cataneis," or "Your fortunate and unfortunate mother, Vannozza
Borgia,"--she used the family name in her private affairs, but not
officially.

Her last letter to Lucretia, written December 19, 1515, which refers to
her son Cæsar's former secretary, Agapitus of Emelia, is as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS LADY: My greeting and respects. Your
     Excellency will certainly remember favorably the services of Messer
     Agapitus of Emelia to his Excellency our duke, and the love which
     he has always shown us. It is, therefore, meet that his kinsmen be
     helped and advanced in every way possible. Shortly before his death
     he relinquished all his benefices in favor of his nephew
     Giambattista of Aquila; among them are some in the bishopric of
     Capua which are worth very little. If your Excellency wishes to do
     me a kindness I will ask you, for the reasons above mentioned, to
     interest yourself in behalf of these nephews to whom I have
     referred. Nicola, the bearer of this, who is himself a nephew of
     Agapitus, will explain to your Excellency at length what should be
     done. And now farewell to your Excellency, to whom I commend
     myself.

  ROME, _December 19, 1515_.

     POSTSCRIPT: In this matter your Excellency will do as you
     think best, as I have written the above from a sense of
     obligation. Therefore you may do only what you know will please his
     Worthiness and, so far as the present is concerned, you may answer
     as you see fit.

  VANNOZZA, who prays for you constantly.

Vannozza clearly was an honor to the Borgia school of diplomacy.

Agapitus dei Gerardi, who wrote so many of Cæsar's letters and
documents, had remained true to the Borgias, as is shown by this letter,
until his death, which occurred in Rome, August 2, 1515. Vannozza, of a
truth, had seen many of the former friends, flatterers, and parasites of
her house desert it; but a number, among whom were several important
personages, remained true. She, as mother of the Duchess of Ferrara, was
still able to exert some influence; she was living a respectable life,
in comfortable circumstances, as a woman of position, and was described
as _la magnifica e nobile_ Madanna Vannozza. She also kept up her
relations with such of the cardinals as were Spaniards and relatives of
Alexander VI, or who were his creatures. She survived most of them. Of
the two cardinals Giovanni Borgia, one had passed away in 1500, the
other in 1503; Francesco and Ludovico died in 1511 and 1512
respectively. Cardinal Giuliano Cesarini passed away in 1510. Vannozza,
in fact, survived all the favorites and creatures of Alexander in the
College of Cardinals with the exception of Farnese, Adrian Castellesi,
and d'Albret,--Cæsar's brother-in-law.

By that sort of piety to which senescent female sinners everywhere and
at all times devote themselves she secured new friends. She was an
active fanatic and was constantly seen in the churches, at the
confessionals, and in intimate intercourse with the pious brothers and
hospitalers. In this way she made the acquaintance of Paul Jovius, who
describes her as an upright woman (donna dabbene). If she had lived
another decade she would probably have been canonized. She endowed a
number of religious foundations--the hospitals of S. Salvator in the
Lateran, of S. Maria in Porticu, the Consolazione for the Company of the
Annunziata in the Minerva, and the S. Lorenzo in Damaso, as is shown by
her will, which is dated January 15, 1517.[242]

For years there were inscriptions in the hospitals of the Lateran and of
the Consolazione which referred to her endowments and also to provisions
for masses on the anniversaries of her death and those of her two
husbands.

Vannozza died in Rome, November 26, 1518. Her death did not pass
unnoticed, as the following letter, written by a Venetian, shows:

     The day before yesterday died Madonna Vannozza, once the mistress
     of Pope Alexander and mother of the Duchess of Ferrara and the Duke
     of Valentino. That night I happened to be at a place where I heard
     the death announced, according to the Roman custom, in the
     following formal words: 'Messer Paolo gives notice of the death of
     Madonna Vannozza, mother of the Duke of Gandia; she belonged to the
     Gonfalone Company.' She was buried yesterday in S. Maria del
     Popolo, with the greatest honors,--almost like a cardinal. She was
     sixty-six years of age. She left all her property,--which was not
     inconsiderable,--to S. Giovanni in Laterano. The Pope's chamberlain
     attended the obsequies, which was unusual.[243]

Marcantonio Altieri, one of the foremost men of Rome, who was guardian
of the Company of the Gonfalone _ad Sancta Sanctorum_, and as such made
an inventory of the property of the brotherhood in 1527, drew up a
memorial regarding her, the manuscript of which is still preserved in
the archives of the association, and is as follows:

     We must not forget the endowments made by the respected and honored
     lady, Madonna Vannozza of the house of Catanei, the happy mother of
     the illustrious gentlemen, the Duke of Gandia, the Duke of
     Valentino, the Prince of Squillace, and of Madonna Lucretia,
     Duchess of Ferrara. As she wished to endow the Company with her
     worldly goods she gave it her jewels, which were of no slight
     value, and so much more that the Company in a few years was able to
     discharge certain obligations, with the help also of the noble
     gentlemen, Messer Mariano Castellano, and my dear Messer Rafael
     Casale, who had recently been guardians. She made an agreement with
     the great and famous silversmith Caradosso by which she gave him
     two thousand ducats so that he with his magnificent work of art
     might gratify the wish of that noble and honorable woman. In
     addition she left us so much property that we shall be able to take
     care of the annual rent of four hundred ducats and also feed the
     poor and the sick, who, unfortunately, are very numerous. Out of
     gratitude for her piety and devout mind and for these endowments
     our honorable society unanimously and cheerfully decided not only
     to celebrate her obsequies with magnificent pomp, but also to honor
     the deceased with a proud and splendid monument. It was also
     decided from that time forth to have mass said on the anniversary
     of her death in the Church del Popolo, where she is buried, and to
     provide for other ceremonies, with an attendance of men bearing
     torches and tapers, in all devotion, for the purpose of commending
     her soul's salvation to God, and also to show the world that we
     hate and loathe ingratitude.

Thus this woman's vanity led her to provide for a ceremonious funeral;
she wanted all Rome to talk of her on that day as the mistress of
Alexander VI and the mother of so many famous children. Leo X bestowed
an official character upon her funeral by having his court attend it; by
doing this he recognized Vannozza either as the widow of Alexander VI
or as the mother of the Duchess of Ferrara. As the Company of the
Gonfalone was composed of the foremost burghers and nobles of Rome,
almost the entire city attended her funeral. Vannozza was buried in S.
Maria del Popolo in her family chapel, by the side of her unfortunate
son Giovanni, Duke of Gandia. We do not know whether a marble monument
was erected to her memory, but the following inscription was placed over
her grave by her executor: "To Vanotia Catanea, mother of the Duke Cæsar
of Valentino, Giovanni of Gandia, Giuffrè of Squillace, and Lucretia of
Ferrara, conspicuous for her uprightness, her piety, her discretion, and
her intelligence, and deserving much on account of what she did for the
Lateran Hospital. Erected by Hieronymus Picus, fiduciary-commissioner
and executor of her will. She lived seventy-seven years, four months,
and thirteen days. She died in the year 1518, November 26th."

Vannozza doubtless had passed away believing that she had expiated her
sins and purchased heaven with gold and silver and pious legacies. She
had even purchased the pomp of a ceremonious funeral and a lie which was
graven deep on her tombstone. For more than two hundred years the
priests in S. Maria del Popolo sang masses for the repose of her soul,
and when they ceased it was perhaps less owing to their conviction that
enough of them had been said for this woman than from a growing belief
in the trustworthiness of historical criticism. Later, owing either to
hate or a sense of shame, her very tombstone disappeared, not a trace of
it being left.


FOOTNOTES:

[234] Despatch of Beltrando Costabili to Ercole, Rome, March 7, 1504.

[235] Magnifico et prestanti viro maiori honorandmo D. Ludovico
Romanellio Ducali Secretario Ferrarie. Omissis. Il Papa mi ha mandato
Don Michiele il quale habiamo cominciato examinare cum turtura de queste
sue sceleranze fin qui [=e] sta saldo et nulla confessa non so m[=o] se
fara cussi in futurum. Omissis. Dixe che Papa Alexandro fù quello che
fece ammazzare Don Alfonso, marito che fù della Ducessa. Rome XX. Lulii,
1504. Thadeus Locumtenens Senatus. In the archives of Modena.

[236] The documents are in the archives of the Sancta Sanctorum.

[237] Act of December 4, 1503, in the same archives.

[238] Archives of the Sancta Sanctorum. The instrument is dated April 1,
1504.

[239] Archives of the Sancta Sanctorum.

[240] Ibid.

[241] This was reported to Cardinal Ippolito by Girolamo Sacrati from
Rome, November 2, 1515. Archives of Modena.

[242] Vannozza's will, in the archives of the Capitol, Cred. xiv, T. 72,
p. 305, among the instruments drawn by the notary Andrea Carosi.

[243] In the diary of Marino Sanuto, vol. xxvi, fol. 135.




CHAPTER XII

DEATH OF LUCRETIA BORGIA--CONCLUSION


The State of Ferrara again found itself in serious difficulties, for Leo
X, following the example of Alexander VI, was trying to build up a
kingdom for his nephew Lorenzo de' Medici. As early as 1516 Leo had made
him Duke of Urbino, having expelled Guidobaldo's legitimate heirs from
their city. Francesco Maria Rovere, his wife, and his adopted mother,
Elisabetta, were in Mantua,--the asylum of all exiled princes. Leo was
consuming with a desire also to drive the Este out of Ferrara, and it
was only the protection of France that saved Alfonso from a war with the
Pope. The duke, to whom the Pope refused to restore the cities of Modena
and Reggio, therefore went to the court of Louis XII in November, 1518,
for the purpose of interesting him in his affairs. In February, 1519, he
returned to Ferrara, where he learned of the death of his
brother-in-law, the Marchese Francesco Gonzaga, of Mantua, which
occurred February 20th. The last of March Lucretia wrote to his widow,
Isabella, as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS LADY, SISTER-IN-LAW, AND MOST HONORED SISTER:
     The great loss by death of your Excellency's husband, of blessed
     memory, has caused me such profound grief, that instead of being
     able to offer consolation I myself am in need of it. I sympathize
     with your Excellency in this loss, and I cannot tell you how
     grieved and depressed I am, but, as it has occurred and it has
     pleased our Lord so to do, we must acquiesce in his will. Therefore
     I beg and urge your Majesty to bear up under this misfortune as
     befits your position, and I know that you will do so. I will at
     present merely add that I commend myself and offer my services to
     you at all times.

  YOUR SISTER-IN-LAW LUCRETIA, Duchess of Ferrara.

  FERRARA, _the last of March, 1519_.

The Marchese was succeeded by his eldest son, Federico. In 1530 the
Emperor Charles V created him first Duke of Mantua. The following year
he married Margherita di Montferrat. This was the same Federico who had
formerly been selected to be the husband of Cæsar's daughter Luisa. His
famous mother lived, a widow, until February 13, 1539.

Alfonso again found his wife in a precarious condition. She was near her
confinement, and June 14, 1519, she bore a child which was still-born.
Eight days later, knowing that her end was near, she dictated an epistle
to Pope Leo. It is the last letter we have of Lucretia, and as it was
written while she was dying, it is of the deepest import, enabling us to
look into her soul, which for the last time was tormented by the
recollection of the terrors and errors of her past life of which she had
long since purged herself.

     MOST HOLY FATHER AND HONORED MASTER: With all respect I
     kiss your Holiness's feet and commend myself in all humility to
     your holy mercy. Having suffered for more than two months, early on
     the morning of the 14th of the present, as it pleased God, I gave
     birth to a daughter, and hoped then to find relief from my
     sufferings, but I did not, and shall be compelled to pay my debt to
     nature. So great is the favor which our merciful Creator has shown
     me, that I approach the end of my life with pleasure, knowing that
     in a few hours, after receiving for the last time all the holy
     sacraments of the Church, I shall be released. Having arrived at
     this moment, I desire as a Christian, although I am a sinner, to
     ask your Holiness, in your mercy, to give me all possible spiritual
     consolation and your Holiness's blessing for my soul. Therefore I
     offer myself to you in all humility and commend my husband and my
     children, all of whom are your servants, to your Holiness's mercy.
     In Ferrara, June 22, 1519, at the fourteenth hour.

  Your Holiness's humble servant,

  LUCRETIA D'ESTE.

The letter is so calm and contained, so free from affectation, that one
is inclined to ask whether a dying woman could have written it if her
conscience had been burdened with the crimes with which Alexander's
unfortunate daughter had been charged.

She died in the presence of Alfonso on the night of June 24th, and the
duke immediately wrote his nephew Federico Gonzaga as follows:

     ILLUSTRIOUS SIR AND HONORED BROTHER AND NEPHEW: It has
     just pleased our Lord to summon unto Himself the soul of the
     illustrious lady, the duchess, my dearest wife. I hasten to inform
     you of the fact as our mutual love leads me to believe that the
     happiness or unhappiness of one is likewise the happiness or
     unhappiness of the other. I cannot write this without tears,
     knowing myself to be deprived of such a dear and sweet companion.
     For such her exemplary conduct and the tender love which existed
     between us made her to me. On this sad occasion I would indeed seek
     consolation from your Excellency, but I know that you will
     participate in my grief, and I prefer to have some one mingle his
     tears with mine rather than endeavor to console me. I commend
     myself to your Majesty. Ferrara, June 24, 1519, at the fifth hour
     of the night.

  ALFONSUS, Duke of Ferrara.[244]

The Marchese Federico sent his uncle Giovanni Gonzaga to Ferrara, who
wrote him from there as follows:

     Your Excellency must not be surprised when I tell you that I shall
     leave here to-morrow, for no obsequies will be celebrated, only
     the offices said in the parish church. His Excellency the Duke
     accompanied his illustrious consort's body to the grave. She is
     buried in the Convent of the Sisters of Corpus Christi in the same
     vault where repose the remains of his mother. Her death has caused
     the greatest grief throughout the entire city, and his ducal
     majesty displays the most profound sorrow. Great things are
     reported concerning her life, and it is said that she has worn the
     cilice for about ten years, and has gone to confession daily during
     the last two years, and has received the communion three or four
     times every month. Your Excellency's ever devoted servant,

  JOHANNES DE GONZAGA, Marquis.[245]

  FERRARA, _June 28, 1519_.

Among the numerous letters of condolence which the duke received was one
in Spanish from the mysterious Infante Don Giovanni Borgia, who was then
in Poissy, France. The duke himself had informed him of the death of his
consort, and Don Giovanni lamented the loss of his "sister," who had
also been his greatest patron.

The graves of Lucretia and Alfonso and numerous other members of the
house of Este in Ferrara have disappeared. No picture of the famous
woman exists either in that city or in Modena. Although many, doubtless,
were painted, none has been preserved. In Ferrara there were numerous
artists, Dossi, Garofalo, Cosma, and others. Titian may have painted the
beautiful duchess's portrait. His likeness of Isabella d'Este Gonzaga,
Lucretia's rival in beauty, is preserved in the Belvedere gallery in
Vienna; it shows a charming feminine face of oval contour, with regular
lines, brown eyes, and an expression of gentle womanliness. There is no
portrait of Lucretia from this master's hand, for the one in the Doria
Gallery in Rome, which some ascribe to him and others to Paul
Veronese,--although this artist was not born until 1528,--is one of the
many fictions we find in galleries. In the Doria Gallery there is a
life-sized figure of an Amazon with a helmet in her hand, ascribed to
Dosso Dossi, which is said to be a likeness of Vannozza.

Monsignor Antonelli, custodian of the numismatic collection of Ferrara,
has a portrait in oil which may be that of Lucretia Borgia,--not because
it has her name in somewhat archaic letters, but because the features
are not unlike those of her medals. This portrait, however (the eyes are
gray), is uncertain, as are also two portraits in majolica in the
possession of Rawdon Brown, in Venice, which he regards as the work of
Alfonso himself, who amused himself in making this ware. Even if there
were any ground for this belief, the portraits, as they are merely in
the decorative style of majolica, would resemble the original but
slightly.

The portrait in the Dresden gallery which is catalogued as a likeness of
Lucretia Borgia is not authentic. There are no undoubted portraits of
her except those on the medals which were struck during her life in
Ferrara. One of these is reproduced as the frontispiece[246] of the
present volume; it is the finest of all and is one of the most
noteworthy medals of the Renaissance. It probably was engraved by
Filippino Lippi in 1502, on the occasion of Lucretia's marriage. On the
reverse is a design characteristic not only of the age but especially of
Lucretia. It is a Cupid with out-stretched wings bound to a laurel,
suspended from which are a violin and a roll of music. The quiver of the
god of love hangs broken on a branch of the laurel, and his bow, with
the cord snapped, lies on the ground. The inscription on the reverse is
as follows: "Virtuti Ac Formæ Pudicitia Præciosissimum." Perhaps the
artist by this symbolism wished to convey the idea that the time for
love's free play had passed and by the laurel tree intended to suggest
the famous house of Este. Although this interpretation might apply to
every bride, it is especially appropriate for Lucretia Borgia.

Whoever examines this girlish head with its long flowing tresses will be
surprised, for no contrast could be greater than that between this
portrait and the common conception of Lucretia Borgia. The likeness
shows a maidenly, almost childish face, of a peculiar expression,
without any classic lines. It could scarcely be described as beautiful.
The Marchesana of Cotrone spoke the truth when in writing to Francesco
she said that Lucretia was not especially beautiful, but that she had
what might be called a "dolce ciera,"--a sweet face. The face resembles
that of her father--as shown by the best medals which we have of
him--but slightly; the only likeness is in the strongly outlined nose.
Lucretia's forehead was arched, while Alexander's was flat; her chin was
somewhat retreating while his was in line with the lips.

Another medal shows Lucretia with the hair confined and the head covered
with a net, and has the so-called _lenza_, a sort of fillet set with
precious stones or pearls. The hair covers the ear and descends to the
neck, according to the fashion of the day, which we also see in a
beautiful medal of Elizabetta Gonzaga of Urbino.

The original sources from which the material for this book has been
derived would place the reader in a position to form his own opinion
regarding Lucretia Borgia, and his view would approximate a correct one,
or at least would be nearer correct than the common conception of
this woman. Men of past ages are merely problems which we endeavor to
solve. If we err in our conception of our contemporaries how much more
likely are we to be wrong when we endeavor to analyze men whose very
forms are shadowy. All the circumstances of their personal life, of
their nature, the times, and their environment,--of which they were the
product,--all the secrets of their being exist only as disconnected
fragments from which we are forced to frame our conception of their
characters. History is merely a world-judgment based upon the law of
causality. Many of the characters of history would regard their
portraits in books as wholly distorted and would smile at the opinion
formed of them.

[Illustration: LUCRETIA BORGIA.

From a painting in the Musée de Nîmes.]

Lucretia Borgia might correspond with the one derived from the documents
of her time, which show her as an amiable, gentle, thoughtless, and
unfortunate woman. Her misfortunes, in life, were due in part to a fate
for which she was in no way responsible, and, after her death, in the
opinion which was formed regarding her character. The brand which had
been set upon her forehead was removed by herself when she became
Duchess of Ferrara, but on her death it reappeared. How soon this
happened is shown by what the Rovere in Urbino said of her. In the year
1532 it was arranged that Guidobaldo II, son of Francesco Maria and
Eleonora Gonzaga, should marry Giulia Varano, although he himself wished
to marry a certain Orsini. His father directed his attention to the
unequal alliances into which princes were prone to enter, and among
others to that of Alfonso of Ferrara, who, he said, had married Lucretia
Borgia, a woman "of the sort which everybody knows," and who had given
his son a monster (Renée) for wife. Guidobaldo acquiesced in this view
and replied that he knew he had a father who would never compel him to
take a wife like Lucretia Borgia, "one as bad as she and of so many
disreputable connections."[247] Thus the impression grew and Lucretia
Borgia became the type of all feminine depravity until finally Victor
Hugo in his drama, and Donizetti in his opera, placed her upon the stage
in that character.

       *       *       *       *       *

In conclusion a few words regarding the descendants of Lucretia and
Alfonso,--the Duke of Ferrara survived his wife fifteen stormy years.
He, however, succeeded in defending himself against the popes of the
Medici family, and he revenged himself on Clement VII by sacking Rome
with the aid of the emperor's troops. Charles V gave him Modena and
Reggio, and he was therefore able to leave his heir the estates of the
house of Este in their integrity. He never married again, but a
beautiful bourgeoise, Laura Eustochia Dianti, became his mistress. She
bore him two sons, Alfonso and Alfonsino. The duke died October 31,
1534, at the age of fifty-eight; his brothers, Cardinal Ippolito and Don
Sigismondo, having passed away before him, the former in 1520 and the
latter in 1524.

By Lucretia Borgia he had five children. Ercole succeeded him; Ippolito
became a cardinal, and died December 2, 1572, in Tivoli, where the Villa
d'Este remains as his monument; Elenora died, a nun, in the Convent of
Corpus Domini, July 15, 1575; Francesco finally became Marchese of
Massalombarda, and died February 22, 1578.

Lucretia's son Ercole reigned until October, 1559. In 1528 his father
had married him to Renée, the plain but intellectual daughter of Louis
XII. Lucretia had never seen her daughter-in-law nor had she ever had
any intimation that it was to be Renée. The life of this famous duchess
forms a noteworthy part of the history of Ferrara. She was an active
supporter of the Reformation, which was inaugurated to free the world
from a church which was governed by the Borgia, the Rovere, and the
Medici. Renée was therefore described as a monster by the Rovere. She
kept Calvin and Clement Marot in concealment at her court a long time.

By a curious coincidence, in the year 1550 a man appeared at the court
of Lucretia's son, who vividly recalled to the Borgias who were still
living their family history, which was already becoming legendary. This
man was Don Francesco Borgia, Duke of Gandia, now a Jesuit. His sudden
appearance in Ferrara gives us an opportunity briefly to describe the
fortunes of the house of Gandia.

Of all the progeny of Alexander VI the most fortunate were those who
were the descendants of the murdered Don Giovanni. His widow, Donna
Maria, lived for a long time highly respected at the court of Queen
Isabella of Castile, and subsequently she became an ascetic bigot and
entered a convent. Her daughter Isabella did the same, dying in 1537.
Her only son, Don Giovanni, while a child, had succeeded his unfortunate
father as Duke of Gandia and had managed to retain his Neapolitan
estates, which included an extensive domain in Terra di Lavoro, with the
cities of Suessa, Teano, Carinola, Montefuscolo, Fiume, and others. In
1506 the youthful Gandia relinquished these towns to the King of Spain
on payment of a sum of money. To the great Captain Gonsalvo was given
the Principality of Suessa.

Don Giovanni remained in Spain a highly respected grandee. He married
Giovanna d'Aragona, a princess of the deposed royal house of Naples; his
second wife was a daughter of the Viscount of Eval, Donna Francesca de
Castro y Pinos, whom he married in 1520. The marriages of the Borgias
were as a rule exceedingly fruitful. When this grandson of Alexander VI
died in 1543 he left no fewer than fifteen children. His daughters
married among the grandees of Spain and his sons were numbered among the
great nobles of the country, where they enjoyed the highest honors. The
eldest, Don Francesco Borgia, born in 1510, became Duke of Gandia and a
great lord in Spain and highly honored at the court of Charles V, who
made him Vice-Regent of Catalonia and Commander of San Iago. He
accompanied the emperor on his expedition against France and even to
Africa. In 1529 he married one of the ladies in waiting to the empress,
Eleonora de Castro, who bore him five sons and three daughters. When she
died, in 1546, the Duke of Gandia yielded to his long-standing desire to
enter the Society of Jesus and to relinquish his brilliant position
forever. It seemed as if a mysterious force was impelling him thus to
expiate the crimes of his house. It is not strange, however, to find a
descendant of Alexander VI in the garb of a Jesuit, for the diabolic
force of will which had characterized that Borgia lived again in the
person of his countryman, Loyola, in another form and directed to
another end. The maxims of Macchiavelli's "Prince" thus became part of
the political programme of the Jesuits.

In 1550 the Duke of Gandia went to Rome to cast himself at the feet of
the Pope and to become a member of the Order. Paul III, brother of
Giulia Farnese, had just died, and del Monte as Julius III had ascended
the papal throne. Ercole II, cousin of Don Francesco, still occupied the
ducal throne of Ferrara. He remembered the relationship and invited the
traveler to stop at his city on his way to Rome. Francesco spent three
days at the court of Lucretia's son, where he was received by Renée.
Whether Loyola's brilliant pupil had any knowledge of the religious
attitude of Calvin's friend is not known. The presence of this man in
Savonarola's native city and at Lucretia's former residence is, on
account of the contrast, remarkable. Francesco left for Rome almost
immediately, and then returned to Spain. On the death of Lainez, in
1565, he became general,--the third in order,--of the Society of Jesus.
He still held this position at the time of his death, which occurred in
Rome in the year 1572. The Church pronounced him holy, and thus a
descendant of Alexander VI became a saint.[248]

The descendants of this Borgia married into the greatest families of
Spain. His eldest son, Don Carlos, Duke of Gandia, married Donna
Maddalena, daughter of the Count of Oliva, of the house of Centelles,
and thus the family to which Lucretia's first suitor belonged, after the
lapse of fifty years, became connected with the Borgias. The Gandia
branch survived until the eighteenth century, when there were two
cardinals of the name of Borgia who were members of it.

Ercole II did not discover the heretical tendencies of his wife Renée
until 1554, when he placed her in a convent. The noble princess remained
true to the Reformation. As the Inquisition stamped out the reform
movement in Ferrara while her son was reigning duke, she returned to
France, where she lived with the Huguenots in her Castle of Montargis,
dying in 1575. It is worthy of note that the Duke of Guise was her
son-in-law.

Renée had borne her husband several children,--the hereditary Prince
Alfonso Luigi, who subsequently became a cardinal; Donna Anna, who
married the Duke of Guise; Donna Lucretia, who became Duchess of Urbino;
and Donna Leonora, who remained single.

Her son Alfonso II succeeded to the throne of Ferrara in 1559. This was
the duke whom Tasso made immortal. Just as Ariosto, during the reign of
the first Alfonso and Lucretia, had celebrated the house of Este in a
monumental poem, so Torquato Tasso now continued to do at the home of
his descendant, Alfonso II. By a curious coincidence the two greatest
epic poets of Italy were in the service of the same family. Tasso's fate
is one of the darkest memories of the house of Este, and is also the
last of any special importance in the history of the court of Ferrara.
His poem may be regarded as the death song of this famous family, for
the legitimate line of the house of Este died out October 27, 1597, in
Alfonso II, Lucretia Borgia's grandson. Don Cæsar, a grandson of Alfonso
I, and son of that Alfonso whom Laura Dianti had borne him and of Donna
Giulia Rovere of Urbino, ascended the ducal throne of Ferrara on the
death of Alfonso II as his heir. The Pope, however, would not recognize
him. In vain he endeavored to prove that his grandfather, shortly before
his death, had legally married Laura Dianti, and that consequently he
was the legitimate heir to the throne. It availed nothing for the
contestants to appear before the tribunal of emperor and pope and
endeavor to make Don Cæsar's pretensions good, nor does it now avail for
the Ferrarese, who, following Muratori, still seek to substantiate these
claims. Don Cæsar was forced to yield to Clement VIII, January 13, 1598,
the grandson of Alfonso I renouncing the Duchy of Ferrara. Together with
his wife, Virginia Medici and his children, he left the old palace of
his ancestors and betook himself to Modena, the title of duke of that
city and the estates of Reggio and Carpi having been conferred upon him.

Don Cæsar continued the branch line of the Este. At the end of the
eighteenth century it passed into the Austrian Este house in the person
of Archduke Ferdinand, and in the nineteenth century this line also
became extinct.

No longer do the popes control Ferrara. Where the castle of Tedaldo
stood when Lucretia made her entry into the city in 1502, where Clement
VIII later erected the great castle which was razed in 1859, there is
now a wide field in the middle of which, lost and forgotten, is a
melancholy statue of Paul V, and all about is a waste. There is still
standing before the castle of Giovanni Sforza in Pesaro a column from
which the statue has been overturned, and on the base is the
inscription: "Statue of Urban VII--That is all that is left of it."


FOOTNOTES:

[244] This letter is quoted by Zucchetti.

[245] Printed in Zucchetti's work. Che da forse dieci anni in qua la
portava el silizio.... This is not, as Zucchetti supposes, the goat-hair
shirt.

[246] In this translation it appears on the cover.

[247] Di quella mala sorte che fù quella, e con tante disoneste parti.
See Ugolino Storia dei Duchi d'Urbino, ii, 242.

[248] J. M. S. Daurignac, Histoire de S. François de Borgia, Duc de
Gandie, Troisième Général de la Compagnie de Jesus. Paris, 1863.




INDEX


  Adriana de Mila, see Mila, Adriana de.

  Albret, Charlotte d', married to Cæsar Borgia, 115, 325.

  Aldo Manuzio, 132, 305, 327;
    in Venice, 340.

  Alexander VI, see Borgia, Rodrigo.

  Alfonso d'Este, see Este.

  Alfonso of Biselli, see Alfonso of Naples.

  Alfonso of Naples, 111, 113;
    flees from Rome, 116;
    attempt on his life, 147;
    murdered, 148.

  Allegre, Monsignor d', captures Alexander's mistress, 87, 143.

  Amboise, Cardinal George d', 115, 169, 296.

  Angelo, Michael, first appearance in Rome, 135; his _Pietà_, 136.

  Aragon, Eleonora of, wife of Ercole d'Este, 54.

  Aragona, Camilla Marzana d', wife of Costanza Sforza, 78, 82.

  Aragona, Isabella d', of Milan, 334;
    guardian of Rodrigo Borgia, 335.

  Aragonese of Naples, their fall, 172.

  Arignano, Domenico of, 11.

  Ariosto, 247, 254, 308-309, 311;
    his _Orlando_, 340.

  _Asolani_, i, 31.


  Baglione, Giampolo, his cowardice, 99.

  Ballet, the, 255.

  Bayard, the Chevalier, his opinion of Lucretia, 332.

  Behaim, Lorenz, humanist, 32.

  Bella, la, or Giulia Bella, 39;
    see also Farnese, Giulia.

  Bellingeri, Hector, 188.

  Bembo, Cardinal, 31;
    eulogizes Alexander VI, 100;
    condoles Lucretia on Alexander's death, 291;
    dedicates his _Asolani_ to Lucretia, 305, 306, 340.

  Beneimbeni, notary, 131.

  Bentivoglio, Ginevra, 101.

  Bisceglie or Biseglia, see Biselli.

  Biselli, 111;
    Lucretia duchess of, 113.

  Biselli, Alfonso of, see Alfonso of Naples.

  Borgia, Alfonso, founder of the family, 3.

  Borgia, Angela, married to Francesco Maria della Rovere, 115, 223, 310;
    wife of Alessandro Pio, 311.

  Borgia, Anna de, Princess of Squillace, 334.

  Borgia, Beatrice, sister of Alexander VI, 5.

  Borgia, Cæsar, his birth, 12;
    his moderation, 29;
    at the University of Pisa, 39;
    made bishop of Valencia, 48;
    his personality, 57-58;
    made cardinal, 65;
    crowns Federico, king of Naples, 108;
    renounces his cardinalate, 113;
    sails for France, 115;
    made duke of Valentinois, 115;
    marries Charlotte d'Albret, 115;
    campaigns in the Romagna, 122, 280;
    takes Forli, 139;
    correspondence with Ercole d'Este, 145;
    letter to Gonzaga, 146;
    power over his father, 149;
    enters Romagna, 159;
    takes Pesaro, 161;
    Faenza, 166;
    made duke of Romagna, 170;
    in Naples, 172;
    returns from Naples, 188;
    his age, 202;
    letter to Lucretia, 280;
    treachery of his captains, 283;
    letter to Isabella Gonzaga, 285;
    taken sick, 286;
    loses his estates, 293;
    in Nepi, 295, 298;
    goes to Naples, 299;
    to Spain, 299;
    confined in Castle of Seville, 300;
    escapes, 317-318;
    informs Gonzaga of his escape, 319;
    his death, 321-322;
    his character, 323.

  Borgia, Catarina, sister of Calixtus III, 4.

  Borgia, Francesco, duke of Gandia, enters the Society of Jesus, 364;
    general of the order, 365;
    dies in Rome and is canonized, 365.

  Borgia, Giovanni, duke of Gandia, son of Vannozza, 12, 93.

  Borgia, Giovanni, Cardinal, "the elder," made cardinal, 49.

  Borgia, Giovanni, Cardinal, "the younger," 116;
    death of, 137;
    his parentage, 138.

  Borgia, Giovanni, "Infante of Rome," his parentage, 192-194, 295, 335;
    at Lucretia's court, 341-342;
    his death, 343-344.

  Borgia, Girolama, daughter of Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, 18.

  Borgia, Giuffrè, son of Vannozza, his birth, 20;
    made archdeacon of Valencia, 40;
    marries Donna Sancia, of Naples, 65;
    Prince of Squillace, 71;
    comes to Rome, 92, 295;
    goes to Naples, 299.

  Borgia, Isabella, daughter of Cardinal Rodrigo, 19.

  Borgia, Isabella, sister of Calixtus III, 4.

  Borgia, Juana, sister of Cardinal Rodrigo, 5.

  Borgia, Juan Luis, nephew of Calixtus III, 4.

  Borgia, Lucretia, daughter of Cardinal Rodrigo and Vannozza,
      birth, 12-13;
    her education, 23;
    her modesty, 28;
    her linguistic attainments, 31;
    letters to Bembo, 31;
    betrothed to Cherubino Juan de Centelles, 41;
    betrothed to Gasparo de Procida, 42;
    married to Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro, 58-60;
    returns to Rome, 86;
    goes to the Convent of S. Sisto, 107;
    rumors concerning, 109;
    divorced from Sforza, 109;
    betrothed to Alfonzo of Naples, 111;
    becomes duchess of Biselli, 113;
    regent of Spoleto, 117;
    invested with title to Nepi, 118;
    gives birth to a son, 121;
    her private life, 125;
    her weakness, 151;
    goes to Nepi, 151;
    letters from there, 155-157, 172;
    represents the pope in his absence, 173;
    charges against her, 175;
    objections to her marriage, 184;
    nuptials with Alfonso d'Este, 185-187;
    prepares to depart, 196;
    her age, 201;
    her dowry, 204-207;
    her character, 212;
    her marriage, 216;
    her retinue, 222;
    leaves Rome, 225;
    journey to Ferrara, 232-240;
    entrance into Ferrara, 240-244;
    her person, 247;
    fêtes in her honor, 250-263;
    letter to Isabella Gonzaga, 263;
    gives birth to a daughter, 282;
    duchess of Ferrara, 303;
    her library, 304;
    corresponds with Giulia Farnese, 313;
    bears a son, 326;
    another, 328;
    regent of Ferrara, 328;
    claims Rodrigo's property, 336;
    change in her character, 338;
    relations with her husband, 341;
    her son, Alessandro, 341;
    letter to Isabella Gonzaga, 355;
    letter to Leo X, 356;
    her death, 357;
    place of burial unknown, 358;
    portraits of, 358-359;
    medals of, 359;
    posthumous reputation, 361;
    her children by Alfonso, 362.

  Borgia, Ludovico, governor of Spoleto, 121.

  Borgia, Luigi, 325.

  Borgia, Luisa, Cæsar's daughter, 325.

  Borgia, Pedro Luis, nephew of Calixtus III, 4, 5;
     his death, 6.

  Borgia, Rodrigo, nephew of Calixtus III, made cardinal, 4;
    vice-chancellor, 5;
    his sensuality, 7;
    his person, 9;
    his wealth, 17;
    and Adriana Orsini, 23;
    witness to marriage of Giulia Farnese and Orsino Orsini, 38;
    elected pope, 44;
    his coronation, 45;
    letter to his daughter, 74;
    his abstinence, 94;
    secures Lucretia's divorce, 108;
    determines to marry Lucretia into house of Naples, 110;
    demands hand of Carlotta of Naples for Cæsar, 110;
    letter to priors of Spoleto, 117;
    assumes control of Nepi, 120;
    his intellectual pleasures, 126;
    extols Ercole, 188;
    his Latin, 189;
    falls sick, 197;
    letter to the priors of Nepi, 224;
    sickness and death, 286;
    his immorality, 289-291.

  Borgia, Rodrigo, nephew of Alexander VI, captain of the papal guard, 49.

  Borgia, Rodrigo, son of Lucretia and Alfonso of Naples, his
      birth, 121, 194, 295-296;
    his death, 333.

  Borgia, Tecla, sister of Cardinal Rodrigo, 5.

  Borgias, their coat of arms, 45;
    their character, 93-94;
    family, 203.

  Brandolini, Aurelio, 126.

  Bull-fighting in Rome, 220.

  Burchard, 125;
    his diary, 129-131, 177, 289.


  Cagnolo of Parma, his description of Lucretia, 248.

  Calcagnini, Celio, bridal song, 246, 340.

  Calixtus III, 4;
    his death, 6.

  Calvin, 363.

  Cambray, League of, 327.

  Canale, Carlo, 21-22.

  Capello, Polo, account of Cæsar, 177, 180.

  Caracciolo, his _De Varietate Fortunæ_, 334.

  Caranza, Pedro, privy-chamberlain, 49.

  Carlotta of Naples, 110.

  Carlotta, Queen of Cyprus, 32.

  Castelli, Adriano, 132.

  Castiglione, 31, 250, 305.

  Castle Vecchio, description of, 270-272.

  Catanei, see Vannozza Catanei.

  Cavalliere, Bartolomeo, letter of, 182.

  Caviceo, Jacopo, dedicates his _Peregrino_ to Lucretia, 308.

  Centelles, Cherubino Juan de, betrothal to Lucretia, 41.

  Charles V, 4, 327.

  Charles VIII, 62;
    enters Italy, 87;
    retreats, 90.

  Chrysoleras, 32.

  Cieco, Francesco, his _Mambriano_, 277.

  Classic culture, 26.

  Collenuccio, Pandolfo, poet and orator, 85;
    letter to Ercole, 161, 293-294;
    his death, 295.

  Colonna, Vittoria, 30, 136, 142.

  Copernicus in Rome, 129.

  _Cortegiano, il_, 31.

  Cosenza, Cardinal of, 191;
    Rodrigo Borgia's guardian, 297.

  Costa, Michele, 339.

  Cotrone, Marchesana of, letter to Gonzaga, 253.

  Croce, Giorgio de, husband of Vannozza, 12, 20.


  Dance, the, during the Renaissance, 253.

  Decio, Philippo, jurisprudent, 40.

  Della Rovere, see Rovere.

  Dianti, Laura Eustochia, mistress of Alfonso d'Este, 362, 366.

  Diplovatazio, Giorgio, 84.

  Dossi, Dosso, 278, 339.

  Drama, the, 128.


  Eleonora of Aragon, wife of Ercole d'Este, 270.

  Enriquez, Maria, wife of Giovanni Borgia, duke of Gandia, 64.

  Este, palaces of the, 244;
    their history, 266-270;
    family expires in Alfonso II, 366.

  Este, Alfonso d', 54;
    projected marriage with Lucretia, 167, 182;
    greets his bride, 236;
    becomes duke of Ferrara, 303;
    conspiracy against, 315;
    suspected of the murder of Strozzi, 327;
    under ban of Julius II, 331;
    asks the pope's forgiveness, 333;
    attends coronation of Leo X, 338;
    cultivates the arts, 339;
    letter to his nephew on Lucretia's death, 357.

  Este, Alfonso II, d', succeeds to throne of Ferrara, 366.

  Este, Alfonso Luigi d', son of Renée, 365.

  Este, Anna d', wife of the duke of Guise, 366.

  Este, Beatrice d', wife of Ludovico il Moro, 54.

  Este, Ercole d', 54;
    letter to Alexander VI, 55;
    letter to Gonzaga, 186;
    to his envoys, 198;
    relations with Lucretia, 205;
    present to her, 217;
    letter to Alexander VI, 265;
    congratulates Cæsar, 284;
    letter to Seregni, 287;
    to Lucretia regarding her son Rodrigo, 297-298;
    his death, 303.

  Este, Ercole II, d', duke of Ferrara, 362, 364.

  Este, Ferrante d', his imprisonment and death, 316.

  Este, Giulio d', attack on, 310;
    its consequences, 315;
    his imprisonment and death, 316.

  Este, Ippolito d', 56;
    made cardinal, 65, 186, 310.

  Este, Isabella d', wife of Francesco Gonzaga of Montua, her
      learning, 30, 54;
    meets Lucretia, 239, 245;
    her beauty
    and vanity, 252;
    letter to Lucretia, 263;
    congratulates Cæsar on his successes, 284;
    predilection for the arts, 340.

  Estouteville, Cardinal, his children, 54.


  Farnese, Alessandro, 36-37;
    made cardinal, 65.

  Farnese, family, 36-37.

  Farnese, Girolama, 65, 312.

  Farnese, Giulia, 35;
    her betrothal, 37;
    marriage, 38, 39;
    "the pope's concubine," 63, 65;
    her daughter, Laura, 66;
    "Christ's bride," 66;
    her beauty, 69;
    captured by the French, 87, 123, 311;
    her death, 314.

  Fedeli, Cassandra, 28, 30.

  Federico of Naples, consents to betrothal of Alfonso and Lucretia, 110.

  Ferdinand of Naples, congratulates Sforza on his marriage, 62.

  Ferdinand of Spain, 299, 302.

  Ferno, Michele, describes Alexander's coronation, 46-48, 129.

  Ferrara, 191;
    Lucretia enters, 240-244;
    description of, 272-278.

  Ferrari, Cardinal, 185, 224.

  Filosseno, Marcello, sonnets to Lucretia, 308.

  Florence, her fear of Cæsar, 202.

  Foix, Gaston de, 332.


  Gaetani, family, 122;
    their property given Lucretia, 123;
    return to Sermoneta, 296.

  Gambara, Veronica, her learning, 30.

  Gandia (see also Giovanni Borgia), Duke of, gonfalonier, 103;
    murder of, 105-106;
    his heir, 106, 177.

  Garofalo, Benvenuto, 278, 339.

  Ghibbelines, 14.

  Gonsalvo, 299.

  Gonzaga, Elisabetta, her pilgrimage to Rome, 140;
    letter to her brother, Francesco Gonzaga, 140-142.

  Gonzaga, Isabella, see Este, Isabella d'.

  Gradara, Castle of, 83.

  Greek, study of, 32.

  Guelf III of Swabia, 267.

  Guelphs, 14.

  Guicciardini, Francesco, his charges against Lucretia, 176.


  Imola, attacked by Cæsar Borgia, 121.

  Infessura, 11, 24.

  Inghirami, Phædra, 128.

  Inquisition, the, 365.


  Jovius, Paul, his opinion of Lucretia, 338.

  Jubilee of 1500, 137, 140.

  Julius II (see also Rovere, Giuliano della), 298, 312;
    offends Lucretia, 313;
    takes Perugia and Bologna, 317;
    forms League of Cambray, 327;
    places Alfonso under his ban, 331;
    his death, 338.


  Lanzol family, 4.

  Leo X, 338;
    his court, 340.

  Literature during the Renaissance, 96.

  Lopez, Juan, made chancellor, 49.

  Louis XII, 116;
    takes Milan, 121;
    opposes marriage of Lucretia and Alfonso d'Este, 169;
  congratulates Alexander VI, 198.

  Loyola, Ignatius, 4, 364.

  Lucia of Viterbo, Sister, 257.

  Ludovico il Moro, 45; hatred of the pope, 89.


  Macchiavelli, his theory of the ruler, 98-99;
    his "Prince," 100.

  Majolica, 83.

  Malatesta, the, of Rimini, 77.

  Malatesta, Sigismondo, 25.

  Malipiero, letter of, 180.

  Manfredi, Astorre, surrenders to Cæsar, 166.

  Mantua, Isabella of, see Este, Isabella d'.

  Mantua, Marquis of, his letter on Alexander's death, 288.

  Manuzio, Aldo, see Aldo Manuzio.

  Marades, Juan, made privy-chancellor, 49.

  Marot, Clement, at court of Renée, 363.

  Matarazza of Perugia, 178-179.

  Matilda, Countess, 267.

  Maximilian, Emperor, opposition to Lucretia's marriage, 184, 329.

  Melini, the brothers, 127.

  Micheletto, confesses that Alfonso of Biselli was murdered by Alexander's
      orders, 346.

  Mila or Mella family, 4.

  Mila, Adriana, 5;
    married to Ludovico Orsini, 23.

  Montefeltre, the, 232.

  Montefeltre, Agnesina di, 142.


  Nepi, 119;
    given to Ascanio Sforza, 120;
    description of, 152-155;
    unhealthful climate of 158.

  Nepotism, 14.

  Novel, the, during the Renaissance, 26.

  Nugarolla, Isotta, her learning, 30.


  Orsini, Adriana (see also Mila, Adriana de), captured by the
      French, 87, 223.

  Orsini, Laura, daughter of the pope, 66;
    betrothed to Federico Farnese, 114;
    betrothed to Raimondo Farnese, 312.

  Orsini, Orsino, 23;
    betrothed to Giulia Farnese, 37;
    the marriage, 38.


  Paniciatus, N. Marius, his poems in honor of Lucretia, 245.

  Paul III, 36.

  Pazzi conspiracy, the, 14.

  Perotto, 177.

  Perugino, 100, 133.

  Pesaro, history of, 76-79;
    description of, 79-86;
    captured by Cæsar Borgia, 161.

  Pesaro, Giovanni of, see Sforza, Giovanni.

  Philosophy, study of, during the Renaissance, 29.

  Piccolomini, Cardinal, his children, 34;
    elected pope, 296.

  _Pietà_ of Michael Angelo, 136.

  Pinturicchio, 100;
    his portrait of Giulia Farnese, 133;
    portraits of the Borgias, 134.

  Pius II, admonitory letter to Cardinal Borgia, 7.

  Pius III, 296.

  Poliziano, Angelo, 21.

  Pollajuolo, Antonio, sculptor, 134.

  Pompilio, Paolo, dedicates his _Syllabica_ to Cæsar Borgia, 39, 129.

  Pontanus, 125;
    his epigrams, 176.

  Porcaro, the, adherents of the Borgias, 46;
    the brothers, 127.

  Posthumus, Guido, see Silvester, Guido Posthumus.

  Pozzi, Gianlucca, 185;
    description of Lucretia, 213;
    letter to Ercole d'Este, 220, 229-232.

  Prete, el, his account of Lucretia's wedding, 214-215, 218.

  _Principe il_, 100.

  Procida, Gasparo de, betrothed to Lucretia, 42;
    the contract dissolved, 51, 111.

  Pucci, Lorenzo, 66;
    letter to his brother, 67.

  Pucci, Puccio, 37, 65.


  Ravenna, battle of, 332.

  Reformation, the, 363.

  Renaissance, the, education of women during, 24-33;
    immorality during, 96-101, 135;
    the theater, 97, 251;
    traveling, 208;
    the dance, 253;
    dress, 260.

  Renée of France, wife of Ercole II, 362-363;
    placed in convent, 365;
    dies in France, 365.

  Requesenz, 300, 319, 321.

  Reuchlin, in Rome, 131.

  Romagna, Duke of, see Borgia, Cæsar.

  Rome, society of, 133;
    sack of, 362.

  Romolini, Francesco, 40.

  Romolini, Raimondo, goes to Rome, 182.

  Rovere, Francesco Maria della, secures Pesaro, 331.

  Rovere, Giuliano della (see also Julius II), his children, 34;
    goes to France to urge Charles VIII to invade Italy, 73, 115, 196;
    becomes pope, 298, 314.


  Sadoleto, 340.

  Sancia of Naples, Donna, gossip concerning, 95;
    banished from Rome, 134;
    her death, 334.

  Sangallo, Antonio di, Alexander's architect, 134.

  Sannazzaro, his epigrams, 125, 176.

  Sanuto, Marino, his diary, 178, 289.

  Saraceni, 188; letter regarding the bridal escort, 199-201;
    letter to Ercole d'Este, 220, 222-232.

  Savonarola, 95, 276.

  Serafina of Aquila, 126.

  Sermoneta, 122.

  Sessa, see Suessa.

  Sforza, the palace of, 81;
    tragedies among, 334.

  Sforza, Ascanio, made vice-chancellor, 44;
    joins the Colonna, 73;
    leaves Rome, 116, 143.

  Sforza, Battista, her learning, 30.

  Sforza, Blanca, 183, 185.

  Sforza, Cattarina, 101;
    surrenders to Cæsar, 139;
    her life, 139;
    released, 143;
    her death, 144.

  Sforza, Galeazzo, succeeds Giovanni, 331.

  Sforza, Ginevra, 28.

  Sforza, Giovanni, of Pesaro, offered Lucretia's hand, 50;
    betrothed to her, 52;
    marriage, 58;
    his person, 59;
    his relations with the pope uncertain, 71;
    letter to his uncle, Ludovico il Moro, 71;
    leaves Rome, 73;
    returns, 102;
    flees from Rome, 104;
    protests against divorce, 108;
    divorced from Lucretia, 109;
    appeals to Gonzaga for help, 159-160;
    leaves Pesaro, 160, 179;
    returns to Pesaro, 294;
    his death, 330.

  Sforza, Ippolita, 28.

  Sforza, Ludovico, captured by king of France, 143.

  Silvester, Guido Posthumus, poet, 85, 179.

  Sixtus IV, 14.

  Soriano, defeat of the pope at, 104.

  Sperulo, Francesco, Cæsar's court poet, 126.

  Spoleto, the castle of, 119.

  Squillace, Prince of, see Borgia, Giuffrè.

  Stage, the, during the Renaissance, 97.

  Strozzi, Ercole, eulogizes Cæsar Borgia, 100;
    poem on death of Cæsar, 324;
    murder of, 326.

  Strozzi, father and son, 277, 307.

  Suessa, Giovanni Borgia, duke of, 71.


  Taro, battle of the, 91.

  Tasso, Torquato, his _Aminta_, 83, 366.

  Tebaldeo, Antonio, 277, 308, 340.

  Theology, study of, during the Renaissance, 29.

  Tiepoli, Ginevra, wife of Giovanni Sforza, 330.

  Tisio, Benvenuto, see Garofalo.

  Titian, 327.

  Torelli, Barbara, 327.

  Trivulzia of Milan, 29.

  Troche, Cæsar's confidant, 191.


  Urbino, Elisabetta of, her learning, 30;
    her beauty, 252.

  Urbino, Guidobaldo of, in command of papal troops, 102.


  Valentino or Valentinois, see Borgia, Cæsar.

  Vannozza Catanei, mistress of Rodrigo Borgia, 10;
    her children, 12;
    her home, 15;
    marriage to Carlo Canale, 22, 295;
    charged with theft, 346;
    gives her house to Church of S. Maria del Popolo, 346;
    her last years, 347-351;
    her bequests, 351;
    her death, 351;
    her obsequies, 353.

  Vasari, his account of Pinturicchio's work, 133.

  Vatican, the orgy in, 178;
    life in, 189.

  Villa Imperiale, 83.

  Vinci, Leonardo da, 100.

  Virago, meaning of the term, 28, 101.

  Zambotto, Bernardino, his description of Lucretia, 247.






End of Project Gutenberg's Lucretia Borgia, by Ferdinand Gregorovius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LUCRETIA BORGIA ***

***** This file should be named 20804-8.txt or 20804-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/8/0/20804/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook, Caesar Borgia, by John Leslie Garner


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Caesar Borgia
       A Study of the Renaissance


Author: John Leslie Garner



Release Date: May 10, 2018  [eBook #57132]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAESAR BORGIA***


E-text prepared by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 57132-h.htm or 57132-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57132/57132-h/57132-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57132/57132-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/caesarborgiastud00garnuoft



CAESAR BORGIA

[Illustration: CESAR BORGIA

_From an early engraving._

            Frontispiece.]




  CAESAR BORGIA

  A STUDY OF THE
  RENAISSANCE

  BY
  JOHN LESLIE GARNER

  WITH 17 ILLUSTRATIONS

  T. FISHER UNWIN
  LONDON: 1 ADELPHI TERRACE
  LEIPSIC: INSELSTRASSE 20
  1912

(_All rights reserved._)




PREFACE


Although much has been written regarding the Borgias, no monograph
devoted to Caesar--the most interesting member of the family as a
psychological study--has hitherto appeared in English.

With the passing of the “great man theory,” biography and history have
become completely separated, and a personality such as Caesar Borgia is
interesting now chiefly as a product of the egoism of the age. Vast,
unrestrained selfishness was the predominant characteristic of the men
of the Italian Renaissance. The Peninsula was in the grasp of a number
of petty tyrants who, to advance their own interests and those of their
families, hesitated at no crime.

Never before was love of power so general and carried to such extremes.
Men and women were mere pawns in a stupendous political game. In the
governing families the women especially were regarded as assets to be
used in establishing alliances to increase the power of the clan.

Men of iron played fast and loose with states and principalities; to
them the lives of a city’s population were nothing except so far as
their own projects and power were concerned.

Of this world the Borgias were part, although they were interlopers in
the affairs of the Peninsula; they saw other upstarts securing vast
wealth and dominion, and why should not they? The thing were easy with
Rodrigo Borgia on the throne of St. Peter. Money in unlimited amounts
was at their command and the spiritual weapons of the Church had not
yet been cast on the rubbish-heap--there were still kings and princes
that quaked at the threat of excommunication.

Other men, other families, have played a much more important part than
the Borgias in the drama of history; others have committed as great
crimes; others have surpassed them in every field of human activity--in
fact, no member of the Borgia family ever produced anything of enduring
value to Italy or the human race. We are therefore led to ask why
Alexander VI., Caesar, and Lucretia Borgia have always aroused such
profound interest. Gregorovius ascribes this to the violent contrast
of their mode of living--their morals--with the sacredness of the
Holy Office. An explanation wholly adequate; for, although there were
temporal princes who equalled or surpassed Alexander VI. and Caesar
Borgia in wickedness, the Papacy furnishes no other example, in the
person of Pope or cardinal, of as great moral obliquity. Caesar had
been a cardinal, and in all his projects, after as well as before he
relinquished the purple, he was supported by the Pope, his father.

Drum and trumpet histories are now fortunately fast becoming obsolete,
and it is a truism to say that any man whose claim to fame is based
on acts prompted by unbridled egoism can have little, if any, lasting
effect upon the progress of the human race. A great scientist, scholar,
or inventor may by his discoveries change the mode of living, the
institutions of mankind, and, therefore, the subsequent history of
humanity. The overthrow of the Feudal System has been ascribed to the
invention of gunpowder; and the mariner’s compass, the steam-engine,
and the printing-press have altered the very nature of man; the
discovery of an anæsthetic or an antitoxin may have greater effect upon
the history of mankind than the victories of an Alexander.

Mere men of violence, the so-called conquerors, the military geniuses,
whom little children were once taught to admire, and whom moral
perverts are still wont to exalt--the ferocious egoists, who sigh for
more worlds to conquer--are the most useless creatures produced by
humanity in the painful course of its evolution.

Even had these men never existed the great historic movements with
which they were connected would undoubtedly have run their course and
reached the same goal. The Roman Empire would have come without Caesar,
and without Napoleon France would still have become the Republic.

However interesting Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, and Napoleon
may be as examples of unbridled egoism, they failed to attain the ends
they sought; their conquests did not last; the victories of fraud and
violence never can endure.

Renascent Italy furnished numerous examples of power built up by
these means, and even the beneficiaries knew how unstable was their
dominion. Professor Achille Loria has pointed out that Machiavelli’s
admiration for Caesar Borgia was due to his perfect comprehension of
the true nature of feudal property and to his understanding of the
inherent necessity for the spoliations, extortions, and crimes which
characterised it; and also of the historical justification of the acts
that favoured the preservation of this dominant social form.[1]

The bombastic chronicles of great men are now recognised as of slight
value, for the economic interpretation of history teaches us that the
individual plays but a small part in the march of events, even when his
character is the noblest, his aims the highest; without Washington the
colonies would have become the United States, and the slaves would have
been freed without Lincoln.

A great man, especially in the domain of politics, is the product
of his age. A genius appearing before society is ready for him is a
visionary, but if the times are ripe for him he is a genius; the great
man is he who best discerns the spirit of the age and enters the lists
as the champion of popular ideals. He is essentially the product of his
environment, and is so much a part of it that it is impossible to think
of him as belonging to any other.

Men being products of history, under similar conditions similar men
will be produced; but as they in the aggregate are the makers of
history there is a constant mutation in conditions and therefore
ceaseless change in men.

In every epoch there are men who although in many respects unlike their
prototypes resemble them in others, and bear a close relationship to
them. Unchecked egoism asserts itself in every age, but the mode of its
expression varies according to the institutions of the day.

In Italy from the twelfth to the sixteenth century this egoism was
embodied in the tyrant or despot; it has found expression in the
absolute monarch, and in the present bourgeois epoch it is exemplified
in the captain of industry, the domineering genius of modern finance.

In the fifteenth century Italy was swarming with tyrants great and
small--men of boundless ambition and greed, striving for power,
deterred by no principle, hesitating at no crime. Duplicity, treachery,
murder, had become fine arts.

A host of adventurers, upstarts, brigands, soldiers of fortune, had
managed to secure possession of the domain of St. Peter and were
building up petty principalities for themselves and their kinsmen.
Originally these tyrants were feudatories of the Holy See, which based
its claim to the territory on the donation of the Countess Matilda,
who, dying in 1115, left her vast estates, which extended from Mantua
to Pisa and thence almost to the walls of Rome, to the Pope.

As soon as these vassals of the Holy See felt themselves strong enough
they refused all allegiance and declined to pay their annual tribute.
Alexander VI. was thus afforded an excellent pretext for attempting to
recover St. Peter’s domain--and this he set about doing, ostensibly
for the Church, but in reality to build up a kingdom in central Italy
for the benefit of his family.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
  INTRODUCTION

  The Renaissance--The Papacy in the fifteenth century--The
      Borgia                                                          23


  CHAPTER I

  Genealogy of the House of Borgia--Vannozza de’ Catanei--Birth
      of Caesar Borgia--His youth                                     68


  CHAPTER II

  Charles VIII. invades Italy--Caesar a hostage--Caesar leaves
      the King’s camp--The League against France--Charles
      enters Rome--Caesar appointed Governor of Orvieto--The
      Pope conceives the idea of recovering Romagna--He declares
      the Romagnol barons rebels--The Pope summons his son, the
      Duke of Gandia, from Spain to command the papal troops--
      Charles VIII. aids the Romagnol barons--Giuffre Borgia and
      his wife, Doña Sancia, of Naples, come to Rome--Caesar
      appointed Legate to crown the King of Naples                    87


  CHAPTER III

  The murder of the Duke of Gandia--Caesar departs to crown the
      King of Naples--He returns to Rome--The Pope’s projected
      matrimonial alliances for his children                         107


  CHAPTER IV

  Louis XII. succeeds to the throne of France--His bargain with
      the Pope--Caesar prepares to go to France--He renounces
      his cardinalate--He arrives in Avignon, where he meets
      Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere--Louis XII. and Caesar
      meet--Caesar’s entry into Chinon--Duke of Valentinois--
      Caesar’s shrewdness--Charlotte D’Albret--Her marriage
      to Caesar--The projected conquest of Milan--Ludovico
      il Moro--The French army invades Italy--Caesar leaves
      France--He enters Milan with Louis XII.                        122


  CHAPTER V

  The first campaign in Romagna--Imola surrenders--Caterina
      Sforza, the type of the virago--Caesar enters Forli--
      Death of Cardinal Giovanni Borgia--Return of Ludovico
      il Moro to Milan--Caesar goes to Rome--His entrance
      into the city--He is invested with the Vicariate of
      Romagna--Delegates from Imola and Forli request the Pope
      to appoint Caesar Governor--Caesar is made Gonfalonier of
      the Church--His oath--Caesar’s physical strength--His
      personal appearance                                            139


  CHAPTER VI

  Murder of Alfonso of Naples, Duke of Bisceglie--The second
      campaign in Romagna--Pesaro surrenders--Caesar’s private
      life--Pandolfaccio Malatesta gives up Rimini--Astorre
      Manfredi--Faenza’s brave resistance--The Pope threatens
      Bologna--Faenza surrenders--Caesar returns to Rome--
      Astorre Manfredi flung into prison--Giovanni Bentivoglio--
      Giuliano and Piero de’ Medici--Caesar’s agreement with
      Florence--Piombino invested--Caesar returns to Rome--
      Coalition of the Pope and the King of France for the
      destruction of the House of Naples--Yves d’Allegre comes
      to Rome--Berault Stuart, commander of the French army,
      enters the city                                                157


  CHAPTER VII

  The expedition against Naples--The taking of Capua--Naples
      surrenders--Caesar returns to Rome--The orgy in his
      apartments in the Vatican--The Pope divides the conquered
      territory in Romagna among his family--Negotiations for
      the marriage of Lucretia Borgia and Alfonso d’Este--Caesar
      receives the Ferrarese envoys--Lucretia’s marriage--Her
      character--The Pope and Caesar go to Piombino--They visit
      Elba--Caesar and Leonardo da Vinci                             181


  CHAPTER VIII

  The third campaign in Romagna--Caesar goes to Spoleto--
      The Duke of Urbino flees to Florence--Valentino takes
      possession of Urbino--Florence sends envoys to him--
      Machiavelli’s first impressions of Caesar--The King of
      France warns Valentino not to molest Florence--Caesar
      plunders the palace of Urbino--Michael Angelo’s “Cupid”--
      Camerino surrenders to Valentino’s lieutenants--Louis XII.
      receives Caesar and Alfonso d’Este at Milan--The King and
      Valentino enter into an agreement--Caesar goes to Imola--
      Affairs of Bologna--Valentino prepares to attack Giovanni
      Bentivoglio, of Bologna                                        194


  CHAPTER IX

  The conspiracy of Caesar’s captains--Machiavelli and
      Valentino--Vacillation of the conspirators--They offer to
      return to Caesar--They again take heart--A reconciliation
      is effected--Caesar separates the conspirators--He
      enters into an alliance with Bentivoglio--The rebels
      return to Caesar--Paolo Orsini takes possession of Urbino
      in Caesar’s name--Execution of Don Remiro de Lorca--
      Caesar goes to Senigaglia, and meets his commanders--The
      trap at Senigaglia--Fate of the rebels--Caesar informs
      the Italian princes of his act--The Orsini and their
      adherents in Rome are seized--Cardinal Orsini’s palace
      is plundered--Fermo and Perugia surrender to Valentino--
      He puts Paolo and Francesco Orsini to death--Cardinal
      Orsini dies in prison--Caesar demands that the Sienese
      expel Pandolfo Petrucci--He ravages the country about
      Siena--Activity of the Orsini in the neighbourhood of
      Rome--Caesar returns to Rome--He lays siege to Ceri--
      Contemporary opinions of the Pope and Caesar--Gonsalvo de
      Cordova in Naples--The Pope and Caesar are stricken by
      the plague--Death of Alexander VI.--Rumours of poison--
      Caesar recovers--He takes possession of the dead Pope’s
      property                                                       206


  CHAPTER X

  The enemies of the Borgia pour into Rome--Fears of the
      Sacred College--Orsini and Colonna--The Cardinals and
      Valentino--Caesar enters into an agreement with France--
      The Cardinal d’Amboise--Scheming before the conclave--
      Caesar leaves Rome--Return of Giuliano della Rovere--
      The conclave--Election of Francesco Piccolomini to the
      Papacy--The new Pope supports Caesar--Valentino’s
      fortunes ebb--Death of Pius III.--Machinations
      preparatory to electing his successor                          242


  CHAPTER XI

  Election of Giuliano della Rovere--Julius II. and Caesar
      Borgia--Caesar leaves Rome--Machiavelli and Caesar--
      Arrest of Caesar--Victory of Gonsalvo de Cordova at the
      Garigliano--Caesar goes to Naples--Gonsalvo seizes
      Valentino and sends him to Spain--Caesar imprisoned in
      the Castle of Chinchilla--Jeanne la Folle and Philippe le
      Beau--Caesar is transferred to the Castle of Medina del
      Campo--His escape                                              266


  CHAPTER XII

  Caesar arrives at the Court of his brother-in-law, the King of
      Navarre--D’Albret’s danger--The Agramont and Beaumont
      factions--Beaumont holds Viana--War is declared between
      D’Albret and Beaumont--Caesar is appointed commander of
      the troops of the King of Navarre--Viana--The chronicler
      Moret--Caesar is killed--The body is buried in Santa
      Maria de Viana--His epitaph--Removal of the body and
      destruction of the tomb--The news of Caesar’s death
      reaches Italy--The feeling in the Peninsula--Caesar’s
      wife Charlotte D’Albret and their descendants--His
      illegitimate children--Death of Caesar’s mother, Vannozza
      de’ Catanei--Conclusion                                        297


  INDEX                                                              313




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  CAESAR BORGIA                                           _Frontispiece_
                                                             FACING PAGE
  POPE CALIXTUS III.                                                  32

  POPE ALEXANDER VI.                                                  52

  FACSIMILE OF LETTER OF CAESAR BORGIA                                80

  ORVIETO                                                             98

  LOUIS XII. OF FRANCE                                               122

  LUDOVICO SFORZA                                                    136

  MAP OF CAESAR’S CAMPAIGNS IN ROMAGNA                        _Page_ 141

  PESARO                                                             166

  GIOVANNI BENTIVOGLIO                                               172

  RIMINI                                                             176

  FREDERIC II. OF NAPLES                                             184

  LUCRETIA BORGIA                                                    188

  URBINO                                                             198

  VITELLOZZO VITELLI                                                 220

  PROSPERO COLONNA                                                   244

  GONSALVO DE CORDOVA                                                280




BIBLIOGRAPHY


The writer desires to acknowledge his indebtedness to the authorities
named below, especially to Alvisi for the details of the campaigns
in the Romagna, and to Yriarte for genealogical data and particulars
regarding Caesar’s life after his seizure by Gonsalvo de Cordova.
Yriarte appears finally to have settled the mooted question of the
descent of Rodrigo Borgia, Alexander VI.; and to have proved that he
was a Borgia on both the maternal and paternal sides, and not merely on
his mother’s; that he was Borja y Borja and not Llançol y Borja; and
that he never had the name of Lenzo,[2] consequently did not relinquish
it and assume that of his mother’s brother.

The dispatches of Giustinian, Venetian ambassador to the Vatican
from May 27, 1502, to April 26, 1505, edited by the profound scholar
Professor Pasquale Villari, have been of the utmost value. The
ambassador watched every move made by the Vatican as if the very life
of his beloved republic depended on it, and with great perspicacity he
followed the extraordinary political drama that was being enacted in
Rome.

Burchard’s diary is also an inexhaustible mine of information
concerning the pontificate of Alexander VI. and the earlier years of
the reign of Julius II. This Alsatian Master of Ceremonies is a wholly
passionless recording machine, so automatic that one immediately
discovers that he had no moral sense whatever. Only once does he
display any feeling--when the swashbucklers of Charles VIII. placed
some of their horses in “my stable, where they devoured my hay and
oats, so I had them removed to the stable of one of my neighbours”--a
very human act on the part of the Master of Ceremonies.

On account of Burchard’s calm relation of the crimes and scandals
connected with the reign of Alexander VI. efforts have been made to
discredit the _Diarium_. It has been claimed that all the available
manuscripts are not only inexact but also that they are largely
fabrications of the enemies of the Papacy; it has also been maintained
that Burchard’s original manuscript is not in existence.

The diary was published complete for the first time by M. Thuasne
(1883–5) in three octavo volumes. His text is derived from the Paris
manuscript, an almost exact reproduction of that in the Chigi Palace
which was copied from the original in the Vatican by order of Alexander
VII.--Fabio Chigi. M. Thuasne has corroborated the statements of the
diary in innumerable instances with notes from other sources and a
large number of hitherto inedited documents.

Burchard, recording the crimes and scandals of the Vatican under
Alexander VI., has been compared with Procopius flaying the vices
of the Court of Justinian--but the comparison is inapt. Burchard
himself had bought the office of Papal Master of Ceremonies, and he
had no sense of shame. Alexander tolerated him and Caesar evidently
did not think him worth putting to death. As Master of Ceremonies he
was minute, trivial, exact, indispensable; to him the salvation of
a thousand souls was far less important than the proper donning of a
vestment or the swinging of a censer. As a recorder of what was going
on about him he was matchless because he was utterly passionless;
fearless he undoubtedly was--perhaps because of his stupidity;
he was a mere piece of mechanism; his function was to record, to
chronicle everything--fact and rumour--and not to judge, not to
analyse. As complacently as a modern newspaper reporter describes the
reception given by a pork packer, he depicts the banquet of harlots
given by Alexander VI. in the Vatican--and with much less opulence
of adjective. That Christ’s Vicar on earth should go about the
apartment pouring confetti in the bodices of the women, whom he had
just entertained with “certain obscene comedies,” did not seem to the
Master of Ceremonies worthy of any special comment. He merely records;
never does he show surprise, contempt, hate; he never criticises,
never censures. He is entirely different from Infessura, who, as an
Italian and a patriot, betrays his hatred of the Papacy on every page.
Burchard, the Alsatian, apparently had little, if any, personal concern
with Italian politics, and it is precisely his lack of feeling that
renders his diary the most valuable authority extant on the pontificate
of Alexander VI.

Burchard was born about the middle of the fifteenth century; he was
early intended for the priesthood, but soon abandoned his theological
studies to take up the law; he appeared in Rome in 1481 and immediately
secured a position as apostolic prothonotary. He decided to purchase
the office of Master of Ceremonies, when a vacancy should occur, and
with this end in view engaged in a long course of study. In 1483 he
attained his ambition.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alvisi, E. Cesare Borgia, Duca di Romagna, Imola, 1878.

Auton, Jean d’, Chroniques, Paris, 1834.

Balbo, Cesare, Storia d’Italia, Firenze, 1856.

Baldi, Bernardino, Vita e Fatti di Federigo di Montefeltro, Roma, 1824.

Bembo, Pietro, Opere, Milano, 1808.

Biancardi, Bastian, Le Vite de’ Re di Napoli, Venezia, 1737.

Brantôme, Œuvres Complètes, Paris, 1838.

Brosch, Moritz, Papst Julius II. und die Gründung des Kirschenstaates,
Gotha, 1878.

Bryce, James, The Holy Roman Empire, N.Y., n.d.

Burchard, Johann, Diarium sive Rerum Urbanarum Commentarii (1483–1506),
Ed. by Thuasne, Paris, 1883.

Burckhardt, Jakob, The Civilisation of the Renaissance in Italy,
London, 1892.

Cartwright, Julia, Beatrice d’Este, Duchess of Milan, London, 1903.

Ciaconius, Vitæ et Res Gestæ Pontificum Romanorum et S.R.E. Cardinalium
ab initio nascentis Ecclesiæ usque ad Urbanum VIII., Pont. Max., Rome,
1630.

Commines, Philippe de, Mémoires, Paris, 1836.

Corio, Historia di Milano, Padua, 1646.

Dante, Il Convito, Firenze, 1857.

Donato, Alexandro, Roma Vetus ac recens, Rome, 1639.

Dumesnil, M. A. J., Histoire de Jules II., sa vie et sa pontificat,
Paris, 1873.

Duruy, Victor, Histoire de France, Paris, 1883.

Fumi, Luigi, Alessandro VI. e il Valentino in Orvieto, Siena, 1877.

Gebhart, Emile, Les Borgia, Paris, 1897.

Gebhart, Emile, Les Origines de la Renaissance en Italie, Paris, 1879.

Gibbon, Edward, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, New York, 1860.

Giustinian, Antonio, Dispacci, ed. by Pasquale Villari, Firenze, 1876.

Gordon, Alexander, Vie du Pape Alexandre VI. et de Cesar Borgia,
Amsterdam, 1751.

Gregorovius, Ferdinand, Storia della Città di Roma nel Medio Evo,
Venezia, 1872.

Gregorovius, Ferdinand, Lucrezia Borgia, nach Urkunden und
Correspondenzen ihrer eigenen Zeit, Stuttgart, 1875, English
translation, New York and London, 1903.

Guicciardini, Francesco, Istoria d’Italia, Pisa, 1819.

Infessura, Stefano, Diario della Città di Roma, Rome, 1890.

Le Gendre, Louis, Vie du Cardinal d’Amboise, Rouen, 1724.

Leti, Giorgio, Il Nipotismo di Roma, Amsterdam, 1667.

Machiavelli, Niccolò, Opere, Firenze, 1818.

Marc-Monier, La Renaissance de Dante a Luther, Paris, 1889.

Mariana, Juan de, Historia General de España, Madrid, 1780.

Maricourt, R. de, Le Procès des Borgia, Paris, 1883.

Matarazzo, Chronicles of Perugia, London, 1905.

Medin, Antonio, Il Duca Valentino nella Mente di Niccolò Machiavelli,
Firenze, 1883.

Müntz, Eugène, Les Précurseurs de la Renaissance, Paris, 1882.

Muratori, L. A., Annali d’Italia, Milano, 1818.

Nitti, Francesco, Leone X. e la sua Politica, Firenze, 1892.

Nitti, Francesco, Machiavelli nella Vita e nella Dottrine, Naples, 1876.

Pii Secundi Commentarii, Rome, 1584.

Platina, Bartolomeo, Le Vite de’ Pontefici, Venetia, 1715.

Roscoe, William, Life of Lorenzo de’ Medici, London, 1884.

Roscoe, William, Life and Pontificate of Leo X., London, 1806.

Sannazarii, Poemata, Padua, 1731.

Strozzi Poetæ Pater et Filius, Venice, 1513.

Symonds, John Addington, Renaissance in Italy, New York, 1888.

Tiraboschi, Girolamo, Storia della Letteratura Italiana, Modena,
1787–94.

Tomasi, Tomaso, Vita del Duca Valentino detto il Tiranno di Roma,
Montechiaro, 1670.

Vasari, Giorgio, Le Vite de’ più Eccellenti Pittori, Scultori et
Architetti, Bologna, 1647.

Villari, Pasquale, The Life and Times of Niccolò Machiavelli, London,
n.d.

Villari, Pasquale, The Life and Times of Girolamo Savonarola, London,
n.d.

Yriarte, Charles, César Borgia, Sa Vie, sa Captivité, sa Mort, Paris,
1889.




CAESAR BORGIA




INTRODUCTION

  The Renaissance--The Papacy in the fifteenth century--The Borgia.


Possessing a mild climate and a fertile soil, Italy from the earliest
times has attracted the invader, the adventurer. Extending out into the
Mediterranean, she has been exposed to attacks on all sides, and when
the Roman Empire, disintegrated by its own corruption and wickedness,
had passed away, no strong central power was left to repel the
marauders who swarmed into the peninsula from all sides.

The rich plains of the north attracted the Teutonic tribes who
established the Lombard Kingdom, and from the south came the Arabs,
bringing their arts and crafts to Sicily. To the Orient the merchants
of Venice went for their perfumes, their spices, their gorgeous stuffs,
their stamped leathers, and with them they brought back much of the
civilisation of the Far East.

Owing to her geographical position, to conditions resulting from her
past history, and the prizes she offered the bold and unscrupulous,
Italy at an early date became the battle-ground of Europe. Human
ambitions and energies now have the entire globe for their field,
but before America was discovered little was known of either Africa
or Asia, consequently civilisation was almost entirely restricted to
Western Europe.

Italy was a seething cauldron of life and activity, and there sprang
into being a race of strong, many-sided individuals. Like Spain, she
became, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, a land of mighty
personalities, of men of varied gifts and vast energy. While Spain gave
the world Cortez, Murillo, Velazquez, Calderon, Charles V., Loyola,
Alva, and Gonsalvo de Cordova, Italy produced Columbus, Michael Angelo,
Raphael, Ariosto, Ludovico il Moro, St. Francis, Prospero Colonna, and
Julius II.

Students have ever been fascinated by those periods in the world’s
history which have been characterised by unusual activity in the
domains of art, letters, science, and politics. The marvellous
flowering in architecture and sculpture in the age of Pericles, in
poetry and the drama in the time of Elizabeth, and in all the arts
during the vaguely defined period of the Italian Renaissance have never
ceased to baffle the historian and the psychologist.

Professor Gebhart, in a work of great erudition[3] has endeavoured to
account for the civilisation of the Italian Renaissance by reference to
“the inherent characteristics of the Italian soul; to certain great and
persistent tendencies in her intellectual life, and to certain facts
in her political career--causes which affect the entire life of the
people; some of which were remote in time, but of lasting effect, while
others were recent and transitory.”

In all fields of worthy human endeavour men in Italy had constantly
before them the inspiration of splendid achievement; but they were also
confronted by examples of evil, vast and successful, reaping material
rewards such as rarely fall to the lot of virtue. Throughout Italy, in
the age of the Borgia, impudent but brave and crafty adventurers were
establishing princely houses, enjoying boundless dominion and
wealth--and could their example have been lost on Alexander VI. and
Caesar Borgia?

The Renaissance in Italy was much more than a revival in literature
and the graphic arts; it was the supreme development of Italian
civilisation as a whole, the most perfect expression of the genius and
intellectual life of the peninsula.

The chief causes of the Italian Renaissance, causes inherent in Italy
herself, were, above all, liberty of the individual mind and social
freedom. The persistence of Latin traditions, and the ever-present
memory of Greece were likewise potent factors; while the language
reached maturity at exactly the right moment. The affluents that came
later to swell the movement and hasten the development of the peninsula
were the foreign civilisations, Byzantine, Arabian, Norman, Provençal
and French.

The Italian spirit has always been essentially practical; abstractions
have never appealed to it as anything more than mental gymnastics; for
pure metaphysics the Italians cared but little; the whole tendency of
their philosophy was utilitarian. In Dante’s “Convito” the question of
pure being, the universals, matter and force are subordinate subjects;
the “Banquet” is chiefly concerned with discussions of manners; the
happiness and welfare of humanity, the government of cities--it is the
work, not of a metaphysician, but of a publicist and moralist--ethics
is placed above metaphysics; its philosophy is wholly practical.

The chosen study of the Italian universities was jurisprudence. Law,
the offspring of pure reason and experience seeking to reconcile
changeable conditions with the immutable principles of justice,
assumed, owing to the importance of the interests it endeavoured to
harmonise--interests upon which rest the government and peace of the
world--the first place in the universities of the peninsula. Roman law
was the favourite discipline of mediaeval Italy.

The Papacy and the Empire; the relations and the limits of the
spiritual power with reference to the temporal and feudal power; the
universal monarchy, and the freedom of the cities--such were the
weighty problems to which Italy devoted her intellect. Jurisprudence
controlled all her mental activities just as absolutely as
scholasticism did those of France. The juristprudents Accorso and his
sons, Jacopo of Arena, Cino da Pistoja, Bartolo and Baldo, were the men
who lent lustre to the Italian universities of the thirteenth century.
Law was the basis of a liberal education. Petrarch had studied it. His
contempt for the scholasticism of “the disputatious city of Paris” is
well known. One of his favourite sayings was: “The object of education
is to teach men to think, and not merely to teach them to argue.” Logic
he regarded simply as a useful tool.

The freedom the Italians displayed in their intellectual life was
manifest also in their religious conscience--and this is one of the
most striking characteristics of their genius. During the Middle
Ages they resembled none of the other members of the great family of
Christian nations. Subtle metaphysics, refined theology, strict regime,
dogmatism, elaborate ritual, restless casuistry, all were repellent
to the Italian genius. The Italian regarded the Church of Italy as
the Universal Church and as largely his handiwork. In St. Peter’s
chair, in the Sacred College, in the great monastical institutions
he sees himself; he knows human passions prevail there as well as
elsewhere--consequently he does not hesitate to enter the Church. This
is why they never found the national religion a too heavy burden, why
they seldom seceded and founded sects. Italy never originated any great
national heresy or beheld any general religious uprisings like the
popular movements initiated by Peter Waldo, Wyclif, Huss, and Luther,
although later numerous heresies from other parts of Europe entered
the peninsula. When other countries were burning witches and heretics
at the stake Italy put Dolcino di Novara and Francesco da Pistoja to
death for advocating the abolition of private property. In 1327 the
poet Cecco d’Ascoli was burned at the stake for practising astrology
and necromancy, but in 1452 the priest Niccolò da Verona, condemned
in Bologna for sorcery, was taken from the stake by the populace and
saved. Savonarola suffered martyrdom, not for his religious theories,
but for his political dreams.[4]

The Italians never spared the Papacy. Dante placed Pope Anastasius
in the red-hot sepulchre of the heresiarchs, and Boniface VIII. in
the circle of the simoniacs with Nicholas III., and to St. Peter in
Paradise he ascribes these ghibelline words: “He who on earth now
usurps my seat before the Son of God, has made of my tomb a sink of
blood and filth.” And Petrarch describes the papal city of Avignon as
“a sewer in which is collected all the filth of the universe.”

Without an appreciation of the Italian character and a knowledge of
conditions in the peninsula before and during the Renaissance it is
impossible to understand how such men as Sixtus IV. and Alexander VI.
could have been chosen to fill the chair of St. Peter.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the end of the fifteenth century the Papacy had almost entirely lost
its sacred character and had become a political prize for which all the
powerful families contended. It was an office to which any cardinal,
regardless of his fitness, might aspire.

Like Naples, Florence, Milan, Perugia, and all the other petty
despotisms of the peninsula, it was a secular principality with the
sole difference that its head had certain priestly functions to perform
and that he was an elected not an hereditary sovereign. Owing to this
latter fact it was the most corrupt of all at this time, and its
corruption was all the more vile and hideous because of the contrast
between the theoretical sacredness and the actual baseness of its head.

In the course of the centuries the Papacy had evolved the astonishing
and absurd fiction that the occupant of St. Peter’s chair had the right
to make and unmake sovereigns at will; and princes and potentates made
a pretence of yielding to this doctrine, knowing that the Church, being
able to control the thoughts, actions, and conscience of the ignorant
masses, by the terror it inspired, was the strongest ally they could
have to maintain them in their usurped and illegitimate domination over
those whom they called their subjects and whose subjection had always
originated in acts of violence on the part of their masters.

The Papacy was the greatest office in Christendom. It enjoyed a vast
income; the patronage, the benefices at its disposal, were innumerable,
and during the period of the Renaissance they were usually sold to the
highest bidder. Owing to the vast power of the Pope as the arbiter of
the destinies of mankind beyond the grave, as well as in this world,
his friendship and support were sought by all the potentates of Europe.
Being human, it is quite natural that he was always ready to profit
by this circumstance. The humblest priest might aspire to the great
office, and if he was sufficiently astute and corrupt might attain it.
During the fifteenth century in the election of the supreme head of
the Church votes were bought and sold even more brazenly than they are
to-day on the occasion of the election of a United States senator, and
the rabble made bets on the result just as they now do on the outcome
of a political contest. Giustinian records the odds that were given on
the election of Giuliano della Rovere against his rivals.

Just as only a wealthy man, a member of a great family, or a
representative of a powerful interest can now hope to attain a high
political office, so in those days none other could hope to reach
the Papacy, except when the rivalry among the leading aspirants was
so intense that some obscure member of the Sacred College--a “dark
horse”--was selected as a compromise candidate; and it is worthy of
note that the one so selected was generally in such poor health or
so decrepit that he could not hold the office long, and consequently
during the period between his election and his death the rival
candidates would have another opportunity to develop their respective
forces and strengthen their tactics for a new election. It therefore
seems that the Divine influences which were supposed to preside over
the election of a Pope were somewhat uncertain in their operation, or
that the influences of the Borgia, the Piccolomini, the Della Rovere,
the Cibo, and the Medici factions outweighed the supernatural, and
there is ample evidence to show that this was precisely their view.
A story is told of a certain cardinal who, it was noticed during
the conclave, was bowed and bent beneath the weight of years and
infirmities; indeed, he was scarcely able to hold up his head--his
eyes were ever on the ground. “Surely,” said his colleagues, “he
will soon go to his reward--we will make him our Pope.” Immediately
after his election his eyes brightened, his voice grew strong, he
straightened up erect--and the Princes of the Church marvelled
greatly. “Whence this change?” they asked; “to what miracle is it due?
You were bent--your eyes ever on the ground--but now----!”

“Ah! my beloved children, I was only looking for the keys of St.
Peter--and I have found them!”

Any strong candidate for the great honour and the vast emoluments
of the Holy Office could count on the vigorous support of his own
family and in many cases on that also of various princes in Italy and
throughout Europe.

When Nicholas V. succumbed to the gout in 1455 the Sacred College
was composed of twenty cardinals, and in the conclave which followed
the three strongest candidates were Capranica, Bessarion, and Alonzo
Borgia. The contest had reached the acute stage when Alain, Archbishop
of Avignon and Cardinal of Santa Prassede, sprang to his feet and
asked, “Shall we select for Pope, for head of the Latin Church, a
Greek, a mere interloper? Bessarion still wears his beard--and
forsooth, he is to be our Lord!”

Then arose his Eminence the Cardinal-Bishop of Nicæa, graceful as he
was erudite, and, announcing that it would be a mistake to elect him,
cast his vote for Alonzo de Borja, Cardinal of Santi Quattro Coronati,
deciding the election in favour of the Spaniard, who assumed the name
Calixtus III. Thus it was that the Spanish house of Borja entered into
the history of Italy and of the Papacy, April 8, 1455.

Alonzo Borja was born in Xativa, Spain, in 1378; he developed into a
studious boy and became a professor at Lerida; later he was made a
canon by the anti-Pope Benedict XIII. In Alonzo’s youth a prophet,
Vicenzo Ferrerio, had announced that the studious boy would some day
wear the tiara, and shortly after his election Alonzo secured the
canonisation of the prophetic Vicenzo, thus showing that he recognised
merit.

Alonzo was regarded as the leading jurist of his day and as one of the
most astute men who ever occupied the throne of St. Peter. He was the
first of the Borja to come to Italy, having accompanied Alfonso of
Aragon as secretary. By Martin V. he was made Bishop of Valencia and
created cardinal by Eugene IV.

When Bessarion arose and cast his vote--with great tact and perhaps
equal political acumen--in the aged cardinal’s favour, the Curia
remembered that Alonzo was seventy-seven years of age and afflicted
with the gout--and his election was assured.

When Alonzo assumed the tiara he pledged his word to the Sacred College
that he would keep himself free from all nepotism--thus showing that
this was a growing evil--a promise he promptly, broke by bestowing
the purple upon his nephew, Juan Luis de Mila, whom he appointed papal
representative in Bologna, and upon Rodrigo Borgia, whom he made legate
to the Marches and Vice-Chancellor of the Church. He likewise made Juan
Mila, Bishop of Zamora, a cardinal.

The new Pope’s nephews--his sister’s sons--were bad men in a bad age,
but, blinded by his affection for them, he did not foresee to what his
passion would lead.

[Illustration: CALISTVS PAPA-III-HISPANVS

POPE CALIXTUS III.

_From an engraving of 1580._

            To face   p. 32.]

Rodrigo Borgia, when the cardinalate was bestowed upon him by his
uncle, September 26, 1456, was about twenty-five years of age, handsome
and profligate. Like the Claudian family of Rome, the Borgia of
Valencia possessed great intellectual force and physical beauty.

Rodrigo’s brother, Pier Luigi, who was a year younger than the
cardinal, remained a layman, but the highest temporal honours were
bestowed upon him; he was made Gonfalonier of the Church, Prefect of
the city, and finally Warder of the Castle of St. Angelo--in spite
of the protests of Capranica and Scarampo, who consequently became
the object of the Holy Father’s undying hatred. Pier Luigi has been
described as a handsome and depraved ruffian.

Even as early as this--the first period of the Borgia supremacy--Rome
was teeming with Spaniards; when Alonzo was made cardinal numerous
members of the related Borgia and Mila families flocked thither--their
number and aggressiveness being attested by the general and intense
hatred that was felt for the Catalans. It was through the Borgias and
their followers that Spain secured the strong grip upon the Papacy
which she held for a hundred years--although the way had been prepared
by the establishment of the Spanish power in Naples and Sicily. To the
Eternal City they flocked, kinsmen and retainers, fortune-hunters, and
adventurers of every sort; they secured all the important offices; they
became utterly lawless and, justice being perverted, they robbed and
murdered with impunity.

In July, 1458, Calixtus further advanced Pier Luigi by bestowing upon
him the vicariate of Benevento and Terracina. He became the most
powerful man in Rome, and seemed destined for a great future when his
career was abruptly terminated. The Orsini had risen to expel the
Colonna and the Catalans; and Pier Luigi, having sold the Castle of
St. Angelo to the cardinals, fled to Civitavecchia, where, attacked
by a fever, he died--August, 1458--leaving his vast property to his
brother Rodrigo, who, already wealthy, now became one of the richest of
the cardinals.

August 6, 1458, Calixtus passed away--to the great relief of the
Romans, who expressed their joy at being delivered from the Spanish
yoke by sacking the Borgia palaces. Calixtus was bitterly criticised
for allowing his nephews to rule him and because of the wretched
condition of affairs in Rome during his reign, when robbery, violence,
and murder were of daily occurrence.

Although Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia had found it prudent to betake himself
to Ostia on the death of his uncle, his high position in the Church was
not shaken, and he was soon able to return to his house in the Ponte
Quarter.

Little is known of the private life of Rodrigo when he was created
cardinal, but there is extant a beautiful letter of admonition written
to him by Pius II., the amiable Æneas Sylvius, from the baths of
Petriolo, June 11, 1460, when Rodrigo was about twenty-nine years
of age, which throws a strong light on the personal conduct of the
Cardinal of San Niccolò in Carcere Tulliano.

  “DEAR SON,--We have learned that your Worthiness, forgetful of
  the high office with which you are invested, was present in the
  gardens of Giovanni de Bichis four days ago, from the seventeenth
  to the twenty-second hour,[5] with several women of Siena--women
  wholly given over to worldliness and vanity. Your companion
  was one of your colleagues who, owing to his years, if not on
  account of his office, ought to have been mindful of his duty.
  We have heard that wanton dances were indulged in; that none of
  the allurements of love were wanting; and that you conducted
  yourself in a manner altogether worldly. Shame forbids mention
  of all that took place, for not only the acts themselves, but
  also their very names are unworthy your rank. In order that your
  pleasures might be free from all restraint the husbands, fathers,
  brothers, and kinsmen of the women were not asked to be present.
  You and a few servants were the originators of this orgy. I am
  told that in Siena nothing is now talked of but your vanity,
  which is generally ridiculed. Here at the baths, where there are
  a great many people--Churchmen and laity--your name is on every
  one’s lips. Our displeasure is beyond words, for your conduct
  has brought the Holy State and Office into disgrace. The people
  will say that they make us rich and great, and that instead of
  living blameless lives, we use what they give us to gratify our
  passions. This is the reason the Princes and the Powers despise
  us and the laity mock at us. This is why our own mode of living
  is flung in our faces when we reprove others. Contempt falls to
  the lot of Christ’s Vicar because he appears to countenance
  these doings. You, dear son, have charge of the Bishopric of
  Valencia, the most important in Spain; you are Chancellor of the
  Church, and what renders your conduct all the more reprehensible
  is the fact that you have a seat among the cardinals who are
  the Pope’s advisers. We leave it to you to decide whether it is
  becoming to your dignity to court young women and to send those
  whom you love presents of wine and fruits, and during the whole
  day to give thought to nothing but sensual pleasures. On account
  of your conduct people blame us, and the memory of your blessed
  uncle Calixtus also suffers--and many say he did wrong in
  heaping honours upon you. If you seek to excuse yourself on the
  ground of your youth, I say to you that you are not so young as
  not to know what duties your offices impose upon you. A cardinal
  should be above reproach, and an example of right living in the
  eyes of all men--and then we should have just grounds for anger
  when temporal princes revile us, when they dispute with us for
  the possession of our property and force us to submit to their
  wills.

  “Of a truth we inflict these wounds upon ourselves and of these
  troubles we ourselves are the cause, since by our conduct we
  constantly diminish the authority of the Church. Our punishment
  for it in this world is dishonour, and in the world to come
  it will be torment well deserved. May your good sense place a
  restraint upon these frivolities, and may you never again lose
  sight of your dignity; then people will not regard you as a vain
  gallant among men. If this occurs again we shall be compelled
  to show that it was in violation of our admonition, and that
  it caused us great pain; and our censure will not pass over you
  without bringing the blush of shame to your cheek. We have always
  loved you and thought you worthy of our protection, as a man of
  an earnest and modest character.

  “Therefore conduct yourself henceforth in such a way that we may
  retain this our good opinion of you and may find in you only the
  example of a well-ordered life. Your years, which are not such as
  to preclude improvement, permit us to admonish you paternally.”

During the pontificate of Paul II. Gasparino of Verona described
Rodrigo Borgia as “handsome and of a most glad countenance. He is
gifted with a honeyed eloquence. The beautiful women upon whom he casts
his eyes are lured to love him and are moved in a mysterious manner--as
iron is attracted by the magnet.”

In 1476, the year of Caesar’s birth, the Cardinal of Pavia wrote
Rodrigo a letter in the Pope’s name, urging him to change his manner
of living, in which he says: “What I write you will not be long, but
this letter is necessary between you and me. Do not entrust this
communication, which is inspired by affection, to your secretaries, but
keep it with you so that you may read it over occasionally and think of
it at least once a year.”

From this it is evident that Rodrigo had not changed his habits. Love
of pleasure characterised him throughout his life. He had no less than
eight illegitimate children--five sons and three daughters--all of
whom were recognised in official documents. At the time of his death,
when he was seventy-two years of age, he had a mistress, the beautiful
Giulia Farnese, by whom he had had a son, who was then five years old,
Don Giovanni, Infans Romanus, Lord of Camerino, whom he first declared
to be the child of his son Caesar, but later in a bull dated September
1, 1501, acknowledged to be his own.

It has been said that as Alexander VI. was not an ordinary man he
should not be judged by the moral standards of ordinary men. The theory
that the great are not subject to the laws which should regulate
the conduct of lesser persons is as absurd as it is pernicious. It
would be more just to say that the Borgia should be judged, not by
the criterions of a later day, but by those of his own age. There is
evolution in morals; the standard of right living is higher to-day
than it was during the Renaissance, and no man of the character of
Alexander VI., were such possible, could now be elected to the Papacy.
At that time many thrones were occupied by men who, in this age, could
not survive a year. It is, however, exceedingly difficult to judge men
of a past age, because, the sphere of morals being a wide one, there
may be progress in one field but not in others--in fact, there may be
retrogression in some. During the Renaissance there were men who were
bad, judged by the criterions of their own day as well as by those of
the present, but their contemporaries, ignorant of the laws governing
human progress, which include the laws of morality, did not perceive
their true status. Surrounded by men of like character, many of the
personalities of the Renaissance were blind to their own depravity.

Nepotism was the root, if not of all, of most of the evil in Rome, and
it steadily increased from the time of Calixtus III., who was succeeded
by Enea Silvio Piccolomini--Pius II.--who was no less devoted to
the interests of his family than his predecessor had been to those
of his kinsmen. Of the four children of his sister Laudomia, he made
Antonio a duke, Andrea a castellan in Pescara, and Giacomo a noble of
Montemarciano. Niccolò Forteguerra, a kinsman on his mother’s side, he
made cardinal; Alessandro Mirabelli Piccolomini, who in partnership
with Ambrogio Spannochi conducted a bank in Rome, was made Master of
the Palace and Governor of Frascati. Jacopo Ammananti of Siena was made
cardinal and Bishop of Pavia. Lolli, a cousin of the Pope, was given an
office, and so many natives of Siena were provided with places at the
pontifical court that it was a saying that “all Siena had moved over
to Rome.” Even Saint Catherine owed her beatification to Pius II., who
died August 15, 1464.

The conclave for the election of his successor was held August 27th.
The Bishop of Torcello, a famous Venetian scholar and humanist,
addressed the cardinals, deploring the loss of dignity of the Sacred
College and exhorting his colleagues to select a man who would put
a stop to the abuses in the Church. At the first scrutiny it was
found that the Cardinal of San Marco was unanimously elected. The new
Pope, who was born in 1418, was the son of Niccolò Barbo and Polisena
Condulmer, a sister of Eugene IV.

When a youth, as he was about to embark on a ship for the Orient,
he received news of his uncle’s election to the Papacy; promptly
perceiving the opportunities for advancing his fortunes offered him by
this event, he changed his plans, and assiduously devoted himself to
the study of theology, for which he had no aptitude, and in 1440 he was
made Cardinal of San Marco.

His Eminence was a stupid but handsome man, tall of figure, majestic,
and exceedingly vain of his personal appearance in ecclesiastical
pageants. On his election he wanted to assume the name Formoso, the
Handsome, but was dissuaded by the cardinals, who also prevented
him from taking the name San Marco, which was the battle-cry of the
Republic of Venice, consequently Piero Barbo called himself Paul II.
and was duly consecrated September 16, 1464.

During the conclave he had sworn to prosecute the war against the
Turks; to reform the Curia; to summon a council at the end of the year;
to limit the number of cardinals to twenty-four; and not to appoint any
one under thirty years of age, or any one who was ignorant of law and
theology, or any of his nephews, to the cardinalate. These promises
were exacted by the members of the Sacred College for the protection of
their traditional privileges. They also secured his permission to meet
twice a year to assure themselves that the agreement was being observed.

Their efforts, however, to reduce the monarchical Papacy to an
oligarchy failed. The Pope promptly found a way out of the difficulty
by presenting the cardinals for their signature a document which
purported to be a copy of the original agreement, but which was in
fact very different. Out of complaisance some promptly signed it,
Bessarion under the Pope’s coercion, while Carvajal was the only one
who persisted in his refusal. Among the cardinals created by Paul II.
were his kinsmen Marco Barbo, Giovanni Michiel and Battista Zeno.

The Pope himself, according to Corio, was wholly given over to sensual
pleasures; he filled his palace with concubines, says Attilius Alexius,
and turned night into day, so that it was exceedingly difficult to
obtain an audience with him. The licentiousness of his court and the
corruption of his clergy were scandalous. He was noted for a vulgar
love of display and took a childish delight in showing himself to the
Romans on all public occasions. He desired to be thought astute in
all ways, but was merely duplicit. He was wholly unable to retain the
friendship of other potentates. He, however, did much to embellish
the city, in spite of the fact that he was exceedingly avaricious. He
was fond of the table, gluttonous, and a valiant drinker. Although
comparatively young, his life was terminated by apoplexy, July 26,
1471, following a supper consisting of two huge watermelons.

In the conclave which assembled August 6, 1471, for the selection of
his successor Cardinal Bessarion just missed the throne, being defeated
by Francesco della Rovere, who owed his success to Borgia, Orsini, and
Gonzaga, and also to the zeal of his attendant in the conclave, Fra
Pietro Riario. In return for his support Borgia received the commendam
of Subiaco; Gonzaga, the abbey of S. Gregorio; and Orsini, famous and
wealthy, was appointed camerlengo.

Francesco della Rovere, born in Savona in 1414, was the son of a
poor fisherman and a Greek woman, Lucchesina Mugnone. He was created
cardinal in 1467 and assumed the title of San Pietro ad Vincula. He had
been general of the Minorites and was famous for his scholarship and
his skill in controversy. On his election he took the name Sixtus IV.,
and he was crowned by Rodrigo Borgia August 25, 1471.

With Sixtus the head of the Church rapidly lost his priestly character
and became a temporal prince. Thenceforth St. Peter’s successors were
Italian sovereigns, and when they possessed the sacred character it
was wholly accidental. The life they led compelled them to resort
to mundane expedients--the sale of offices and indulgences and the
promotion of the interests of their kinsmen. Never before had such
shameless nepotism been displayed, and it now became the mainspring of
every act of the Pope.

Illegitimate sons of the Popes appeared with every change in the
Papacy; they conducted themselves in the Vatican like princes; they
terrorised Rome and endeavoured by force to obtain possession of
the various Italian principalities. Generally their careers came to
an abrupt end with the death of the Pope to whom they owed their
advancement, and to whom they were frequently valuable aids, the
Pontiff’s desire for temporal supremacy often finding expression
through them. The Popes, in their struggle with the cardinals,
frequently found these satellites highly useful. Their power, however,
did not extend far beyond the boundaries of the States of the Church as
they were bitterly opposed by the older dynasties.

Under Calixtus III. Rome had been a Spanish state, in the reign of Pius
II. a Sienese, and during the papacy of Sixtus IV. it was a Ligurian
monarchy, and the domain of St. Peter had now reached its greatest
territorial expansion. Within its boundaries, however, there still
remained a number of feudal families and republics to be destroyed.
These the papal favourites, anxious to change the States of the Church
into an hereditary monarchy, were eager to crush.

December 15, 1471, Sixtus made Pietro Riario, his putative nephew, but
probably his son, Cardinal of San Sisto, and Giuliano della Rovere,
son of his brother Raffaele, Cardinal of San Pietro ad Vincola, thus
breaking his oath. Both these young men were of low origin and no
education, and the Sacred College little suspected that one of them,
Giuliano, was destined to become the famous Julius II.

Giuliano della Rovere, who was Bishop of Carpentras, was twenty-eight
years old, a libertine and man of the world. Pietro Riario was somewhat
younger and Sixtus made him Bishop of Treviso and bestowed numerous
other honours upon him. Pietro soon entirely dominated the Pope and
from a poor friar became a man of vast wealth. He entered upon an
unchecked career of vice, and in two years had squandered a fortune of
two hundred thousand gold florins and become a physical wreck. He died
in 1472, leaving vast debts which were never paid. Other kinsmen of
Sixtus remained laymen but nevertheless were advanced to positions of
honour through the influence of the Pope.

On the death of Pietro Riario, Sixtus transferred his affections to his
nephew Girolamo, probably also the pontiff’s son, who was called to
Rome and given the title to Imola, which had been purchased from Taddeo
Manfredi. The government of the States of the Church was entrusted
to him, and Galeazzo Sforza conferred upon him the hand of his
illegitimate daughter, Caterina, the heroic virago who defended Forli
against her husband’s murderers and later against Caesar Borgia, and
whom her countrymen styled _la prima donna d’Italia_. In return for the
honour Sixtus made Galeazzo’s son, Ascanio, a cardinal.

Soon after this the Pope succeeded in establishing a matrimonial
alliance between his family and the princes of Urbino; for, in return
for creating Federico di Montefeltre Duke of Urbino, the latter
consented to the marriage of his daughter, Giovanna, to Giovanni della
Rovere, another brother of Giuliano.

Sixtus also conferred the purple on Cristoforo and Domenico della
Rovere; upon his sister’s son, Geronimo Basso, and also on Raffaele
Riario, a nephew of Pietro Riario.

It was stated that the Pope in his eagerness to advance his innumerable
kinsmen and connections frequently bestowed an office on one,
forgetting he had already given it to another. It was even said that
Cardinal Pietro Riario entered into an agreement with Galeazzo Maria
Sforza, of Milan, by which the duke was to furnish him with money and
troops to enable him to seize the papal throne, which Sixtus appears to
have been ready to yield to him; the plan, however, which would have
resulted in the secularisation of the Papal States, failed through the
death of Pietro.

The secularisation of the Papacy, nevertheless, was proceeding
rapidly. The Curia was becoming more and more addicted to the vices
of the age. German travellers who visited Rome in 1475, the year
of the Jubilee--Paul II. having reduced the period intervening
between jubilees to twenty-five years for the sake of the money they
yielded--relate that they saw nothing but nepotism, simony, extortion,
and crime. On every hand was extravagance, pomp, and vulgar love of
display. The populace, as in the days of the Roman Empire, clamoured
for spectacular exhibitions, and these the Popes lavishly furnished.

The success of the political schemes of Sixtus demanded the overthrow
of the Medici, and he consequently, at least, countenanced the Pazzi
conspiracy, which resulted in the murder of Giuliano de’ Medici and
the wounding of Lorenzo, who only saved himself by flight. Three weeks
later the Pope, King Ferdinand of Naples, and the city of Siena formed
a league whose avowed purpose was the expulsion of the Medici from
Florence.

Sixtus was a consummate politician, and Infessura speaks of the day
on which he died as “that most blessed day upon which God delivered
Christendom from the hands of a most impious and iniquitous king.”[6]
He states that Sixtus had no affection for his people; that he
was avaricious, vain, vicious; that he trafficked in offices and
benefices, made a plaything of justice, and that he was cruel and
vindictive.

According to history Sixtus was an evil ruler in an evil age. All his
acts were inspired by a love of power or an exaggerated affection for
his kinsmen. He it was who first completely surrendered the Papacy
and Rome to his relatives. He used all sorts of means to increase
the Church revenues, only to hand them over to his nephews to use in
extending the power of his family. He was, however, not wholly devoid
of virtue, for he possessed great learning. Impatient of contradiction,
he used any means to overcome opposition, and he soon showed that he
was born to rule. Sixtus IV. had none of the priestly characteristics
which the Supreme Pontiff is supposed to possess; in him the priest was
lost in the prince.

From that time forth St. Peter’s successors were temporal sovereigns
who happened to be Popes; the members of their families were everywhere
treated as princes. Many of their putative nephews were in reality
their own illegitimate sons. There was a saying current in Europe
during the reign of Sixtus that there were as many popes in Rome as
he had nephews. With every change in the Papacy a new swarm came into
power, only to fall with their creator’s decease.

The Papacy having become a temporal power, the Pope’s kinsmen were his
chief support; at the same time, the Sacred Office was the greatest
political instrument an ambitious and powerful family could secure to
aid its advancement.

The papal nephews terrorised the domain of the Church and endeavoured
to obtain possession of rival states and cities. Nepotism became a
system, and, as hereditary succession was denied the Pope, it furnished
him the only means by which he could hope to perpetuate his power, but
as we have seen the means were inadequate.

The Italians promptly discovered that the same hopes and fears,
the same ambitions and passions prevailed in St. Peter’s Chair as
ruled elsewhere, and also that the Pope was a very human sovereign
and one who enjoyed the advantage of being unhampered by any feudal
institutions.

The temporal supremacy of the Pope, however, could be exercised only
in the territory about the city of Rome where there were still left a
few powerful feudal families, together with a number of small republics
whose destruction could be compassed only through the agency of the
Pontiff’s favourites or kinsmen. In that way a monarchy might be
established which in size and power would have equalled most of the
Italian states of that age.

Sixtus created no less than thirty-five cardinals. The Pazzi
conspiracy, the war against Ferrara, his treatment of the Colonna and
the names of Pietro and Girolamo Riario show to what depths the Papacy
had fallen in the closing years of the fifteenth century.

Between the nepotism of Sixtus IV. and that of Alexander VI. there was
but little difference. If the nephews of Della Rovere had possessed the
ability of the Borgia, or if political events had occurred to disturb
the concord of the peninsula, Sixtus IV. would have secured the place
in Italy and in the history of Rome which Alexander VI. holds. Sixtus
was the first Pope-king, but he was far surpassed by Alexander VI.

Italy had fallen upon evil days; the peninsula was teeming with
corruption; everywhere there was a mad scramble for office; every
man’s hand was against his neighbour; the Popes engaged in all sorts
of financial operations--the sale of offices, honours, indulgences,
immunities; and, to make matters worse, foreign invasion threatened the
country.

Sixtus died August 12, 1484, and when his opponents learned of his
death they rushed forth and sacked the Riario palaces. The conclave
for the election of his successor was held August 26th, and it was
found that the cardinals were divided into two parties, one comprising
Rodrigo Borgia, the Orsini, and the Aragonese faction; the other,
Colonna, Cibo, Della Rovere, and the Venetians.

Rodrigo Borgia felt so certain of being elected that he had his palace
fortified to preserve it from being sacked. Votes were openly traded
for castles, benefices, and papal offices. Ascanio Sforza and the
Aragonese, unable to force the election of the Borgia, sold their votes
to Cardinal Giambatista Cibo, who was elected August 29, 1484. He
assumed the name Innocent VIII. Giuliano della Rovere had managed his
campaign most skilfully.

Cibo was a handsome and imposing man, but he possessed neither wealth
nor brains. He had numerous progeny by a certain Neapolitan woman.
It was his son, Franceschetto Cibo--reputed to be his nephew--who
married Maddalena, daughter of Lorenzo de’ Medici, January 20, 1488, in
the Vatican amid great pomp, and in return for this honour, Giovanni
de’ Medici, then thirteen years of age--the future Leo X.--was
created cardinal.

To the cardinals Innocent made all sorts of promises which he never
kept--promises made by the man might be broken by the Pope. He was
the first of Christ’s Vicars publicly to acknowledge his children, of
whom he had seven. He was a loathsome individual, avaricious, vicious,
and venal, and completely under the control of his favourites. At Rome
he established an office for the sale of pardons whose revenues went
to himself and his son Franceschetto. During his reign crime held high
carnival throughout the Campagna.

Innocent continued and extended the evil practices of his predecessors.
The traffic in offices was conducted on a scale hitherto unknown, for
he constantly created new ones solely for the profit to be derived
from their sale. He sold the right to collect the customs to certain
individuals and bankrupted the State. Rome was a sink of crime and
corruption, a market where all the world might purchase indulgences.

Innocent’s nepotism was different from that of some of the other Popes.
With him it was based on no political idea or purpose, but simply upon
avarice and vulgar greed. He founded no principalities for his sons
because he himself was entirely devoid of force and political acumen,
and they had neither the ambition nor the ability to make themselves
powerful in the State. The county of Cervetri and Anguillara had been
given to Franceschetto, but on the death of his father he sold it to
Virginio Orsini, and wisely, because he could not have held it.

Infessura tells us that when the wretched Innocent VIII. was on his
death-bed his Jewish leech sought to prolong his life with the blood
of three young boys who were purchased for a ducat apiece, and who
promptly died, whereupon the physician fled and the Pope expired, July
25, 1492.

The conclave for the election of his successor began in the Sistine
chapel, August 6th. Twenty-five cardinals were present. The Sacred
College was dominated by Ascanio Sforza, Lorenzo Cibo, Raffaele Riario,
Giuliano della Rovere, and Rodrigo Borgia. It is said that the King
of France contributed 200,000 ducats and Genoa 100,000 to secure the
election of Della Rovere, whose most dangerous rival was Ascanio
Sforza, for whom Rodrigo Borgia cast his vote, knowing that he could
not be elected.

When Sforza saw that he himself could not win the great prize, he set
about securing--with the help of Riario and Orsini--the election of
the Borgia, and at the proper moment cast his vote for him. Although
Ascanio Sforza was enormously wealthy he had his price and he was
bought. In Rome it was said that before the conclave Rodrigo Borgia had
sent him four mules laden with silver, and also that he had promised
him, in the event of his own election, his palace and its contents,
and also the great office of Vice-Chancellor of the Church. Orsini was
satisfied with Monticelli and Soriano, while Colonna and his family
were pleased to accept Subiaco and its castles in perpetuity. Cardinal
Michiel was promised the Bishopric of Porto; Sclafenati was presented
with Nepi, and Cardinal Savelli with Civita Castellana. Others
preferred cash. The Patriarch of Venice, then ninety-five years of age,
was given 50,000 ducats to provide for him until he should enter into
paradise. The few who could not be bought were Piccolomini, Zeno, Della
Rovere, and Caraffa.

When the Borgia found he was elected he was overcome with joy and
exclaimed: “Now I am Pope, Pontiff, Christ’s Vicar!”--but the youthful
Cardinal de’ Medici leaned over and whispered in Cibo’s ear: “Let us
escape before the wolf gets us into his maw!”

Borgia, fearing that by some mischance the office might still slip
through his fingers, hastily donned the papal robes and directed the
Master of Ceremonies to distribute cards bearing the words, “We have as
Pope, Alexander VI.” Early the next morning the window was thrown open,
the cross put forth, and in the silence of early dawn the name of the
new Pope was announced: Alexander VI.!

Alexander’s dissolute life was known of all men; and when we remember
that this was an age of libertinism, when men expected no more of
the clergy than they did of the laity, the fact that the Borgia’s
conduct excited any comment shows to what depths of immorality he had
descended. He was freely accused of the unmentionable vices which
Tacitus and Suetonius lay to the charge of the earlier Roman emperors.

It cannot be denied, however, that Alexander VI. also possessed great
virtues. His contemporaries describe him as energetic, cultivated,
astute, and prompt to act, and also as ready and vigorous of speech.

Rodrigo Borgia had spent seven years at Bologna studying canon law; and
when his uncle, Calixtus III., in 1456, made him Bishop of Valencia, he
also created him Cardinal-deacon of San Niccolò in Carcere Tulliano,
and shortly afterwards made him Vice-Chancellor of the Church.

During the reign of Sixtus IV. he had been made Bishop of Porto and
sent as legate to Spain. While returning to Italy he was shipwrecked
and rescued only with great difficulty. When he was cardinal he
occupied the Cesarini palace, but it is said that he was miserly and
that, in spite of his vast wealth, he seldom entertained.

The Borgia made a majestic and imposing Pope; he was crowned August 26,
1492, with the greatest pomp and magnificence. Never before since the
days of the Empire had Rome beheld such pageants. When the Pope, half
dead with fatigue, reached the Lateran he fainted; and again when he
took his seat on the throne, he swooned, his head falling on Riario’s
shoulder.

Guicciardini says Italy’s two greatest misfortunes were Lorenzo de’
Medici’s death and Rodrigo Borgia’s accession to the papacy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Borgias were vicious, shrewd, intellectual, and perspicacious, and
possessed of indomitable will. They were endowed with the mental and
physical force which wins success and often hatred.

[Illustration: POPE ALEXANDER VI.

_From a fresco by Pinturicchio._

            To face p. 52.]

Securing possession of the papal office at a time when all men were
greedy for power; building up principalities and advancing the family
interests and at the same time enhancing the Spanish influence in the
Holy See and throughout Italy, their enemies minimised their virtues
and magnified their vices. They were charged with all sorts of hideous
crimes, some of which they undoubtedly committed, and some, of which
they certainly were innocent. Their hostile contemporaries spread
reports of their evil deeds throughout Christendom, and the charges
made against them in their lifetime have been repeated by historians
down to the present day.

Again, the Borgias have been judged, not in connection with their age
and their contemporaries, but as isolated creatures, or by modern
standards of ethics. Caesar Borgia has been described as a ravening
wolf among a flock of sheep, whereas, as Medin well says,[7] he was
merely a wolf battling with other wolves, with this difference, that
while he possessed the same greediness, ferocity, and ambition,
he surpassed them all in the vastness of his projects and in the
unshakable determination with which he carried them out.

To judge the Borgias by present standards is manifestly unjust. The
character of the Papacy has changed; Alexander VI. was merely a
temporal prince with certain sacerdotal functions. He used his great
office for the advancement of himself, his family, and his followers,
as other Popes of his epoch did, but more consistently, more skilfully.
Like other potentates of the day, he had his mistresses, whom he did
not hesitate to introduce into the Vatican, and his numerous bastards,
whom he publicly acknowledged.

In this connection it might be well to remember that the illegitimate
in the fifteenth century were not regarded with the contempt in which
they are supposed to be held at the present time; in fact, they were
openly recognised and treated exactly the same as the legitimate
children, and when for political or other reasons it became necessary
to legitimatise them, nothing was easier, the Popes often undertaking
to remove the taint by special bulls. Gregorovius calls this the golden
age of bastards and enumerates among the reigning princes of Italy of
illegitimate birth, Sforza of Milan, Ferrante of Calabria, Sigismondo
Malatesta of the Marches, and Borso of Ferrara, who was one of the
eight natural sons of the House of Este who rode forth to meet Pius
II. when he was on his way to the Congress of Mantua in 1459, and
whom he described as “eloquent, generous, and magnificent.”[8] When
the lawful children were minors or lacking in force, bastards were
often admitted to the succession; the fitness of the individual, and
not the fact of pure or impure birth, was the test. In more northern
countries, Burgundy for example, illegitimate children were provided
for by a distinct class of appanages, such as bishoprics. The greatest
of the sons of men did not express an isolated opinion when he made
Gloucester’s illegitimate son, Edmund, exclaim:--

 “Who in the lusty stealth of nature take
  More composition and fierce quality
  Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
  Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops,
  Got ’tween asleep and awake.”

History, whose chief concern until recent years has been the recording
of the victories of fraud and force and the perpetuation of the memory
of the morally deformed, from Caesar to Bonaparte, has preserved for
our edification the names of innumerable bastards who dazzled their
contemporaries, and whom little boys and girls are taught to admire,
just as they are taught to admire those monsters who, in the pursuit
of their own aims and ambitions, have destroyed the greatest number of
their fellows--wholesale murder being a glorious achievement; thus we
have Don John of Austria, Vendôme, Dunois, Prince Eugene, the Constable
of Bourbon, and Maurice of Saxony. Not until the sixteenth century did
Italy feel any repugnance for illegitimacy, and then it was due to the
influence of foreign ideas and the counter-revolution.[9]

In addition to illegitimacy of birth another form of illegitimacy
was common in the peninsula, the illegitimate power of a reigning
sovereign--that is, the usurped dominion enjoyed by a political
adventurer. We need not pause to inquire whether he usurped it from an
earlier usurper, either a prince or a faction, or to ask how usurped
power can ever become legitimate. This state of affairs gave birth to
innumerable crimes of violence, and the dagger and the poisoned cup
were the usual instruments of personal political advancement.

The origin of some of these illegitimate powers can be traced back
to the middle of the eleventh century, when the feudal lords found
themselves confronted by a new power in the cities in the form of the
corporation or guild of artisans who had gradually become conscious of
their strength and importance, and had shown their masters that they
were to be counted with in the future.

The development of this new movement was furthered by the Wars of
Investiture, which, while weakening the authority of the bishops,
aroused the minds of the citizens, caused them to take an interest in
public affairs, and gave them a desire for freedom.

In almost every city there were then two bishops, one representing
the Empire, the other the Holy See, and each sought to increase the
number of his followers for the purpose of overcoming and expelling his
rival; hence innumerable concessions, privileges, and franchises were
granted the citizens, until finally, when the struggle was brought to
a close by the Concordat of Worms, in 1122, almost all the sovereign
rights--the regalia--had passed into the hands of the people.

Not only were the bishops forced to yield but the Emperor himself, the
Countess Matilda, and all the great lords were compelled to acquiesce
in the movement which even extended to cities that were independent of
any bishop.

Henceforth the cities governed themselves and elected their own chiefs
or consuls. They, however, did not pretend to be wholly independent
of the Empire but readily acknowledged themselves its feudatories.
The movement spread throughout Italy, and many of the cities became
so powerful that they compelled the feudal lords of the surrounding
country to apply for citizenship and to agree to obey the communal
statutes. These various elements introduced into the city soon
occasioned discord and quarrels, in which bloodshed became frequent;
in addition to this intestine warfare, the rivalry between the
different communes resulted in continual strife among them.

For a time they were left to prey on each other; for, although they
were feudatories of the Empire, the Emperors were unable to devote
any attention to the affairs of Italy, Germany being torn asunder by
the Guelphs, adherents of the house of Bavaria, and the Ghibellines,
supporters of the house of Franconia.

The communal regime was an advance over the Feudal System, but it could
not survive the internal and external quarrels; it soon began to show
signs of weakness, and by the end of the century it was apparent that
it was doomed. The majority of the people, interested in commerce and
manufacturing, grew tired of the strife and were ready to welcome any
strong power that would assume the leadership and put an end to the
internal dissension and protect the city from attacks from without.
As the commune was broken up into innumerable factions it was in a
peculiarly suitable condition to be seized by any strong and daring
adventurer who might aspire to the control, and when this man happened
to be the head of the city government, the podestà or captain of the
people, it was an easy step to the tyranny. During the later years
of the communes the magistrates were usually selected from among the
feudal families of the neighbourhood. They were accustomed to command
and were supplied with arms, and in addition to their supporting
faction in the city they had, in many cases, a large following of
kinsmen and retainers on their neighbouring estates. Consequently
nothing was easier than for them to seize the supreme power in the
city, hold, and transmit it to their descendants.

Among the first families to secure and preserve this illegitimate power
were the Della Scala, who appropriated Verona; the Este, who imposed
themselves on Ferrara; the Medici, who secured the powerful commune of
Florence; and the Gonzaga, who seized Mantua.

The vast multitude which came to Rome for the jubilee of 1300
inspired Boniface VIII. with dreams of empire, and a year later he
published a bull in which he affirmed the absolute power of the Pope
above all princes, kings, and emperors. This view was contested by
Philippe le Bel of France, who was supported by the nobles, clergy,
and people. Boniface retired to his city of Anagni to prepare a bull
of excommunication, whereupon, acting in accord with Sciarra Colonna
and other enemies of the Pope, Nogaret, Philippe’s minister, took
possession of the town of Anagni and seized his Holiness, who was,
however, liberated by the people a few days later. The Holy Father
returned to Rome, where he died shortly afterwards (1303).

Two years later a Frenchman, Bertrand Got, Archbishop of Bordeaux, was
elected Pope. He, however, did not go to Italy, but established the
Papal See at Avignon, and the Popes finally placed themselves under the
protection of the kings of France and their political authority rapidly
declined.

During the succeeding two hundred years the tyrannies established on
the ruins of the communes were growing stronger, and in many cities
powerful dynasties had established themselves, handing the government
down from father to son, or to the member of the clan best fitted to
conserve the power, priority or legitimacy of birth having little to
do with the succession, the possession of _virtu_, the characteristic
most necessary for the preservation of self and family, determining
the descent. Wherever the legitimate heir was found to be inferior,
mentally or physically, to one of the bastards of the family, he was
set aside for the latter.

The companies of paid soldiers now began to appear in Italy. These
bands of mercenaries were captained by the so-called condottieri,
and when the war for which they had been engaged was ended they were
discharged like other wage-workers. Their leaders were bold and
unscrupulous and had no personal interest at stake. This system gave
rise to the gravest dangers to the peninsula; it brought into Italy
swarms of worthless adventurers, who sold their services to any one
able to pay for them and often they turned against their employer. They
overran the country, robbing, murdering, debauching.

The power of the Popes in Romagna, never very strong, had grown
weaker during their absence in Avignon. Bologna had fallen into the
grasp of the Pepoli; the Polentani had secured Ravenna; the Manfredi
owned Faenza; the Ordelaffi enjoyed Forli; the Malatesta held sway
over Rimini; the Varano disposed of the fortunes of Camerino; the
Montefeltre of Urbino and Civitavecchia. The Campagna was harassed
by bands of brigands led by members of these families, and in Rome
complete anarchy obtained, the two great clans of Orsini and Colonna
constantly fighting to secure the control.

The fifteenth century was filled with the contests of the tyrannies
among themselves; the weaker were crushed by the stronger, who absorbed
their territories, and thus the great states were formed and their
heads became princes. Besides the struggles with outside rivals these
princely houses were always at strife with other powerful families
within their own domain; conspiracies and intrigue filled the day;
the princes became more despotic; rivals, pretenders, disobedient or
lukewarm retainers were systematically put to death; cruelty knew no
bounds.

The people were callous or indifferent to the crimes of the lords
because they were committed chiefly against their own rivals--that
is, persons of their own rank. The populace had long since lost all
hope of ruling, and they were dazzled by the splendour of the Court and
the magnificence of the monuments erected by the reigning prince. The
return of a modicum of the spoils, in the form of a monument of some
sort, a library, or a hospital, to commemorate the name and fame of the
brigand has always been found to be the most efficacious way to placate
the despoiled rabble.

The Visconti of Milan was one of the greatest of the princely houses
of Italy, and it reached the height of its power in the person of Gian
Galeazo, who added greatly to the family domains. With the assistance
of the Carrara of Padua he overthrew the Scala of Verona and Vicenza,
and then proceeded to wrest Padua from his late allies, who, however,
soon recovered the city. He put down the Gonzaga of Mantua, the Este
of Ferrara, and the Paleologi of Montferrat, and in 1395 he induced
the Emperor Winzel to confer the title of Duke of Milan on him. Having
defeated a coalition formed against him, he seized Pisa, Siena, Lucca,
Perugia, Assisi, Spoleto, and Bologna, and was preparing to appropriate
Florence and make himself King of Italy when he suddenly died (1402).
On his death his states rapidly fell away; the Pope recovered Bologna,
Perugia, and Assisi, Florence took Pisa, while the Venetians grabbed
Verona and Vicenza. In some of the cities families that had been
despoiled by the Visconti returned to power, and other places fell into
the hands of the condottieri, so that Gian Galeazzo’s sons found their
estates reduced to Milan and Pavia. No better example could be found of
the rise, growth, and extinction of an illegitimate power--that is, a
power based on fraud, usurpation, and tyranny.

Filippo Maria, the last of the Visconti, died in 1447 and a republic
was immediately proclaimed in Milan. Francesco Sforza, not wishing to
assert such rights as he may have had to the succession as the husband
of a natural daughter of Filippo Maria Visconti, placed his services
at the command of the republic in the war against Venice. He, however,
unexpectedly made peace with the enemy and turned his forces against
Milan, and, although there was a party favourable to Sforza, the city
made a brave resistance. Finally an uprising occurred, the republic was
overthrown, and Francesco entered the city and was proclaimed duke in
1450.

Milan in the second half of the fifteenth century was one of the most
powerful of the Italian states; and when Francesco Sforza died in 1466
he was succeeded by his son Galeazzo Maria, a dissolute and cruel man,
who was assassinated in a church by three nobles in 1476. His son,
Gian Galeazzo, at this time was only eight years old, consequently
his mother, Bona of Savoy, assumed the regency. The brothers of the
deceased duke, however, conspired against her, and finally Ludovico il
Moro, the most determined and deceitful of them, succeeded in getting
possession of the government, whereupon he compelled her to leave the
duchy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Italy had awakened from the long slumber of the Middle Ages, during
which her intellect had been paralysed by the superstitions and terrors
inculcated by an ignorant and mercenary priesthood. She was emerging
from the gloom into the new life which manifested itself, not only
in the revival of learning and the prodigious blossoming of the fine
arts, but also in the expansion of the human personality. Man had again
discovered himself; he had become conscious of his faculties; he had
found that he possessed a will that could carry him on to greatness in
many fields of human activity. Hitherto superstitious, ignorant, and
bigoted, he had been taught that if he ventured to use the intellect
with which he had been endowed he would be eternally damned. Life to
him was merely a painful pilgrimage between two eternities, through one
of which he would be doomed to hell fire if in his mundane existence he
dared to find any of the joy of living.

Finally some perspicacious souls began to doubt, and in the teachings
of the newly discovered heathen philosophy they found a theory of life
more humane, more natural, more charitable.

The arts had been entirely occupied with sacred subjects because
in the Middle Ages the Church was their only patron. The gloom
and superstition of mediaeval Christianity oppressed men’s souls,
consequently the subjects selected were hideous and lugubrious in the
extreme--emaciated saints, representations of the Last Judgment, human
beings writhing in the torment of eternal wrath. The Almighty was not
a god of pity and love, but one of vengeance. The teaching of the
Nazarene was entirely distorted, just as it was by the Presbyterian
divines in Scotland in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries when
they proclaimed their mission to be “to thunder out the Lord’s wrath
and to curse,” and endeavoured to frighten their hearers into the
paths of virtue with horrible tales of men “scorched in hell-fire,”
in “boiling oil, burning brimstone, scalding lead,” sufficiently
summarised in one of Binning’s sermons: “You shall go out of one hell
into a worse; eternity is the measure of its continuance, and the
degrees of itself are answerable to its duration.” Such, according to
the Scotch pastors, was the measure of God’s love.

Extremes, however, lead to revolution. A period of great asceticism is
always followed by an era of licentiousness, and in Italy this era was
synchronous with the age of the Borgias.

It is no part of the present writer’s purpose to palliate the crimes
of the Borgia; recent attempts which have been made to show that
Alexander VI. and his son Caesar were gentle and impeccable beings,
maligned and slandered, are inspired chiefly by a love of paradox,
or occasioned by a motive not unlike that which actuates the great
criminal lawyer whose chief victories consist in securing, not the
acquittal of the innocent but of the guilty. These efforts, therefore,
should not be taken too seriously.

Like other princes, the Borgias were human, and the same passions that
prevail among the laity also rule among the priesthood. Theoretically
the cardinals were the Pope’s advisers, an ecclesiastical senate,
charged with the salvation of humanity, but actually they were a body
of powerful and astute politicians, appointed by the Pope on his own
initiative or at the request of some reigning sovereign or great family
whose support his Holiness was anxious to secure. The cardinalate was
bestowed in precisely the same way, and for the same reasons, as a
minister’s portfolio is at the present time--that is, without any
regard to the fitness of the beneficiary, and as a reward for services
rendered or to come, and sometimes for even baser reasons: Alexander
VI. raised Farnese to the purple in return for the complaisance of his
sister, the beautiful Giulia.

Youths were made cardinals at a tender age. Giovanni de’ Medici, a
precocious prelate of eighteen years, on the conclusion of the conclave
that elected Alexander VI. was wise enough to flee from Rome; and
Caesar Borgia was seventeen when his father discovered he had need of
his counsel in conducting the affairs of the Church.

The great houses vied with each other for the honour, prestige, and
power. It was no small matter to sit in the ecclesiastical senate and
have a voice in directing the conscience of civilised humanity, at a
time when the masses did not dare even to think; and to have a vote in
the election of the greatest potentate on earth, who could make and
unmake kings and emperors, and consign them to eternal punishment at
will. The vast emoluments of the great office, the enormous revenues
of the various prebends and livings the cardinals enjoyed need not be
mentioned.

Their power and wealth knew no bounds. Surrounded by their kinsmen and
retainers, they maintained princely courts. They rode about the city
in the garb of condottieri, encased in steel, with swords clanking at
their sides. In their palaces they maintained hundreds of men, whose
number was increased, when occasion demanded, by the addition of gangs
of paid bullies and ruffians. Every palace was a stronghold, and in
addition those of the cardinals possessed the right of sanctuary--a
right, it may be observed, which was not generally respected unless it
was backed by might, as is shown by the frequent murders in churches in
Italy in the period of the Renaissance, one of the most extraordinary
of which was the stabbing to death of Giuliano de’ Medici by Bernardo
Bandini and Francesco de’ Pazzi, assisted by a priest, who “being
accustomed to the place, was less superstitious about its sanctity,”
at the steps of the altar in the duomo of Florence in 1478, under the
very eyes of Cardinal Raffaele Riario, the raising of the Host being
the signal for the attack. The palaces were great stone fortresses
with towers and battlements; the portal was closed with doors barred
and studded with iron, capable of resisting almost any force; within
were vast courts and living quarters for the swarms of retainers. Many
of these strongholds were even supplied with artillery. A criminal
often secured the protection of some cardinal who, with the aid of his
“family,” his armed followers, would rescue and save him from prison.
On one occasion a number of playful young Romans having assaulted
some of Cardinal Ascanio Sforza’s servants, the good prelate’s
“family,” armed to the teeth, sallied forth, fell upon the jokers,
and slashed and hacked about twenty of them. At another time when a
certain Savelli, Captain of the Curia, was about to proceed with an
execution in the vicinity of the palace of Cardinal Balue, that worthy
ecclesiastic called to him from a window and commanded him to stop,
as the place was in his own jurisdiction. On the captain’s refusal to
do as he was commanded the cardinal ordered his “family” to storm the
prison, which they did, liberating all the captives and destroying the
records. That night Cardinals Savelli and Colonna dispatched their own
forces against their colleague. Subsequently all the belligerents were
summoned to appear before the Pope on the charge of contumacy, but the
only notice which Cardinal Balue took of the order was to fill his lair
with armed men.

In a world of rapid change human life, honour, and the higher
sentiments are held in slight esteem; material success is the goal men
strive to reach and few question the means they employ. During the
late Renaissance the despot did not hesitate to remove any obstacle in
the way of his progress, even when that obstacle was a near kinsman;
and the act was generally connived at by the other members of the
family, conscious that in those unsettled days their own position and
safety depended upon the strength and astuteness of their chief.

Italy was then divided into a hundred petty dukedoms and
principalities, each struggling to preserve itself by annihilating its
neighbour. Coalitions were constantly formed for the destruction of a
state whose growing power threatened to disturb the balance, and these
compacts often were broken as soon as made. Deception became a fine
art, and diplomacy and duplicity were synonymous. It was this keen
struggle for existence which made the Italians the most perspicacious
politicians of the day.

Every ruler sought to attract to his court the artist and the literary
man, for he knew that the prestige gained thereby was no slight adjunct
to his power, and this explains why many of the most brutal and
egotistical of the princes became famous as patrons of the arts and
sciences. This protection was repaid with flattery, and to what depths
of sycophancy men will descend is attested by the nauseous dedications
of books of the day. In 1488, when Caesar Borgia was fourteen years of
age, and by the grace of Innocent VIII. a prothonotary of the Apostolic
See, Paolo Pompilio dedicated his “Syllabica,” a work on rhetoric, “to
the ornament and hope of the house of Borgia, the Illustrious Caesar,
whose love of letters foretells the greatness that is to be his.”




CHAPTER I

  Genealogy of the house of Borgia--Vannozza de’ Catanei--Birth of
      Caesar Borgia--His youth.


The Spanish house of Borja, tracing its line back to 1035, claimed
descent from Don Ramiro Sanchez of Aragon. A certain Don Pedro de Borja
who died in 1152--the year in which Don Ricardo, a representative of
the junior branch, removed to Naples--had a son, Don Ximenes Garcia
de Borja, who was the founder of the senior line. His son, Gonzales
Gil, was the father of Don Raymon de Borja, whose son, Don Juan Domingo
de Borja, Lord of the Torre de Canals--who was living in the city
of Xativa in Valencia in the fourteenth century--had by his wife,
Francina de Borja, several daughters and a son Alonzo, the future
Calixtus III.

As early as 1233 the Borja family had won fame, for in that year eight
of their name had hurried to the support of Don Jaime in his war
with the Moors, and by their bravery had secured a place among the
_Caballeros de la Conquista_.

Numerous positions of honour were held by the Borja from that time
forth, but the height of their glory was attained when Alonzo de Borja,
who had gone to Naples in the train of King Alfonso of Aragon, was
elected to succeed Nicholas V. as Pope in 1455.

Of the several sisters of Alonzo de Borja--who on his election to the
Papacy assumed the name Calixtus III.--Catalina married Juan Mila of
Xativa, by whom she had two sons, Cardinal Juan del Mila and Perot del
Mila, whose daughter Adriana was the wife of Ludovico Orsini and the
kinswoman and confidante of the future Alexander VI., the son of Doña
Isabella de Borja, another of the sisters of Calixtus III.

Ever since the publication of Tomaso Tomasi’s “Duca Valentino”
historians have repeated his statement that Caesar regarded Rodrigo
Lenzuolo, or Lenzol, as his father--_Riconobbe per padre Cesare
Borgia, detto poi il Valentino, Roderigo Lenzolio_.[10]

Gregorovius says that Isabella, the sister of Alonzo, was the wife of
Jofre Lanzol, a wealthy nobleman of Xativa, and that she was the mother
of several daughters, all of whom remained in Spain, and of two sons,
Pedro Luis and Rodrigo; and that Calixtus III., the uncle, adopted
these two nephews and gave them the family name; thus the Lanzol became
Borgia, the Italian form of the Spanish name Borja.

If Tomasi, Panvinio, Mariana, and the later historians are correct in
stating that Isabella’s husband was a Lanzol, their son, following the
Spanish custom of uniting the mother’s family name with that of the
father, would have been Rodrigo Lanzol y Borja and the descent from
the Borja would have been through his mother only. But M. Charles
Yriarte[11] conclusively shows that Rodrigo was Borja y Borja, doubly
a Borgia, his father having been, not Jofre Lanzol, but Don Jofre de
Borja y Doms, who married Isabella de Borja, sister of Calixtus III.
Doms therefore was the name of Rodrigo’s paternal grandmother, and the
shield with the three bands azure, which appears in all the arms of the
Borgia, in all the monuments of the Este family, and in all Italian
works on heraldry, is the escutcheon of the Doms and not of the Lanzol
family, whose arms according to Fabrer were “azure with a sun argent
in the first and or with a crescent argent in the second quarter”--a
device which is never found in connection with the Borgia in either
Spain or Italy.

The Valencian chronicle of the thirteenth century which says that:
“the Borja to the number of eight hastened to Valencia to serve the
king,” adds that “all, without exception, bore on their shields a bull
on a golden ground.” Thus we find the Borgia arms clearly defined
at this early date, and two hundred years later Calixtus III. used
the same arms with a border of gules charged with eight oriflammes;
finally Alexander VI. added to his escutcheon the arms of the Doms, his
paternal grandmother’s family, three bands azure on a field of gold,
which are the arms of Sibilla Doms, of Catalonia, wife of Rodrigo Gil
de Borja, brother of Domingo.

The offspring of this union, Jofre de Borja y Doms, father of Rodrigo
Borgia, therefore had the right to place the three bands azure of the
house of Doms by the side of the Borgia bull, and this he did.

Rodrigo Borgia therefore was the son of Jofre de Borja y Doms and
Isabella de Borja, who were first cousins; and he was the nephew of
Calixtus III., his mother’s brother.

All the descendants of Alexander VI. used the arms which he had
engraved on his pontifical seal and which by his order Pinturicchio
painted in the Appartamento Borgia in the Vatican.

When Lucretia Borgia, through her marriage with Alfonso d’Este, became
Duchess of Ferrara, she added to her arms the eagle of the House of
Este and also the pontifical keys, and when her brother Caesar, on his
marriage with Charlotte d’Albret, was made Duke of Valentinois, he
adopted the lilies of France, although he should have taken the arms of
Navarre.

Now, what connection had the Lanzol with the Borgia, and what caused
the curious mistake regarding the name of Rodrigo Borgia’s father?

Don Rodrigo de Borgia, later Alexander VI., had three sisters, one of
whom, Doña Juana, married P. Guillem Lanzol de Romani and bore him a
son, Don Jofre Lanzol y Borja, who married Doña Juana de Moncada and
by her had a son, Don Rodrigo Lanzol, who, instead of calling himself
Lanzol y Moncada, as he should have done, took the name of Borgia,
which was that of his grandmother as well as of his great-grandmother,
Isabella, the sister of Calixtus III., and it was this Rodrigo Lanzol,
who incorrectly called himself Borgia, whose name finally, in some
unaccountable way, became confused with that of Rodrigo Borja y Borja,
subsequently Alexander VI., and the error has persisted for centuries.
Such is Yriarte’s explanation. The evidence furnished by the arms
is substantiated by the Valencian chronicles and by records in the
archives of Osuna.

The Borgias were Spanish and such they remained throughout their long
and infamous career in Italy, and they were always supported by a
powerful Castillian party.

That Rodrigo Borgia was Caesar’s father there is no doubt. Rodrigo as
cardinal, and later when Pope, always acknowledged and treated him as
his son, lavishing unbounded parental affection on him and striving in
every way to advance his material interests, as he did those of all his
kinsmen and children.

One of the most striking traits of the Borgia family was their
exaggerated affection for each other and their unbounded sense of
family solidarity. Even Pope Calixtus III., who has not been accused
of sacrificing his office wholly to his kinsmen, saw fit to bestow the
cardinalate upon several of them.

If Mariana is correct in stating that Rodrigo’s eldest son Don Pedro
Luis, first Duke of Gandia, who was born in 1467, was the child of
Vannozza de’ Catanei, the cardinal’s relations with this woman, which
lasted about fifteen years, began when he was about thirty-five.

Of Vannozza little is known. She was born in 1441 and was the wife of
Giorgio de Croce when she first succumbed to the magnetic cardinal,
to whom she presented four children, about whose birth and parentage
there is no doubt whatever: Giovanni, born in 1474, married Doña Maria
Enriquez, and was assassinated in 1497; Caesar, born in 1476; Lucretia,
born in 1480, was first married to Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro, then to
Alfonso of Aragon, Duke of Bisceglia, and finally to Alfonso d’Este;
Don Giuffre, the youngest, was born in 1481. Mariana makes no mention
of Rodrigo’s other children--Girolama, who died in 1483; Isabella, the
wife of Pietro Giovanni Matuzzi; and Giovanni Borgia, Lord of Camerino,
who was the son of Giulia Farnese.

Vannozza was simply a nickname for Giovanna, and Catanei was a
common name throughout Italy. In numerous contemporary documents she
is mentioned as Madonna de Casa Catanei. As she was able to hold
the pleasure-loving cardinal so many years and secure from him the
recognition of her children, various writers have seen fit, in the
absence of other grounds for romance, to ascribe to her great physical
beauty, force of character, and intellect. Her name does not appear in
the list of public courtesans of Rome, and numerous guesses have been
made as to her social status and mode of living; they are, however,
neither probable nor illuminating. Her obscurity is proved by the
indifference of the sonneteers and epigrammatists of the day, who, had
she been at all conspicuous, would have made her notorious. Burchard
mentions her only twice, once in January, 1495, when her house was
sacked by the French, and again in connection with the supper that
preceded the murder of the Duke of Gandia in June, 1497.

Although Rodrigo’s relations with Vannozza ceased about 1482 he
continued to interest himself in her material welfare. Her husband,
Giorgio de Croce, died in 1486, whereupon the cardinal, in order that
she might not be without a home and a protector, married her to Carlo
Canale of Mantua, a scholarly, but complaisant, individual who had been
secretary to that great patron of letters Cardinal Francesco Gonzaga,
upon whose death in 1483 Carlo had gone to Rome to enter the service of
Cardinal Sclafenati.

Rodrigo, probably thinking that Carlo’s talents might be useful,
selected him to be the husband of his widowed mistress; and avarice or
ambition induced Carlo to acquiesce in the arrangement.

The nuptial contract was drawn up June 8, 1486, and to her husband
Vannozza brought as marriage portion a thousand gold ducats and an
appointment as _sollicitator bullarum_. The contract describes this
as her second marriage, thus making it doubtful whether she was ever
married to Domenico d’Arignano, who, Burchard says, “had been married
by Rodrigo to a certain woman who had borne the cardinal a son, whom he
had always maintained and recognised as his own, and whom he had made
Bishop of Pamplona.”[12]

With the assistance of her cardinal lover she had amassed a
considerable fortune, a part of which by her will she eventually
devoted to the purchase of her soul’s salvation. She appears to have
been a strong, coarse woman, penurious and avaricious. Records are
extant showing that she was charged with stealing, through the agency
of her paid servants, eleven hundred and sixty sheep from Ludovico
Mattei in 1504, and she was found guilty. In 1502 a complaint was
likewise lodged against Donna Vannozza de’ Catanei by Nardo Antonazzi,
a goldsmith of the Regola Quarter, for refusing to pay for a silver
cross he had made for her in 1500. The jeweller, however, lost his case.

Tomasi says that Vannozza was of ignoble condition and that she
succeeded with the consummate art of the courtesan in dominating any
one she wished to control, and that she was an insatiable harpy.
The same writer states that Cardinal Rodrigo had spent his youth
in cultivating his natural gifts with the aid of all the tricks
and artifices known to the courtier, and that he was a perfidious,
bloodthirsty, and voracious beast of prey, but one who knew how to
insinuate himself into the favour of all men.

Such were the antecedents of Caesar Borgia, and if his parentage was
bad the environment in which he grew up was worse.

Caesar, if we accept his father’s statement, was born in April, 1476,
for in 1501 the Pope, in conversation with the Ferrarese ambassador,
remarked: “The Duchess Lucretia will complete her twenty-second year
next April, and in the same month the Most Illustrious Duke Caesar will
be twenty-six.”

The father’s statement concerning the age of his children, which was
promptly reported to Duke Ercole of Ferrara by the ambassador, is
confirmed by various dispatches and letters, among which are two sent
by Gianandrea Boccaccio to the same person February 5 and March 11,
1493, which are now in the state archives of Modena. These dispatches
give Caesar’s age at that time as “sixteen or seventeen years.” He was,
therefore, somewhat younger than has for a long time been supposed, and
was not as old as his brother Giovanni.

At the time of Caesar’s birth his father was about forty-five and his
mother, Vannozza, thirty-four. Of her four children Caesar is the most
interesting as a psychological and historical study, not on account of
his crimes, for every petty Italian state had its criminal despot at
that time, but because he displayed a calculating cunning, a shrewdness
in statecraft, and a fidelity to purpose which is rarely met with in
men of his years, and which made him pre-eminent among personalities of
his own stamp.

Whether or not Caesar was striving to consolidate the numerous Italian
states and eventually construct a great central kingdom in the
peninsula, as Machiavelli believed, is difficult to determine. Caesar’s
activity, however, reveals something more than the unreasoned efforts
of a ferocious egoist to gratify an unbounded but vague ambition. At
the beginning of the fifteenth century Italy offered great prizes to
the resolute adventurer, and Caesar’s horizons may have been wider than
the domain of St. Peter.

What is known of his boyhood and youth is, in comparison with a
knowledge of the environment in which he grew up, of slight value. A
bull of Sixtus IV., issued in April, 1480, in which he is described as
the “son of a Cardinal-Bishop and a certain married woman,” relieved
him of the necessity of proving himself of legitimate birth; and
an Act signed by Ferdinand the Catholic in 1481 provides for his
legitimation and naturalisation. These steps were necessary before he
could be invested with the various offices his father, the all-powerful
Cardinal of San Niccolò in Carcere Tulliano, was determined he should
enjoy. While still a child privileges of all sorts were bestowed upon
him. July 10, 1482--Caesar was then about six--Sixtus IV. granted
him the revenues of the prebends and canonicates of the cathedral of
Valencia; and by a second bull, dated April 5, 1483, presented him with
another canonicate and a benefice belonging to the archdiaconate of
Xativa; the following year the Pope appointed him provost of Albar, and
finally--September 12, 1484--when according to the bull he was nine
years of age, he was made treasurer of Carthagena.

During his childhood Caesar probably lived with Adriana Mila, his
father’s cousin. A granddaughter of Catalina, sister of Calixtus III.,
she had married Ludovico Orsini, Lord of Bassanello, who died some time
before 1488. She dwelt in the Orsini palace in Rome. Lucretia Borgia
also was placed under her care. Adriana Mila was more than Rodrigo
Borgia’s kinswoman, she was his confidante up to the day of his death.
Her son it was who married the beautiful Giulia Farnese, and Adriana
was the complaisant witness of the adulterous relations of his wife,
“Christ’s Bride,” as the satirists called her, with her cousin, St.
Peter’s successor.

The dedication--already mentioned--of Paolo Pompilio’s treatise on
rhetoric to Caesar in 1488 is the first public notice we have of him.
The following year he was a student of canon law at the Sapienza
of Perugia, where he also had a special preceptor, Juan Vera of
Valencia. At the university he had a number of intimate friends and
companions--all young Spaniards--who were closely associated with his
subsequent fortunes. The most famous of these young men was Francesco
Romolino of Lerida, one of the commissioners sent to Florence in
1498 by Alexander VI. to secure the conviction of Savonarola, and
who remarked to his host, Pandolfo della Luna: “We shall make a fine
bonfire; I bear the sentence with me already prepared.”[13]

From Perugia, where Caesar spent about two years, he went to Pisa--in
1491--to attend the lectures of Filippo Decio, one of the most famous
professors of canon law of that day, and he was still there September
12, 1491, on which date Innocent VIII. conferred the bishopric of
Pamplona on him. Five days later Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, in his
capacity of Vice-Chancellor of the Church, informed the Chapter
of Pamplona, and the alcaldes and counsellors of the city, of the
appointment; and on the same day Caesar, the dignified bishop of
fifteen years, also brought the fact to the notice of these various
personages and sent them as his representative the venerable Martin
Zapata, Canon-Treasurer of Toledo, provided with a power of attorney,
and the bulls and letters naming him administrator of the province. The
original documents are in the archives of Pamplona.

In the first letter, which is written by Caesar’s father, in Spanish,
he is described as a _persona muy a nos conjunta_--“a person very
closely connected with us.” The cardinal adds: “The Holy Father has
decided to appoint to this bishopric the prothonotary Don Caesar de
Borgia, distinguished for his virtues and his learning.”

Caesar’s letter, written at Soriano, is as follows:--

  “TO THE MAGNIFICOS, OUR HONOURABLE AND ESPECIAL FRIENDS,--You
  doubtless have already learned from letters of the Reverend
  Cardinal, Vice-Chancellor of the Church, that, the Episcopal See
  of your city having become vacant in consequence of the death
  of the Reverend Señor Don Alfonso Carillo of blessed memory,
  his Holiness, the Pope, and the Reverend Seniors constituting
  the Sacred College, unanimous in their choice, have promoted
  us to this dignity, and have placed in our hands the bulls and
  briefs which we hereby tender for your examination. Solicitous
  for the future good government of the bishopric, spiritual as
  well as temporal, we send to you the venerable Mossen Martin
  Zapata, the beloved and esteemed canon and treasurer of Toledo,
  as our representative, duly empowered to decide all matters in
  our stead. We have specially instructed him to confer with you
  regarding a number of matters, and we urge you to trust him in
  all things and to show him all confidence. I expect you also of
  your own goodwill to aid and serve him. Should anything special
  arise affecting your noble city and the general welfare of
  yourselves and the community you may rest assured that we will
  give it the same attention that we would bestow on any affair of
  our own. I have only to add that I pray the Lord to take your
  honourable and noble persons under his protection.

  “From Soriano the xvii day of September, MDLXXXXI. Ever yours to
  command,

            “CESAR DE BORGIA,
               “_Elector of Pamplona_.”

In the latter half of the fifteenth century, when boys were married at
sixteen, made cardinals at seventeen, and commanded armies at twenty,
children were precocious, and Caesar, a student in Pisa, could not have
been blind to the vast opportunities presented to him by his father’s
elevation to the Papacy in August, 1492.

By the immediate bestowal of high offices on his favourites and kinsmen
Alexander showed that he did not intend to hold himself aloof from
nepotism. His uncle, Calixtus III., having set the example, the evil
had grown, and Alexander was destined to be its supreme exponent.

Caesar did not attend the elaborate fêtes given on the occasion of
his father’s coronation. His Holiness doubtless thought it wise not
to bring his son forth into public gaze thus early in the drama.
Caesar was in Spoleto at the time, and, being a shrewd youth, he must
have appreciated the scandalous means by which his father secured his
election. The coronation took place August 26, 1492, and in honour of
the happy event Alexander made his son, Caesar, Bishop of Valencia, an
office he himself had held, and which carried with it the dignity of
Primate of Spain.

[Illustration: FACSIMILE (REDUCED) OF A LETTER WRITTEN BY CAESAR BORGIA
TO FERDINAND OF SPAIN, ROME, 1497.

            To face p. 80.]

The Spaniards were not forgotten by the Borgia; those who already
held office were promoted and places were found for those who had not
yet secured a foothold. The Bishop of Modena states in one of his
letters that ten popes would not be able to satisfy these satellites.
The Pope’s sisters immediately became personages of importance in
Rome, and Vannozza, the mother of four of his children--who, after
the birth of Giuffre, had found herself deserted for the beautiful
Giulia Farnese--gained in both social position and material wealth by
Rodrigo’s election. Thenceforth she appears to have lived the life of a
respectable and influential matron in the papal city.

All were provided for; the Pope’s mistress, his innumerable kinsmen,
the children and grandchildren of his sisters, the hosts of Spaniards
who fastened themselves on the papal treasury, the prebends and
benefices--and who even demanded a share of the lands confiscated
from the Romagnol barons. Prominent among the Spaniards in the
papal palace were: Romolino of Lerida, Juan Vera, Juan Lopez--who
was made Chancellor--Pedro Caranza and Juan Marades, who were
Privy-Chamberlains.

A letter written by Caesar from Spoleto to Piero de’ Medici shows that
he was in that place as late as October, 1492. The youth explains
why he had failed to call on the Florentine before leaving Pisa, and
recommends to his favour the faithful Romolino of Lerida. The letter,
which was delivered by Caesar’s tutor, Juan Vera, concludes with the
formula used by princes: “_Tanquam Frater Vr Cesar de Borgia Elect.
Valent_.”

Not until the spring of 1493 did Caesar go to Rome, where a house in
the Trastevere was furnished him. Here he maintained a numerous Court,
and although he was only seventeen years of age, one of the dispatches
of Gianandrea Boccaccio, the Ferrarese ambassador, shows that he knew
how to play the prince perfectly. The ambassador went to the Vatican
to render homage, and March 19, 1493, in announcing the results of
his interview to his master, Ercole d’Este, he gives the earliest
description we have of the youthful Bishop of Valencia.

“The other day I called on Caesar in his house in the Trastevere. He
was about to set out for the chase and was clad in a costume altogether
worldly; he was clothed in silk and had a sword at his side. We rode
along on horseback, conversing as we went. I am on friendly terms with
him. He is intellectual and cultured--with the manners of a prince. He
has a serene and cheerful disposition, and his gaiety is contagious. He
is very _modest_. His bearing is much better than that of his brother,
the Duke of Gandia, who is by no means devoid of good qualities. The
Archbishop [Caesar] has never had any taste for the priesthood, but it
should be remembered that his benefices annually bring him in more than
sixteen thousand ducats.”

Just what the word “modesty” meant in those days is not apparent, for
it is applied to persons who would seem to have possessed little of
that admirable trait.

Ecclesiastical rules hampered Caesar but little. He was enormously
wealthy, and additional benefices were constantly given him. He was
promptly allotted the income of the churches of Castres and Perpignan,
and thirty thousand gold ducats from San Michele d’Arezzo fell to his
share.

At the time of Alexander’s accession to the papal throne Italy, and
Naples in particular, were threatened by grave dangers arising from
the contests of King Ferdinand of Naples and Ludovico, Duke of Milan,
and in March, 1493, the former endeavoured to secure the friendship of
the Pope by suggesting a marriage of one of his natural daughters with
Giuffre; the suggestion, however, came too late, for in April Lucretia
Borgia was betrothed to Giovanni Sforza, Lord of Pesaro, and kinsman
of Ludovico; and a coalition was formed by Milan, Venice, and the Holy
See, which could only result in disaster to Ferdinand, as Charles
VIII., who had just inherited the crown of France, was beginning to
assert his claims to the throne of Naples.

Irritated by the rejection of his offer, the King of Naples wrote his
orator in Spain that Alexander was detested by every one in spite of
his holy office, and that his only care was to increase the fortunes of
his children by fair means or foul.

Some of the other Italian states joined the coalition, and in April,
1493, the Bishop of Nepi, Bartolomeo Flores, publicly read the articles
of the treaty in St. Peter’s, and although no threat was made against
Ferdinand, every one knew that the purpose of the league was the
destruction of the House of Naples. Lucretia Borgia’s betrothal to
Giovanni Sforza strengthened the alliance. Alexander hated Ferdinand
because he was outspoken in his condemnation of the scandals of the
Vatican and because he was a vigorous supporter of the Neapolitan
party in the Sacred College. The King had opposed the bestowal of the
cardinalate upon Alessandro Farnese, Giulia Bella’s brother, and he had
also allied himself with Giuliano della Rovere and Virginio Orsini,
who, aided by those who had tried to prevent Alexander’s election, were
holding a portion of the territory of the Church by force. Finally the
King openly supported the rebels, furnishing them troops and supplies,
while his own son, who had gone to Ostia with Giuliano della Rovere,
joined Virginio Orsini and Fabrizio Colonna, the Pope’s mortal enemies.

June 12, 1493, Giovanni Sforza, Lord of Pesaro, was married to the
Pope’s daughter, who was then thirteen years of age. She had been
betrothed twice before, and is described as a beautiful, vivacious,
golden-haired girl. The marriage ceremony was performed in the Vatican,
and the festivities which followed caused an uproar throughout the city.

Burchard, the minute Master of Ceremonies, may not have been
present--his diary stops abruptly June 11, 1493, and does not begin
again until January 14, 1494--but Infessura fills in the lacuna.

The Pope invited one hundred and fifty of the prominent women of Rome
and their husbands, and also the ambassadors and city officials, to the
wedding. After being kept waiting for some time in a hall, the women
were allowed to enter, but when their husbands and the ambassadors
and officials were about to follow, the doors were closed and were
not again opened until an hour had elapsed; then the notaries who had
attested the marriage contract appeared and informed the men, who were
then permitted to enter, that the ceremony was over. It was said that
on the conclusion of the ceremony the Pope had produced fifty goblets
filled with confetti which, in the exuberance of his joy, he had poured
into the bodices of the women, “probably the most beautiful ones, and
this,” concludes Infessura, “to the honour and glory of God and the
Roman Church.”

The chronicler proceeds to describe a banquet in the papal palace,
which was attended by Church dignitaries and numerous women, among whom
were the Pope’s daughter and Giulia Bella. The festivities lasted until
the seventh hour of the night, and included the reading of several
comedies--“among them some obscene ones.” Nowhere in connection with
the marriage of Lucretia and Giovanni Sforza is Caesar mentioned,
although he had left Spoleto.

The tension in the affairs of Italy was somewhat relieved by the King
of Spain, and through the intercession of Frederic, son of the King of
Naples, an agreement was reached in July, 1493, between Virginio Orsini
and the Pope. The price of the agreement and of the dissolution of the
league was the hand of Doña Sancia to be given to Giuffre, Caesar’s
younger brother. The contract was formally signed August 15, 1493, and
the league was dissolved. Giuffre’s marriage with Doña Sancia, like all
those arranged by Alexander VI., was purely a political expedient.

Although Caesar had no inclination or fitness for the Church, shortly
after this, September 21, 1493, he was made a cardinal. It was at this
same creation that Giuliano Cesarini--whose brother had married
Girolama Borgia in 1482--and Alessandro Farnese were made cardinals,
and Burchard adds that there were certain others who paid more than a
hundred thousand ducats for the honour. Farnese, brother of the Pope’s
concubine, as the papal Master of Ceremonies describes him with his
usual fondness for exact details, was henceforth known in Rome as “the
cardinal of the petticoat.”

In that grossly immoral age it is not surprising that Farnese took
advantage of the adulterous relations of the head of the Christian
Church with Giulia, “Christ’s Bride” as she was called in derision. The
Farnese family had been of slight importance in the history of Italy up
to the time of Alexander VI., but when he made Alessandro a cardinal he
brought them into the history of Rome and of the world--for this act
led to the pontificate of Paul III., the founder of the Farnese House
of Parma.




CHAPTER II.

  Charles VIII. invades Italy--Caesar a hostage--Caesar leaves the
      King’s camp--The league against France--Charles enters Rome--
      Caesar appointed Governor of Orvieto--The Pope conceives the idea
      of recovering Romagna--He declares the Romagnol barons rebels--
      The Pope summons his son, the Duke of Gandia, from Spain, to
      command the papal troops--Charles VIII. aids the Romagnol barons--
      Giuffre Borgia and his wife, Doña Sancia of Naples, come to Rome--
      Caesar appointed Legate to crown the King of Naples.


The nuptial contract of Giuffre Borgia and Sancia of Naples was
signed January 25, 1494, but King Ferdinand died before the marriage
was performed, and the crown passed to Federigo of Aragon. Giuffre
by the contract received for himself and his heirs in perpetuity the
principality of Squillace and the county of Cariati in Calabria.
The King of Naples and the Pope each promised to give the young man
an annual allowance of ten thousand crowns, and Giuffre was to be
received and treated as a prince throughout the Regno. The marriage was
celebrated with great pomp, May 7, 1494, and Giuffre remained in Naples
several months. This alliance for a time put an end to the strife
between the Vatican and those who, supported by the King of Aragon, had
been holding part of the papal territory by force.

Naples was now filled with reports of the preparations which Charles
VIII. of France was making for invading Naples, and King Alfonso sent
Ferrante de Genaro to urge Ludovico il Moro to oppose the coming of
the French King. Desiring the Pope’s aid, Alfonso also requested an
interview with him, and about the end of June the Pontiff, accompanied
by three cardinals, set out to meet him at Vicovaro. Burchard describes
the departure of the Pope in great detail; among the cardinals in his
suite was his Eminence of Valencia.

July 14th the approach of the King was announced to the Pope. As they
entered the town Caesar, Cardinal of Valencia, who had gone to escort
his Majesty, rode on the King’s left. The Pope and the King remained
in Vicovaro three days, and a coalition was established between them
and Florence against the King of France, but as all of the allies were
afraid of Charles, it came to nothing. The Pope and Caesar returned to
Rome some time before July 17th.

To understand why Ludovico il Moro urged the King of France to invade
Naples it is necessary to go back to the time of Galeazzo Sforza,
Duke of Milan, whose oppressions and cruelties were ended by his
assassination in December, 1476, as he was about to enter the church of
St. Stephen.

Galeazzo left an infant son, Gian Galeazzo Maria, and a widow, Bona
of Savoy, sister-in-law of Louis XI. of France. The Duchess acted as
regent for her son, but Ludovico, brother of the murdered duke, soon
succeeded in wresting the power from her. He also refused to turn the
government over to his nephew Galeazzo Maria, when he came of age--at
the same time virtually holding him prisoner. Galeazzo Maria’s wife,
Isabella of Aragon, daughter of Alfonso, Duke of Naples, hereditary
prince of the Regno, complained to her father, whereupon, to render
the opposition of Naples unavailing, and eventually obtain control of
Milan, Ludovico hit upon the plan of inducing the youthful King of
France, Charles VIII., to come to Italy and assert the old rights of
the House of Anjou to the throne of Naples.

By his contemporaries Ludovico was regarded as the greatest political
genius of the age, and the extravagant admiration bestowed on him shows
that the adoption of any means to egotistic purposes was regarded not
only as justifiable but also as commendable. Ludovico accepted the
applause as his due, and boasted that “the Pope was his chaplain, the
Emperor his condottiere, Venice his chamberlain, and the King of France
his courier to come and go at his bidding.”

Charles VIII. was a visionary, weak, headstrong young man, and,
disregarding the advice of his counsellors, he readily fell in with
Ludovico’s plans. Vast preparations were made for war; a great army
was gathered at Vienne and a large amount of artillery of a size
hitherto unknown in Italy was sent to Genoa. Before Charles entered the
peninsula, however, Don Federico began the war by an attack on Genoa,
which, however, was unsuccessful.

Finally, August 23, 1494, Charles himself left Vienne and crossed
the Alps to Asti, where he fell ill. On his recovery he visited his
cousin, the deposed Duke of Milan, and his young wife, who were kept by
Ludovico in the castle of Pavia. The Duchess pleaded for her husband
and infant son and for her father and family, against whom Charles was
advancing.

Shortly after the King’s visit the young duke died, and it was
generally believed that he had been poisoned by his uncle, Ludovico.

Charles had sent an ambassador, Philippe de Commines, to endeavour
to obtain the support of the Venetians, but they held aloof. The
envoy explained that the King desired their aid and counsel in his
undertaking; to which they replied that he was indeed most welcome,
but that they could not give him any help, as they were afraid of the
Turk--although they were at peace with him--and as to advising such a
wise King, and one who already had such able counsellors, it would be
great presumption on their part; nevertheless, they would much rather
assist than injure him. They were careful to talk and also act with
circumspection. “I believe their affairs are conducted more judiciously
than those of any other power or prince in the whole world,” concludes
Commines. As Venice would not assist him, it was necessary for Charles
to secure Florence before advancing into Naples. He therefore decided
to march through Tuscany, where he encountered no opposition, the
cities in many cases voluntarily opening their gates to him and asking
his protection.

The citizens of Florence were well disposed toward the French, hoping
they would help them to throw off the tyranny of Piero de’ Medici, who
refused to desert Naples. Charles therefore entered Tuscany and laid
siege to Sarzana, whereupon Piero’s courage failed, and he secretly
tried to make terms for himself. His situation had become so desperate
that he offered to give up Pisa, Leghorn, Pietrasanta, and Librafatta,
and he also agreed that the Republic should advance Charles a large
sum of money. On learning of this the Florentines became so incensed
that Piero fled and took refuge at the Court of Giovanni Bentivoglio of
Bologna and never returned. After a short stay in Pisa and Florence the
King set out for Rome.

At that time the French army was greatly superior to the armies of
Italy. Charles’s cavalry consisted of _lances_, each composed of a
heavily-armed man-at-arms and his three or four attendants; they and
their horses were well equipped. The great strength of the French
infantry, however, lay in the Swiss mercenaries.

The Italian troops were subjects of various states and were under the
command of their own captains and were paid by them; consequently
cohesion and discipline were entirely lacking in the armies of the
peninsula. The Italian foot-soldiers were inferior to the Swiss, who
were regarded as the best in the world. In addition to their heavy guns
the French had a large number of light brass field-pieces, which could
be easily moved about, and which threw iron balls, and were discharged
with considerable rapidity, while the Italian guns were so heavy that
they could be moved only by oxen and with the greatest difficulty;
their ammunition consisted of heavy stone balls.

In the fifteenth century wars the loss of life was
slight--notwithstanding the blood-curdling accounts of contemporary
chroniclers. The defensive armour was so massive that it was difficult
to kill a man, although it was comparatively easy to unhorse him.

War is a trade--in spite of the efforts of the advocates of brute
force to glorify it. Wars were usually brought about then by
adventurers bent on gain, as they are now, by the so-called captains of
industry--who control all civilised Governments--for the extension
of commerce, but always, of course, in the sacred name of patriotism,
which Dr. Johnson described as “the last refuge of a scoundrel.” The
leaders and the men in their pay fought for any state which hired
them, and they might at any time change employers. The famous Italian
captains played the game of war with great profit to themselves and no
little skill.

While the French troops were overrunning the Patrimonium Petri a body
of their cavalry under Monsignor Yves d’Allegre captured Madonna
Adriana Orsini, Giulia Bella, the Pope’s mistress, and her sister
Girolama, and great was the consternation of his Holiness; his anxiety
to secure the return of the ladies set all Italy to laughing and gave
the sonneteers an opportunity to display their wit, of which they were
not slow to avail themselves. The captain who made the precious capture
wanted to hold them for a vast ransom, “because the Holy Father would
give his very eyes to have them back”; but Charles surrendered them for
a comparatively insignificant sum, doubtless not valuing them as highly
as did Christ’s Vicar.

The Neapolitan troops retreated before Charles, who entered Rome the
last day of the year 1494; and Burchard describes in detail the manner
of his reception and how the populace greeted him with shouts of
“Francia, Francia! Colonna, Colonna! Vincola, Vincola!” Evidently they
preferred France, Colonna, and Della Rovere to Borgia.

All the great prelates then in Rome promptly paid their respects to
the King, the youthful Cardinal of Valencia among the number. While
the French were in the city they committed all sorts of outrages,
robberies, and murders. It was at this time that Vannozza’s house was
plundered, and on January 10, 1495, the Pope for his greater security
removed to the Castle of St. Angelo, accompanied by several cardinals,
including Valencia.

The following day the Holy Father and Philibert De Bressa, Charles’s
representative, concluded an agreement by which the Pope was to crown
the French monarch King of Naples and was to abstain from harming
the cardinals Della Rovere, Gurk, Savelli, and Colonna. It was also
arranged that the Pope’s son Caesar should accompany the King of France
as his hostage.

January 28th, after taking leave of the Pope with many expressions of
friendship, Charles departed. At the place appointed for Caesar to
join him the youthful cardinal presented himself with six magnificent
chargers, and they rode forth, Caesar on the King’s left. Two days
later news was brought the Pope that the Cardinal of Valencia,
disguised as a stable-boy, had fled from the King’s camp at Velletri.

When Caesar joined the King he had nineteen large chests, which were
supposed to contain his personal effects; two of the trunks were
brought back to Rome; the remaining seventeen were opened by the
King’s order after the flight of his hostage, and were found to contain
nothing--“at least, so I was informed,” adds Burchard, “but I do not
believe this.”

On his return to Rome Caesar spent the first night at the house of
Antonio Flores, Auditor of the Ruota--perhaps to give the paternal
anger time to cool. The following day the Pope sent his secretary, the
Bishop of Nepi and Sutri, to the King to disclaim all responsibility
for Caesar’s disregard of the agreement.

February 1st the city of Rome sent three envoys, Hieronymus Portius,
the Pope’s intimate, Coronato Planca, senior Consistorial Auditor,
and Jacopo Sinibaldi, Master of the Seals, to the King to recommend
the city to his care and to beg him not to be angry on account of the
cardinal’s flight.

At the time it was generally believed in Rome that his Holiness had
connived at Caesar’s conduct, but his right to give his son to Charles
as a hostage was also questioned. Caesar was then only nineteen, and
his flight was clear proof of his powers of dissimulation and of his
determination. Charles finally concluded to ignore the matter, and in
the course of a few days the young cardinal again appeared about the
Vatican.

About the time that Caesar took his unceremonious departure the Spanish
ambassadors arrived in Charles’s camp to renew the protests of the
House of Aragon, which was determined to assert its own rights to the
Neapolitan throne, and while at Velletri Don Antonio de Fonseca had
threatened Charles with war. These protests, which were the beginning
of the famous League of the Conservation, furnish a more reasonable
explanation of Caesar’s flight from the French camp than does the
theory of an earlier agreement between himself and his father.

The day the League was proclaimed in Rome--April 1st--a mob of
Spaniards attacked a body of Swiss troops belonging to the French army,
and Burchard intimates that Caesar inspired the assault in revenge for
outrages committed by the mercenaries. The Pope, to avoid the charge of
complicity in Caesar’s escape, sent him to Spoleto, where the promising
ecclesiastic awaited developments. Twenty days after Caesar left the
French camp Charles VIII. entered Naples as conqueror.

Ludovico il Moro now began to regret the alliance he had made with
King Charles, although by his coming he had been able to make himself
Duke of Milan. A league against France was solemnly proclaimed in St.
Peter’s on Palm Sunday--the Venetians having signed it March 30th--and
when Charles learned of the preparations that were being made in the
north of Italy to oppose him and that his ally the Duke of Milan,
throwing off his mask, had attacked the French vessels in the harbour
of Genoa, he became anxious for his own safety. He therefore arranged
for the occupation of the Regno, leaving a considerable force in the
conquered territory, and decided to return to France. He determined to
endeavour to detach Alexander from the league, and with this end in
view he set out for Rome. The Pope was his nearest and most dangerous
enemy; the King therefore was anxious to win him over and obtain from
him the investiture of the Kingdom of Naples.

Alexander, knowing that Charles was offended by Caesar’s flight and
by his own activity in the formation of the league, decided to avoid
him. Therefore, accompanied by Caesar and nineteen other cardinals,
he left Rome for Orvieto, where he arrived May 28th. In notifying the
people of Orvieto of his intended visit the Pope stated that he was
going thither to meet the King of France. When his Holiness left Rome
he placed Palavicini, Cardinal of Sta Anastasia, in charge of the city,
and directed him not to oppose the King in any way, and to show him
all honour and respect. The Pontiff’s escort numbered more than five
thousand men, including Greek mercenaries, archers, mounted and on
foot, courtiers, and servants.[14] The Pope sent to Montefiascone and
Viterbo for all the artillery, mortars, siege guns, and small cannon,
which he placed in the castle, together with the munitions of war
brought from Rome.

June 3rd an ambassador arrived from the Emperor Maximilian with a
retinue of thirty horsemen, and was escorted into the town by a number
of cardinals with a guard of a thousand men, horse and foot. The
following day an envoy also arrived from the King of France. It is
believed that the purpose of Maximilian’s embassy was to prevent the
Pope and the French monarch--who was persisting in his efforts to see
his Holiness--from coming to any agreement. While the diplomatists
were endeavouring to hoodwink each other Caesar was busily engaged in
putting the strongholds and castles in a condition for defence. The
evening of June 4th the Pope held a consistory, at which it was decided
to send Juan Lopez, Datory and Bishop of Perugia, to that city, whither
the Pope had determined to go, and direct the officials to make proper
preparations for the reception of his Holiness. It was said at the
time that it was the Pope’s intention to go from Perugia to Ancona and
thence to Venice to ask the aid of the Republic, rather than have an
interview with Charles.

June 5th the entire Pontifical Court set out for Perugia, and they had
no sooner left the town of Orvieto than a royal envoy arrived with
instructions to follow the Pope and see him at any cost. As soon as
the messenger learned of Alexander’s departure he left for Perugia. At
Toscanella his people were refused lodging, a fight ensued, and blood
was shed. At Santa Fiora the French learned that Guido Sforza was in
command of the citadel and they immediately took him prisoner, an act
due to their hatred of his kinsmen Ludovico il Moro, who had betrayed
their sovereign. In the meantime the Pope and Caesar had arrived at
Perugia, and thus avoided the meeting they feared.

Charles had entered Rome--June 1st--and had remained there only
over night. On the 5th he was in Viterbo, and thence he advanced
into Lombardy; he avoided Florence and refused to give up Pisa. He
reached Pontremoli and crossed the Apennines without encountering any
resistance, but found the armies of Milan and Venice, under the command
of Francesco Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua, lying in wait for him on the
other side of the mountains. After a brief struggle at Fornovo, on the
Taro, the King with his army of 10,000 men broke through the allied
forces of 35,000--who lost about 3,500--and escaped to Turin and
thence to France, where he apparently forgot all about his conquest of
Naples, for he left his Viceroy, Gilbert de Montpensier, to look after
himself as best he might. Immediately after the battle of Fornovo,
Ferdinand II. with a few Spanish troops surprised Naples and captured
Montpensier, and the French dominion in the Regno came to an end as
quickly as it had been established. Before leaving Italy Charles had
made peace with Ludovico independently of the Moor’s allies.

The danger passed, the inhabitants of Orvieto, anxious for the Pope to
return to their city, sent a delegation to request him to do so, and
June 21st he did return, but was so anxious to be back in Rome that he
remained only a day. The Pontiff, however, appreciated the strategic
advantages of the castle of Orvieto so highly that he made the town a
legation _a latere_ and appointed his son legate and governor for life.

[Illustration: ORVIETO

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 98.]

The Pope’s letter announcing Caesar’s nomination is dated July 22,
1495, and is as follows:--

  “Beloved Sons etc. Having[15] for a long time known of your great
  love and loyalty toward us and that you desired us to appoint our
  beloved son, Caesar, Cardinal of Valencia, to be your protector
  and governor; and knowing that on account of his high character
  and especially his sound judgment, you can expect much from him;
  and being exceedingly anxious to comply with your wishes in order
  that you may know how great is our love for you we have decided
  to make him your governor for life and do so appoint him as you
  will see by the proper document under our seal. We do this the
  more willingly as, owing to the great love and affection he bears
  you, we are confident that you will be well governed and also
  protected; and that your affairs will prosper in all ways. On
  account of other matters which concern us he is not able to go to
  you immediately, consequently he sends in his place our beloved
  son, Giacomo Dracaz, etc. Given in Rome, in St. Peter’s under
  the Pontifical seal xxii July MCCCCLXXXXV, the third year of our
  pontificate.

            “B. FLORIDUS.”

The reader may well wonder whether any one was ever deceived by such an
epistle.

Caesar’s first act was to make certain appointments to office which
were beyond his authority, and when the fact was brought to his
attention he withdrew them, and apologised with a tact and courtesy
which proved the maturity of his judgment and character and at once
endeared him to the people of Orvieto.

Caesar concludes his letter:--

“In view of the tricks and shrewdness of certain men who have no regard
for the truth nothing is more difficult for those who are animated by
just intentions than to distinguish the true from the false. If in
future I should ever do anything contrary to your customs, statutes,
or privileges, know that I have been led into error by some designing
person, for I am only human and as such am liable to be tricked and
deceived.”

The cardinal of nineteen years signs himself _C. cardinalis Valentinus,
qui vos ex corde amat_.

Although the letter does not sound like that of a boy of nineteen we
must remember that children were precocious in those days and that
his training and constant association with astute men much older than
himself, who were concerned with the great interests of the age,
probably made him wise beyond his years.

The letter to the conservators is dated August 7, 1495; consequently
the Pope and Caesar had returned to Rome as soon as they knew that the
French army was engaged with the forces of the league.

It was about this time that Alexander conceived the great idea of his
reign--namely, to secure the definitive submission of the Romagnol
barons who had greatly troubled the earlier years of his Pontificate.
Caesar was only twenty years of age, and it is hardly probable that
he was of much help in this project, although he could not have been
indifferent to events about him--the collecting of men to strengthen
the papal army, the repairing and provisioning of the castles about
Rome, movements undoubtedly directed against the barons of the Romagna
now deprived of the support of both France and Naples, the latter the
victim of another war, caused by the determination of the Catholic
sovereigns to restore the throne of Aragon in the Regno.

At this juncture the Pope decided to strengthen the Spanish party
in the Sacred College; he accordingly at one creation--February
19, 1496--bestowed the cardinalate on four Castillians: the Bishop
of Segovia, the Bishop of Agrigentum, the Bishop of Perugia, and on
Francesco Borgia. The number of Spanish votes in the Sacred College was
thereby raised to nine, and a great protest was made in Rome.

Romagna, the Marches, and Umbria nominally belonged to the Papacy,
but in reality they were governed by certain powerful families: the
Orsini and Colonna near Rome, the Verano in Camerino, the Freducci
in Fermo, the Trinci in Foligno, the Della Rovere in Sinigaglia and
Urbino, the Baglioni in Perugia, the Vitelli in Città di Castella, the
Sforza in Pesaro, the Malatesta in Rimini, the Manfredi in Faenza,
the Bentivoglio in Bologna, and the Este in Ferrara. These families
Alexander determined to destroy, ostensibly to recover the territory
for the Church, but actually to build up a great principality for his
family.

To carry out his design, however, the Pope had to find a reasonable
pretext, and this he readily did, for when the King of France came
to Italy the Orsini had entered into a treaty by which they were
to help him, although they had hitherto supported the House of
Aragon. Alexander could not have had a better excuse for crushing
them; accordingly June 1, 1496, in public consistory he had a bull
read declaring Virginio, Gian Giordano, Paolo and Carlo Orsini, and
Bartolomeo d’Alviano rebels and deprived of their estates for having
sided with the French and borne arms against the Church. Their ruin was
hastened by the surrender of Aversa, July 23rd, when Virginio, the
head of the family, was taken prisoner.

To carry out his plan the Pope summoned his son Giovanni, Duke of
Gandia, to Rome, intending to confer on him the office of Gonfalonier
of the papal forces, a position his elder brother, Pier Luigi, had
previously held. Giovanni was born in 1474; he was therefore two years
older than Caesar. In 1492 he had married Doña Maria Enriquez, a niece
of the Catholic Sovereigns, and he seemed destined for a great career.

When Giovanni reached Rome, August 10, 1496, the Cardinal of Valencia,
accompanied by the entire Court on horseback, went to meet him at the
Porta Pertusa, and escorted him in great state to the papal palace.

Giovanni found his sister Lucretia and his brother Giuffre married into
two of the great families of the peninsula and his brother Caesar an
enormously wealthy Prince of the Church.

So many benefices had been conferred on him that he was one of
the richest of the cardinals. At this time Caesar’s secretary was
Carlo Valgulio of Brescia, a famous scholar, who dedicated his “De
Contemplatione Orbium Excelsorum Disputatio,” a translation from
Cleomedes, to his master with the usual flattery.

Towards the end of October the Duke of Gandia was made Captain-General
of the Pontifical forces, and, together with the Duke of Urbino and
several of the Colonna, with all his men, arms, and machines of war,
set out for Anguillara for the purpose of seizing the estates of the
Orsini.

In less than a month they took ten castles, but during this time
Bartolomeo d’Alviano made a raid up to the very walls of Rome and just
missed capturing Caesar, who was hunting; the cardinal only saved
himself by flight.

Carlo Orsini arrived at Soriano January 26, 1497, with the troops of
Vitellozzo Vitelli, and after a fierce struggle the Duke of Urbino was
captured. In the fight the Duke of Gandia was slightly wounded in the
face. Fabrizio Colonna and the legate Pietro de Luna were forced to
flee to Ronciglione. The war continued for another month, and ended
with an agreement by which the Orsini promised to pay 50,000 ducats for
the return of the territory which had been occupied and to release all
their prisoners except the Duke of Urbino.

When the King of France had learned of Alexander’s activity against the
great feudatories of the Romagna, who had sided with him, he had sent
Carlo Orsini and Vitellozzo Vitelli to their aid with fresh troops.
One after another the Baglioni, the Della Rovere, and all who hated
Alexander and saw that the destruction of the Orsini would be followed
by the overthrow of their own power joined the Pope’s enemies. Only the
Colonna and the Savelli held to the Holy Father.

The Duke of Gandia was the hero of the _fêtes_ which followed the
termination of the war. He and Lucretia’s husband, Giovanni Sforza
of Pesaro, were selected to meet Gonsalvo de Cordova when he came to
Rome, March 15th, after the capture of Ostia, which Minaldo da Guevra
had endeavoured to hold for Giuliano della Rovere. The Holy Father,
however, continued to look after the interests of Lucretia, and
especially of those of Caesar, who was given a share of the spoils
wrested from the Roman barons. Next to Estouteville, Caesar was the
wealthiest of the cardinals, and it now began to be whispered about
that he intended to relinquish the purple.

In entering the Church he had merely yielded to his father’s wishes
and he had only the first tonsure. The ambassadors noted his dislike
for the Church; his instincts were those of a soldier; he was always
armed; he was attracted by war and greedy for power. Had he been the
eldest son he undoubtedly would have been made Captain-General of the
papal forces, for he had more energy, a stronger will, a livelier
imagination, and what is perhaps of even greater importance in the
egotistical scramble for wealth and honours, he had absolutely no moral
sense. In the great drama that was preparing he undoubtedly would have
promptly found his fitting part. He was as violent and overbearing
as his father, who had not dared to punish him when he fled from the
French camp.

Giuffre, Prince of Squillace, and his wife, Doña Sancia of Naples,
entered Rome in great state, May 20, 1496, by the Lateran Gate. The
Prince was then fourteen and his wife two years older. They were
escorted to the principal entrance of the Lateran Church by Caesar
and Lucretia, with a company of two hundred persons, including the
orators of all the powers, the cardinals and their suites, and numerous
citizens; here Giuffre, Sancia, and Lucretia dismounted and entered the
edifice; thence, after a short stay, they proceeded to the Apostolic
Palace, where from a window the Pope eagerly watched their approach.
His Holiness, attended by eleven cardinals--Caesar having now joined
him--received them in a great hall. Before the Pope’s footstool was
a low bench, on which was a brocaded cushion, and before this on the
floor, in the form of a cross, were four large cushions of crimson
velvet. Giuffre knelt before the Pope, who took the Prince’s head
between his hands, but did not kiss him. Sancia and Lucretia followed,
and were received in the same manner. Thereupon the Prince and his
consort kissed the hands of all the cardinals. This done, Giuffre took
his place between his brother, the Cardinal of Valencia, and Cardinal
Sanseverino, while Lucretia and Sancia seated themselves on the Pope’s
left-hand, and “all conversed for some time pleasantly and wittily,”
after which they took their departure. The next day Sancia and Lucretia
and a number of other women, to the great scandal of Rome, crowded into
and about the marble pulpit in St. Peter’s, from which the priests were
accustomed to read the gospel.

Sancia, brought up in the corrupt Court of Naples, was a bold and
perverse woman, who later became Caesar’s most determined and fearless
enemy; she was the only person who dared brave him. Older than her
husband, she despised and dominated him. It is said that she was the
mistress of both her brothers-in-law, the Cardinal of Valencia and the
Duke of Gandia, and also later of Cardinal Ippolito d’Este.

In a consistory held June 8, 1497, Caesar Borgia was appointed legate
to anoint and crown Frederic of Aragon King of Naples. Alexander had
consented to invest him with the Regno and remit the annual tribute
to the Church if he would make Benevento an independent principality
for his son, the Duke of Gandia, without feudal obligations. In secret
consistory the Pope secured the cardinals’ consent to the investiture
of the Duke of Gandia with Terracina and Pontecorvo.

Caesar was making extravagant preparations for his departure and Gandia
was completing arrangements to go with him to receive the investiture
of his new domains when an event occurred which changed the whole order
of things, and one which has continued to baffle historians--the
murder of the Duke of Gandia the night of June 14, 1497.




CHAPTER III

  The murder of the Duke of Gandia--Caesar departs to crown the King
      of Naples--He returns to Rome--The Pope’s projected matrimonial
      alliances for his children.


The most circumstantial account we have of the murder of the Duke of
Gandia is contained in Burchard’s diary,[16] and is as follows: “June
fourteenth the cardinal of Valencia and the Illustrious Don Giovanni
Borgia of Aragon, Duke of Gandia, Prince of the Holy Roman Church,
Captain-General of the pontifical forces, and most beloved son of his
Holiness dined at the home of their mother, Donna Vannozza, near the
church of San Pietro ad Vincola with their mother and several other
persons. The repast finished and night having come, Caesar and Gandia,
accompanied by a few of their people, mounted their horses and mules to
return to the Apostolic Palace. They rode together to a place not far
from the palace of Cardinal Ascanio Sforza, the Vice-Chancellor. There
the Duke, saying he intended to go and enjoy himself for a while before
returning to the palace, took leave of his brother, the cardinal, and
having dismissed all but one of the servants he had with him, _he rode
back_. He also kept with him a certain person who was masked and who
had come to him while at supper, and who for the past month had been
coming to see him almost every day at the Apostolic Palace. The Duke
took this person up on the crupper of his mule and rode off to the
Piazza degli Ebrei, where he left the servant he had kept, telling him
to wait for him there until the twenty-third hour, and if he did not
return then to go back to the palace. Having given these instructions,
the Duke with the mysterious person on the crupper, rode away from the
servant to some place--I know not where--and was killed and thrown
into the river.”

The servant left in the Piazza degli Ebrei was found there mortally
wounded and unable to give any information.

The morning of the fifteenth day, the Duke having failed to return
to the Apostolic Palace, the Pope became uneasy, but, assuming that
his son had gone to see some mistress and that he did not wish to be
observed coming away in the daytime, the father concluded he would
return that night; but Gandia failing to put in an appearance, the Holy
Father became alarmed and caused a thorough investigation to be made.

Among those examined was a certain Giorgio Sclavus, who made a business
of gathering driftwood along the banks of the river and who stated
that on the night the Duke disappeared he was guarding his wood when,
about the fifth hour, he saw two men on foot come from the Hospital
Sclavorum, along the public highway close to the river. After looking
about in every direction and seeing no one, they returned the way they
had come. Soon after two others appeared from precisely the same place
and did as the former couple had done, and, discovering no one, they
made a signal to their comrades. Immediately a man rode forth on a
white charger with a dead body behind him.

The corpse was taken from the horse and cast into the stream, whereupon
the rider asked, “Did it sink?” To which the others replied, “Signor,
si.” Then all disappeared whence they had come.

When the man was asked why he had not reported the crime to the
Governor of the city, he replied that in his time he had seen a hundred
bodies cast into the Tiber at this very place and no questions had been
asked.

Men were secured in the city to drag the river; a large reward was
offered for the recovery of the body, and about nightfall it was
found, fully clothed; even his purse, containing thirty ducats, was
untouched. On the corpse were nine wounds, one in the throat and eight
in the head, body, and legs, thus proving that the Duke had bravely
defended himself. The body was taken to the Castle of St. Angelo, and
subsequently to the Church of Santa Maria.

When Alexander learned of his son’s murder his grief exceeded all
bounds. For several days he would neither eat nor drink, and the
efforts of his familiars to console him were unavailing.

The Pope directed the Governor of the city to apprehend the murderers,
but in vain. Rome was filled with rumours. The Orsini were suspected,
so was Bartolomeo d’Alviano; even Lucretia Borgia’s husband, Giovanni
Sforza, was mentioned in connection with the crime. By those close to
the Pope Cardinal Ascanio Sforza was said to have been, if not the
perpetrator at least the instigator of the murder--he had recently
complained to the Pope of an insult he had received from Gandia.
Ascanio, when summoned by his Holiness, refused to obey until his
safety had been guaranteed by the ambassadors of Spain and Naples. When
he did appear, however, the Pope received him kindly and allowed him to
depart at his pleasure. Ascanio, nevertheless, believed it prudent to
leave Rome for a while.

It was also said that Antonio Maria Pico della Mirandola, inspired by
Ascanio, had committed the murder, and even Giuffre was suspected,
because--at least, so it was stated--Gandia had been unduly intimate
with his wife. In the effort to fasten the guilt on Caesar it was
said that both he and Gandia were rivals for Sancia’s favours, and
that, owing to jealousy, he had killed his brother. Burchard’s account
contains all that is known of the murder of the Duke. Suspicion finally
crystallised around Caesar, although the reasons for ascribing the
crime to him are so slight that it is amazing that historians have for
four hundred years laid the guilt at his door; we are not offered even
circumstantial evidence; the most that is adduced against him is a
possible motive, and there were undoubtedly equally strong motives for
him against the crime, especially if he had the astuteness we are led
to believe he possessed.

Even admitting he was potentially the criminal into which he later
developed, is it possible that he would have begun his career of
iniquity with a crime so monstrous as the deliberately planned murder
of his own brother? Caesar was then twenty-one and Gandia twenty-three
years of age. The latter may have received great honours at the hands
of their father, but so had the former. Caesar, a Prince of the Church,
of vast wealth, could look forward to a far more brilliant career than
could any mere princeling of Benevento. He must have known that even
the Papacy was within his prospects, and in that age what potentate in
Italy could compare with Christ’s Vicar? Although Caesar disliked the
Church the sacerdotal character of the cardinal was no impediment to
great temporal enterprises; like a cloak, it could be laid aside and
assumed again at pleasure; it was a distinct advantage, as Caesar must
have known.

There are men who are jealous of the success of all others, but they
are invariably weak characters, and no one can accuse Caesar Borgia
of weakness; even admitting he was jealous of Gandia, it is unlikely
that his jealousy was sufficiently bitter to induce him to plan the
murder of his brilliant and accomplished brother, whose talents and
advancement would surely contribute to the progress of all the family.
In that age, although there were determined family feuds and rivalries,
there was frequently a strong sense of family solidarity, and this the
Borgias possessed in an eminent degree.

Who was the unknown man in the mask who had been coming to see Gandia
at the Papal Palace almost daily for a month past, and who had even
called on him during the supper in Vannozza’s garden? Perhaps some
pander or low associate who had accompanied him during his debauches;
or if not this, a decoy sent by some enemy of the Duke or of his
family--and Italy was teeming with them.

If the murder was the work of some enemy, what would be more natural
than for the assassin to endeavour to turn suspicion from himself and
at the same time heap infamy upon the Borgias by launching the rumour
that the Cardinal of Valencia was the author of the crime?

It is clear that Gandia voluntarily went into the quarter of the city
dominated by the most determined enemies of the Borgia--the Orsini.
His personal attendant was found in the morning murdered, in the Piazza
degli Ebrei, where the Duke had left him. Evidently the man in the mask
had led Gandia into a trap, and then, after he had been dispatched,
had provided for the taking off of this henchman. When Gandia left the
servant he evidently thought he might not return that evening.

But how could the man in the mask have visited Gandia every day for a
month for the purpose of entrapping him, without the Duke discovering
it was a plot? Clearly Gandia had no suspicions whatever.

The whole affair is so mysterious that we are inclined to ask whether
Burchard’s statement of the circumstances is correct.

It is against all reason to suppose that Gandia would have ventured
at night unattended into the quarter of the Orsini with a strange man
behind him on his mule, unless he was going to keep an assignation, and
his remark to Caesar shows that such was his purpose.

If this assignation was only a plot to get him away from his own
people, who contrived it? Did Caesar? For Caesar to have arranged it
right in the stronghold of their bitterest enemies, a mass of details,
a planning, and a coincidence of events wellnigh impossible would have
been necessary. It is much more logical to suppose that those enemies
themselves planned it--especially as Gandia had been brought from
Spain expressly to crush the Orsini.

Again--we may ask--was the Duke playing false with his own people?
He had seen little of them, he scarcely knew them. Did he perhaps
fancy that he might rise more rapidly by casting his fortunes with
the enemies of the Pope than by supporting him? Was the mysterious
man in the mask the agent of some family or faction trying to win
over the Duke? Gandia accompanied this man apparently without even a
suggestion of fear into the enemy’s quarter. If he was concerned in
some conspiracy against his family and the Vatican, some obstacle in
the negotiations may have made his death and that of the bully left in
the square necessary to prevent exposure, even if it had not at first
been intended to murder the Duke.

If he was plotting against the Vatican, who were his
fellow-conspirators in the Orsini quarter? The affair seems to contain
more than a mere assignation, for if not why was it necessary to
dispatch the servant?

It was not long before accusations came from without, started perhaps
by persons who at a distance felt secure from the wrath of the Borgia.

February 22, 1498, Pigna, the Ferrarese ambassador in Venice, reported
that he had heard that Caesar had caused the Duke of Gandia’s death.
This was more than eight months after the crime; it was the first time
the charge had definitely been made; several of the Orsini were then
in Venice, and they would undoubtedly have spread the rumour, as the
Pope had endeavoured to cast suspicion on them. If they, however, had
brought about the Duke’s destruction, they would probably have gloried
in the deed.

The accusation once made against Caesar, it was repeated by Paolo
Capello in a relation of September 25, 1500, and also in the famous
letter to Silvio Savelli of November 15, 1501. This same Capello,
Venetian ambassador, wrote: “Every night the bodies of four or five
murdered men, bishops, prelates, and so forth, are found in Rome.”
Under Alexander VI. crime held high carnival in the Eternal City, as it
had under his predecessors.

The Pope did not receive Caesar--at least, publicly--for five weeks,
and the cardinal busied himself with preparations for his journey to
Naples to crown the King.

His Holiness seemed to have changed; he was constantly at work with
the six cardinals he had appointed to draw up plans for the reform
of the Church, and he declared in consistory that henceforth family
considerations and projects would have no weight with him.

At last he gave up trying to discover the murderer, and the conviction
became general that he, better than all others, knew who the guilty one
was. Alessandro Braccio, the Florentine orator in Rome, said in one
of his dispatches: “Whoever managed the affair had a good head, and
courage--and every one admits that he was a ‘master.’” This peculiar
attitude toward crime, which is merely a form of the unreasoned and
immoral admiration for success regardless of means still everywhere
prevalent, was especially noticeable in Italy during the Renaissance.
Machiavelli well illustrates it in his remarks on Giovanpagolo Baglioni
in connection with the expedition of Pope Julius II. to Perugia in
1505, for the express purpose of driving the Baglioni from their
domain. Although the Pope had a considerable army he entered the city
with only a small guard, in spite of the fact that Giovanpagolo had a
large force--and the “prudent men who were with the Pope commented on
his rashness and on the cowardice of Giovanpagolo, who might have won
eternal glory and at the same time have destroyed his enemy and secured
vast spoils, for the Pope was accompanied by all the cardinals with
their rich belongings. His restraint was not due to any goodness or
conscience, for he was a man who, in order to reign, had murdered many
of his kinsmen; and it was concluded that there are men who do not know
how to be great criminals or perfectly good--for a crime may possess
greatness and be to some extent glorious [_generosa_]. Therefore
Giovanpagolo did not know how--or better, did not dare--when he had
the opportunity, to perform a deed for which every one would have
admired his courage and which would have secured him eternal fame. And
he would have been the first to show the prelates how little respect
is due to those who live and reign as they do; and he would have
performed a deed whose greatness would have wiped out all infamy.”[17]

The Vice-Chancellor’s palace near which Caesar and Gandia parted on the
night of June 14, 1497, was on the Banchi Vecchi in the Ponte Quarter,
where the Orsini had four strongholds--Monte Giordano, Torre di Nona,
Tor Millina, and Tor Sanguigna. Besides the Orsini and their retainers
a large number of Jews dwelt in this part of the city.

June 16th Cardinal Ascanio Sforza sent his brother, the Moor, an
account of the tragedy, which agrees closely with that of Burchard. He
adds that Gandia’s mule was found near the house of Carlo da Parma.
Burchard’s narrative agrees with all those of the day. Many of the
Romans made no effort to conceal their joy at being rid of one Borgia,
and the satirists did not overlook the murder.

More than three years afterwards, September 28, 1500, the Venetian
Ambassador, Paolo Capello, definitely stated that Caesar was the
murderer; Capello, however, was not in Rome at the time of the
assassination.

It may never be known who was the murderer of the Duke of Gandia, but
there is absolutely no proof that Caesar either instigated or planned
the assassination. Gandia was about to form an alliance which the
Pope believed--and Caesar must have been of the same opinion--would
materially strengthen the house of Borgia, and the power of the family
had not yet become so firmly established that Caesar would have been
likely to commit a terrible crime for the purpose of securing the sole
dominion for himself. He still had need of Gandia, whatever the future
might bring him. There certainly were numerous enemies of the Borgia
who would profit much more by the destruction of a member of the family
than Caesar could.

The kingdom of Naples was torn by discord; one faction supported
France, another Aragon; and in his brief appointing the Cardinal of
Valencia legate to crown the King, the Pope enjoined him to put an end
to the strife. Caesar’s mission was an important one.

Accompanied by a numerous retinue, the expenses of which were to be
borne by King Frederic, the Cardinal of Valencia left Rome for Naples,
and August 1st reached Capua, where he was received by the royal Court
with the highest honours. There he fell ill, and Giuffre and his wife,
Sancia, left Rome almost immediately to go to him. However, his illness
could not have been serious, for he crowned Frederic, the last of the
Aragonese rulers of Naples, August 10, 1497.

Caesar acquitted himself well, displaying a dignity beyond his years.
He was invested with special privileges for the occasion; the symbols
of the spiritual as well as of the temporal power--the flabel, the
sedia gestatoria, the globe, and the sword--were borne before the
Pope’s representative, who exerted himself to secure the goodwill of
the new sovereign, who invested him, as the representative of the
son of the unfortunate Duke of Gandia, with Benevento, the barony of
Fiumara, and the county of Montefoscolo.

August 22nd, to the great relief of Frederic, whose exchequer was
suffering severely on account of the entertainment, Caesar set out
to return to Rome; as he did not reach the city until the 5th of the
following month, he may have spent some time inspecting the estates
granted Gandia’s son by the newly-crowned King.

The morning of the 6th--says Burchard--all the cardinals who were in
the city went to meet Caesar at Santa Maria Nuova, and later all were
received by his Holiness, and the Master of Ceremonies adds, “neither
father nor son uttered a word, but the Pope, having blessed him,
descended from the throne.” In this circumstance some writers discover
evidence of Caesar’s guilt.

The Pope, accompanied by the Cardinals of Valencia and of Agrigentum,
with an escort of a thousand men, went to Ostia, October 17th, to spend
a few days. The large guard was made necessary by the proximity of the
Orsini. The Pope and his family were in grave danger, and now that
Gandia was dead who was to defend them? Giuffre was scarcely twenty,
and he had cast his fortunes with the House of Aragon; moreover, he
showed none of Caesar’s resoluteness.

At the coronation of the King of Naples the legate had used a sword
upon which was engraved the motto _Cum Numine Caesaris Amen_ and
_Caesar Borgia Cardinalis Valentianus_, and which is now in the
possession of the Gaetani family of Rome. All the engravings on the
blade represent scenes of war, and it is therefore reasonable to
assume that the cardinal’s dreams turned more to military glory than
to ecclesiastical honours, and Gregorovius says, “the allusions to the
Caesar of the Roman Empire show what ideas were already seething in
the cardinal’s brain.”

In November, 1497, the Spanish physician Gaspare Torrella dedicated
to the youthful cardinal a work on a loathsome disease which had
been spread in Italy by the soldiers of Charles VIII., and which
was in consequence called the “French sickness.” Caesar himself
evidently had suffered from it, for the author states that the world
owed the cardinal a debt of gratitude for subjecting himself to his
treatment.[18] A work by Sebastiano Aquilano of Padua on the same
subject was dedicated to Ludovico Gonzaga, Bishop of Mantua.

February 14, 1498, the body of Pedro Calderon, one of the Pope’s
familiars, was found in the Tiber, into which he had fallen, _non
libenter_, as Burchard says, a few days before. In this connection the
Venetian ambassador, Capello, writes: “and another time he [Caesar]
murdered with his own hand messer Pierotto, under the very mantle of
the Pope, so that the blood spurted up into the face of his Holiness,
of whom Pierotto was a favourite.” This account agrees with that in
the letter to Silvio Savelli. Sanudo’s report of the affair is the
same as Burchard’s, but he adds that Pierotto was “found drowned in
the Tiber with a young woman called Madona Panthasilea, one of Madonna
Lucretia’s young women and a creature of this pontiff’s--and the cause
is not known.” Early in the year 1498 it was rumoured in Rome that
Caesar intended to leave the Church. A letter written by Alexander
in August, 1497--less than two months after the murder of the Duke
of Gandia--shows that the Pope was already considering a plan which
implied this step on his son’s part. Caesar now seldom appeared in the
garb of a cleric; he went everywhere dressed in the “French style” and
armed. His tastes were altogether martial.

It appears that his Holiness was scheming for Caesar to marry
either the widow of King Ferdinand of Naples or Doña Sancia, his
sister-in-law, who was to be separated from Giuffre for this purpose;
later the Prince of Squillace was to be made a cardinal to replace his
brother, in order that the number of Spanish members of the Sacred
College be kept the same.

In this connection Sanudo says in his diary: “Giuffre, younger than
his wife, has not yet consummated the marriage (he is not sixteen),
he is not a man, and according to what I have heard Doña Sancia has
for some months been the mistress of the Cardinal of Valencia.”
Fifteenth-century chroniclers went into minute particulars.

Lucretia Borgia’s marriage with Giovanni Sforza had been dissolved in
spite of the husband’s protests. For her the Pope was planning a more
brilliant future than the insignificant Lord of Pesaro could offer and
his Holiness readily found a pretext for getting rid of him; in his
project he was assisted by both Ascanio Sforza and the Duke of Milan.
Although every one was against him, Giovanni did not submit tamely, and
he it was who launched the charge of incest against the Pope and Caesar
and his own wife--a charge which, whether true or false, has done more
than anything else to blacken their memory.

Lucretia’s formal divorce took place December 2, 1497. It had been
brought about by the Pope and Caesar purely for political reasons, and
it was now rumoured in Rome that she was to marry Alfonso of Bisceglia,
Sancia’s brother.

The Pope had asked King Frederic for the hand of his daughter Carlotta
for Caesar, but both he and the princess absolutely refused. In his
anxiety, however, to escape the Pope’s wrath he made one sacrifice and
consented to the marriage of Lucretia and Don Alfonso, Sancia’s younger
brother. This youth of seventeen came to Rome unattended by any pomp
and the betrothal took place in the Vatican June 20, 1498, and the
marriage the 21st of the following month. Lucretia was about a year
older than her husband.




CHAPTER IV

  Louis XII. succeeds to the throne of France--His bargain with
      the Pope--Caesar prepares to go to France--He renounces his
      cardinalate--He arrives in Avignon, where he meets Cardinal
      Giuliano della Rovere--Louis XII. and Caesar meet--Caesar’s entry
      into Chinon--Duke of Valentinois--Caesar’s shrewdness--Charlotte
      d’Albret--Her marriage to Caesar--The projected conquest of
      Milan--Ludovico il Moro--The French army invades Italy--Caesar
      leaves France--He enters Milan with Louis XII.


Charles VIII. died April 7, 1498, and was succeeded by Louis XII., who
was endeavouring to secure from the Pope the necessary dispensation to
enable him to repudiate his wife Jeanne and marry his predecessor’s
widow, Queen Anne, whose dowry would include the Duchy of Bretagne.

The Pope, with his usual clairvoyance with respect to his personal
interests, immediately saw an opportunity to profit by the
circumstances, and he made a bargain by which, in return for his
dispensation, the King agreed to bestow the county of Valence--which
was to be raised to a duchy--upon Caesar, who was to renounce his
cardinalate. The King also promised to find him a princess for wife.
The Cardinal of Valencia was thus to become the Duke of Valentinois.
The King also agreed to give him a pension of twenty thousand livres--a
great sum for those days--and also to maintain a company of one hundred
men-at-arms for him. The bargain also included a cardinal’s hat for
the King’s Prime Minister, Georges d’Amboise, Bishop of Rouen, who was
always careful not to overlook his own interests.

[Illustration: LVIGI XII·RE DI FRANCIA

LOUIS XII. OF FRANCE.

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 122.]

In addition the Pope and the King entered into an alliance, offensive
and defensive, the Holy Father agreeing to assist the King in the
conquest of the Regno, and Louis promising to aid Alexander to reduce
the rebellious lords in the Romagna and to re-establish the integrity
of the Papal domain. Thus did sovereigns play fast and loose with human
destinies. This vast intrigue developed during the first eight months
of the year 1498; and August 17th, in a secret consistory, Caesar asked
for a special dispensation to enable him to resign his ecclesiastical
offices and again become a layman in order that he might marry. On the
Pope’s promise that all the offices and benefices his son had enjoyed
should revert to the Sacred College, the cardinals promptly consented
to the dispensation. The same day Louis de Villeneuve, Baron of Trans,
representing Louis XII., arrived in Rome for the purpose of escorting
Caesar to France.

Sure of the cardinals’ consent, everything had been arranged in advance
for Caesar’s departure, even those who were to accompany him had been
selected. His gorgeous wardrobe, which set all Rome to talking, had
been prepared. The Baron of Trans had brought the patents of Caesar’s
new domain, and, accompanied by a numerous retinue, they set out for
Ostia October 1st “for the purpose of going to France by sea, and,”
Burchard adds, “I heard that he had a vast amount of money with
him and that several of his horses were shod with silver.” The new
Duke took with him 200,000 gold ducats, confiscated shortly before
from Pedro de Aranda, Bishop of Calahorra, who had recently--most
opportunely--been convicted on the charge of heresy--Alexander VI.
always endeavoured to pluck his victims and compass his iniquities
strictly in accordance with the forms of law. Three hundred Jews and
usurers, found guilty of various offences, had been imprisoned, but
their terms were commuted into heavy fines, the money going to swell
Caesar’s exchequer.

Louis XII. had promised to send a fleet of several vessels to Ostia to
conduct him to France, and it was expected about the end of August, but
it did not arrive until October 27th, when the new Duke embarked with a
hundred pages, servants, equerries, and retainers. Besides his horses
he had fifty mules and wagons to carry his personal effects.

In his suite were his secretary, Agapito, the famous Spanish physician,
Gaspare Torrella, and his majordomo, Remiro de Lorca, whom he
subsequently had beheaded in Cesena for fraudulent and oppressive acts
as governor of that place.

Six days were required to make the voyage to Marseilles, where Caesar
was received upon the quay by the Archbishop of Dijon. Thence they went
to Avignon, where the Duke met Giuliano della Rovere, the implacable
enemy of his family, who was compelled in consequence of his quarrel
with them to live abroad, and who was then residing at the Court of
France, although since August, when Ostia had been restored to the
cardinal, they had been on somewhat better terms. A month before
Caesar’s departure for Marseilles the Pope had written the Cardinal
San Pietro ad Vincola recommending Caesar to him, and Della Rovere had
replied in the friendliest manner. In one of his letters to the Pope he
said: “I cannot refrain from telling you that the Duke of Valence is so
modest, sensible, and capable, and endowed with such fine qualities,
both mental and physical, that every one is charmed by him. He is in
high favour at Court and with the King. All love and esteem him; it
gives me real pleasure to say this.”

In cunning and duplicity Della Rovere was a match for Borgia, and he
was waiting for a more favourable opportunity to destroy his enemy.

From Avignon Caesar went to Valence, the capital of his duchy, but
he declined to accept the honours which were offered him until he
was formally placed in possession of his State. Almost immediately
on his arrival there a royal messenger appeared and in the King’s
name presented him with the Order of St. Michael--an honour at that
time reserved for princes of the blood and the great nobles of the
kingdom--but Caesar declared he would accept it only from the hands of
the sovereign.

Benoit Maillard, Prior of the Abbey of Savigny, records Caesar’s
arrival in Lyons in November “with great magnificence in his apparel
and trappings.” The 7th of the month an extraordinary banquet was
given for Valentinois, and the account of the expenditures throws
a curious light on the manners of the day. The list of viands is
astonishing: 28 capons, 168 white partridges, 24 red ones, 192 ducks,
420 turtle-doves, 36 wood-cock, 144 peafowl, 120 pheasants, a round
of veal, a quarter of beef, 150 pounds of lard, oranges, vanilla, 2
_goneaux_, 18 quince pies, 18 English tarts, 18 _bride faveaulx_, 18
platters of minced meat fritters, 18 platters of _foub_, 18 platters
of lambs’ tongues in aspic, 18 platters of _mestier_, 18 _pâtés_ of
capon, 18 _pâtés_ of lark, 18 cream cakes, almonds, eggs, rose-water,
suet, quantities of cinnamon, candied orange-peel, annis, _pignons_,
colliander-seed, _mandrians_, sugar-plums seasoned with musk,
hippocras, ginger, nutmegs, cloves, sugar, malmsey, muscat, grapes,
plums, dates, pomegranates, &c.--truly a gargantuan feast.

Caesar finally met the King at Chinon, December 18th. Louis did not
wish to treat Caesar as the son of a sovereign, but at the same time
did not want to incur the Pope’s enmity by offending him; he therefore
hit upon the ingenious expedient of meeting Caesar by chance--under
pretext of going to the chase--about two leagues from the city gates.
There he greeted him warmly, even treating him familiarly, but did not
accompany him to the city, where he was met by the Cardinal of Rouen
and a brilliant escort representing the King.

Brantôme gives a detailed account of Caesar’s entry into Chinon.[19]
The Sieur de Bourdeille says he found the account among his family
papers written in rather crude verse, and that he rewrote it in
prose--_au plus clair et net langage_.

“First came M. the Cardinal of Rouen, M. de Ravastain, M. the
Seneschal of Toulouse, and M. de Clermont, who together with many lords
and gentlemen of the court accompanied the Duke on his entry as far
as the end of the bridge. Then there were eighty-four very beautiful
mules laden with trunks and chests covered with red cloth with the arms
and escutcheon of the said Duke. Then came twenty-four more mules with
trappings of red and yellow, the livery of the King, for these were his
colours; then followed twelve mules covered with striped yellow satin.
Then came ten mules covered with cloth of gold in stripes, first one
smooth and then one wavy.

“When all had passed the bridge they went to the castle.

“Then came sixteen magnificent coursers covered with red and yellow
cloth of gold, each led by a groom, and with Turkish bridles. These
were followed by eighteen pages each mounted on a handsome steed,
and sixteen of them were clad in crimson velvet and the other two in
crinkled cloth of gold. Then followed six lackeys, according to the
custom of the day, leading six beautiful mules harnessed and with
saddle and bridle, and with trappings of crimson velvet, and the
lackeys were clothed with the same.

“Then came two mules bearing coffers on their backs and all were
covered with cloth of gold--and the people in the crowd said that
these contained something more exquisite than all the others--rich
and precious stones for his mistress, and for others--perhaps some
bulls and fine indulgences from Rome, or perhaps some holy relics,
said others. Then came thirty gentlemen clothed in cloth of gold and
silver--but there were not enough of these, said the Court; in view of
the large number that had preceded them there should have been at least
a hundred, or a hundred and twenty clad in the French or Danish fashion.

“Then followed three musicians, two small drums and a violin--which
were at this time in great favour--just as the great lords of
Germany and generals of armies now have them when on the march. The
two drummers above mentioned were clad in cloth of gold and their
instruments were of silver and were provided with great chains of gold
and the said musicians went before the gentlemen named above and the
Duke of Valentinois, playing their instruments the while.

“Then came four trumpets or clarions of silver, the musicians being
richly dressed and playing continually. These were followed by eighty
lackeys clad in crimson velvet and yellow silk, who surrounded the Duke
and M. the Cardinal of Rouen, who was conversing with him.

“As to the Duke himself he was mounted upon a magnificent charger
richly accoutred with a robe of red satin and cloth of gold, with a
border of precious stones and pearls.

“On his bonnet were five or six rubies as large as beans which flashed
most brilliantly; on his cuffs were great quantities of precious stones
and even his boots were covered with gold and gems.

 ‘Et un collier, pour en dire le cas,
  Qui valoit bien trente mille ducats,’

so says the rhyme.

“The horse which he rode was covered with gold and jewels with pearls
and precious stones galore.

“In addition he had a beautiful little mule to ride about the city; and
its harness, saddle, bridle, and brest band were covered with rosettes
of fine gold as thick as one’s finger.

“Bringing up the rear there were eighty mules more, with red trappings
and the arms of the said Duke and also a great number of wagons laden
with other necessities such as camp beds, utensils, &c.

 ‘Ainsi entra, pour avoir bruict et nom,
  Ledict seigneur au chasteau de Chinon,’

“The King was at a window watching his arrival and there is no doubt
that he and his courtiers made merry over him and said that it was too
much for a little Duke of Valence.”

The château of Chinon had been selected for the Duke’s residence and
there the King, accompanied by Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere, called
upon him. When the Duke was about to kneel the King restrained him; a
few words were exchanged and then the Cardinal of Rouen informed his
Majesty that Monseigneur, the Duke, had not yet dined, whereupon the
King replied: “Very well, then let his Highness go to dinner”--thus
ending the interview; Louis evidently was bored and not greatly
impressed. After dinner the King received Caesar and the following day
they took a walk together. A few days later the King went to Nantes to
meet the Queen and the marriage was celebrated. Caesar’s fopperies and
extravagance in dress caused general amusement and disgust and the King
and his courtiers ridiculed the “vain glory and stupid pomposity of
this little duke of Valentinois.” Louis, however, wished to use Caesar
in his schemes, consequently he was careful not to offend him.

The Duke had brought the King a letter from the Pope in which he said:
“In order that your Majesty may see how great is our desire to please
you in all things we are sending you our heart, that is our beloved
son, the Duke of Valentinois, and we beseech your Majesty to treat him
in such a way that all may know how dear this Caesar, whom I entrust to
your kingly good faith, has become to you in all ways.”

Thus far but one of the articles of the agreement between the Pope
and the King had been carried out. By letters patent, dated August
13, 1498, Caesar had been created Duke of Valentinois and he had been
received as such at the Court of France. The negotiations, however,
which were intended eventually to make him the heir to a crown had
failed. Louis had undertaken to secure the marriage of Caesar and
Carlotta of Aragon, daughter of the King of Naples, but Frederic
opposed it and the young woman herself absolutely refused to consent to
the union.

The brilliant entry into Chinon therefore was a fiasco, as Giuliano
della Rovere, in a letter dated January 18, 1499, informed the Pope,
who shortly after complained to the cardinal that the King had exposed
him to ridicule, as it was known everywhere that Caesar had gone to
France expressly to marry.

Caesar, however, had displayed the astuteness and cunning that never
deserted him, for when obstacles began to be interposed in the way of
marrying Carlotta he pretended that he did not have the dispensation
permitting Louis XII. to marry Anne of Bretagne.

The King, however, had been informed by the Pope himself that the
dispensation had been granted, consequently he had proceeded with his
plans and the decree of divorce had been obtained.

The political interests of the King of France in Italy were, however,
more important than the purely personal question of his marriage with
the widow of Charles VIII.; consequently it was greatly to his interest
to find some way to gratify the Pope’s wishes, therefore he made
another effort to overcome the opposition of Frederic and his daughter,
but in vain. Louis thereupon decided to substitute his own niece, the
daughter of the Count de Foix, but she, too, declined.

Caesar, however, treated the matter in a cavalier manner, saying that
if the King of Naples would have none of him because he was a natural
son, Frederic himself was also illegitimate, merely a king’s bastard,
while he himself--and he was proud of it--was the bastard of a pope!

Among the demoiselles who had come from various parts of France to
acquire the graces of the polished Court of the Queen was Charlotte
d’Albret, sister of Jean d’Albret, King of Navarre, and daughter of
Alain, Duke of Guyenne. While Charlotte was still a child she had been
placed under the care of Anne of Bretagne, and she had grown into a
beautiful young woman, gracious and intelligent, and Louis decided to
endeavour to bring about a union between her and Caesar. Alain, the
father, looked with little favour upon the proposed marriage, but the
political interests of the House of Navarre were such that he decided
to consent, provided, of course, he could drive a good bargain--for in
the days of chivalry fair women were exceedingly valuable pieces in the
great game of politics. Throughout the negotiations Charlotte’s father
showed himself to be cold, calculating, avaricious, and suspicious, but
as Louis felt that everything depended upon securing a wife for Caesar,
and as he himself was anxious to set out for Italy he granted all of
Alain’s demands. The negotiations were protracted, almost interminable,
but finally the marriage contract was drawn up at the château of Blois,
May 10, 1499, in the presence of the King, Queen Anne, the Cardinal
d’Amboise, Chancellor of France, the Archbishop of Sens, the proxies
of the Duke of Guyenne, and numerous other dignitaries. By its terms
Alain d’Albret was to give his daughter a dowry of 30,000 livres
Tournois. The marriage was celebrated May 12, 1499, and the bride
was said to be the most beautiful woman of France, while Caesar was
described as possessing fine features and a most elegant bearing; one
writer said that, like the Emperor Tiberius, he was the handsomest man
of his century. Charlotte d’Albret must have known that the marriage
was purely a political one. Burchard records that May 23rd a courier
arrived from France with a letter to the Pope from Caesar in which he
made a brutal confession with regard to his wife.

Charlotte wrote the Pope expressing filial devotion and a desire to
come to Rome to make his acquaintance--and she added that she was
very much pleased with her new spouse.

Alain’s daughter was the sacrifice and Alexander VI. and Louis
XII. were to reap the benefits. Among the documents containing the
negotiations with Alain d’Albret are some which clearly reveal their
plans.

The treaty made by the Pope and the King has often been published;
but the one under discussion when they were endeavouring to bring
about a marriage between Caesar and King Frederic’s daughter had never
been printed until M. Yriarte reproduced[20] the entire document
as an example of the duplicity which then marked all political
transactions--and, it might be added, which continues to characterise
them.

“Minutes of an agreement between our Holy Father, the Pope Alexander
VI. and the Most Christian King:--

“1. In order that the Pope may appreciate the love which the King bears
toward him and his, the said lord promises His Holiness to marry Mgr.
de Valence to the eldest daughter of Don Frederic, with her express
consent, the said daughter being with the queen.

“2. In order that the said seigneur of Valence may have the necessary
means for maintaining his proper estate the King will give him, for
himself and his heirs in perpetuity, the county of Valence and Diois
which is estimated to be worth twenty thousand francs a year; and
in case it should not prove to be worth the sum named the King will
furnish him from some other source enough to make up the said sum, and
as the brothers of the said sieur de Valence are dukes and princes the
King will raise the said county into a duchy.

“3. He will give to the said seigneur de Valence one hundred lances,
maintained by France, both in time of war and in peace, for carrying on
his projects in Italy and elsewhere. The King will increase this number
with two or three hundred lances whenever it should seem to him to be
for the best.

“4. He will give the said seigneur de Valence an annual pension of
twenty thousand francs for his personal expenses.

“5. In case that the said King recovers his duchy of Milan he will give
the said seigneur de Valence his county of Asti for him and his, to
hold under the King in loyalty and homage.

“Item. He will give the said seigneur de Valence his order of St.
Michael; and in order that the King may be satisfied of the good will
of our Holy Father, His Holiness will place the said Sieur de Valence
in his service and will have him marry the person selected. To conduct
the affair more secretly and surely the King will, by the middle of
August, place six vessels in order in the port of Ciotat, Bishopric of
Aix, to bring the said Sieur de Valence and the legate whom the Pope
shall select to perform the requirements of the King. Item because ...
runs danger by the absence of Mgr. de Valence the King will send the
Pope a thousand men for his guard during his absence for which the King
will pay each month four thousand ducats which shall be paid the Pope
secretly by Mgr. the Cardinal of St. Denis, who is in Rome, and this
engagement shall be for three or four months.

“And in case the Holy Father should feel that this confederation and
agreement of perpetual friendship was endangered by any prince of the
league the King will give him letters patent signed with his hand and
sealed with his seal by which he will promise and swear to God and the
Virgin Mary to defend, guard, and protect His Holiness in temporal as
well as spiritual affairs.

“Item. Regarding the kingdom of Naples whatever the King may do, the
said seigneur promises to do nothing and determine upon nothing except
by the hand of His Holiness.

“Item. He will have our seigneurs the Cardinals ad Vincula and Gurk
return to Rome and the Pope agrees to treat them with all friendliness
and gentleness as his good brothers, of which the King shall assure
them, at the same time exhorting them to obey and respect our Holy
Father.

“All of which the King promises on his word as King to maintain,
observe, and keep, and in whatever concerns the estate of Mgr. de
Valence regarding the said counties he will have the same ratified and
agreed to by the chamber of accounts.

“And so far as the other articles are concerned the King will give the
Bishop of Cette and the Archdeacon of Chalais such private letters as
the Pope may wish and which will be sent with the memorandum, &c., &c.”

When news reached Rome that Caesar had received the coveted order of
St. Michael from the King there was a great celebration in the city
and bonfires were lighted by order of the Pope before the palaces of
Cardinals Orsini and St. Dionysius and also before that of Lucretia;
the evening of May 23rd the Spaniards indulged in an orgy which
Burchard says was a disgrace to the Pope and the Holy See.

From the secret agreement it is clear that the conquest of Milan and
the expedition against Naples had been decided upon. The King of
France, now sure of the Pope and Caesar, signed a treaty of alliance,
both offensive and defensive, with Venice April 15, 1499, which was
directed against all the Italian princes. The negotiations had been
kept secret from Ludovico il Moro; that prince _sans foi et sans loi_,
whose destruction was determined upon, was the last to learn of it. The
price the Venetians demanded for joining the league was the cities of
Cremona and Chiari. Although the Duke of Savoy was in accord with Louis
XII. he did not formally join the alliance.

Ludovico il Moro was the most hated man in Italy: he had betrayed
Florence, Venice, and the King of France one after the other; without
regard to the other powers of Italy he had treated with Charles VIII.
when the French first descended into the peninsula. Consequently when
he was again threatened he found himself without friend or ally.

Louis’s pretensions to Milan were based, not only on his inheritance of
the rights of Charles VIII. but also on the claims of his grandmother,
Valentina Visconti, and as he was also determined to recover Naples he
was wise in securing a strong place in the north. Before attempting the
conquest of Milan Louis renewed the treaties of Charles VIII. with his
neighbours. The Duke of Savoy gave him permission to pass through his
territory and promised him troops; in return for Venice’s assistance
Louis agreed to give her the two places she had demanded; the Pope and
Caesar had already been paid.

[Illustration: LUDOVICO SFORZA.

_From the woodcut in Antonio Campo’s “Istoria di Cremona.”_

            To face p. 136.]

The King dispatched his armies to Italy under the command of Louis de
Ligny and the Count d’Aubigny but did not immediately go himself.

Ludovico il Moro was attacked simultaneously by the French and the
Venetians, and as his own people hated him and his governors proved
false, he lost all his cities one by one and was reduced to the last
extremity and finally compelled to make his escape to Germany. When
the Gascon archers entered Milan, October 2, 1499, they shot his
statue--the work of Leonardo da Vinci--to pieces with their arrows.

Caesar was still in France but was preparing to come to Italy; before
leaving he gave his wife a power of attorney to enable her to act as
administrator of his new possessions, the Duchy of Valentinois, the
County of Diois, and all his seignories and property in the Kingdom of
France, and in Dauphiné.

Valentinois had lived with his wife from the last of April until
September, and early in 1500 Charlotte bore him a daughter, who was
christened Louise and who was destined never to know her father. The
Duchess of Valentinois never saw Caesar again.

Valentino may have returned to Italy with the King of France, for the
chronicler Jean d’Auton records that the Duke was among the great
lords who accompanied Louis XII. when he entered Milan, Sunday,
October 6, 1499.[21] The cardinals Delia Rovere and Amboise were also
present, together with the dukes of Savoy and Ferrara, the Marquis of
Mantua, the ambassadors of Genoa, Florence, Pisa, Siena, and Bologna,
and innumerable other high dignitaries. Baldessare Castiglione, who
accompanied the Marquis of Mantua, describes Valentinois as _molte
galante_. A month later when Louis XII. set out to return to France,
having left the government of the conquered duchy to Trivulzio, he
directed two of his captains, Yves d’Allegre and the Bailli of Dijon to
place themselves under Valentino’s orders. The former had a company of
three hundred lances and the latter four thousand Swiss and Gascons,
while Caesar himself had collected a considerable number of men.




CHAPTER V

  The first campaign in Romagna--Imola surrenders--Caterina Sforza,
      the type of the virago--Caesar enters Forli--Death of Cardinal
      Giovanni Borgia--Return of Ludovico il Moro to Milan--Caesar goes
      to Rome--His entrance into the city--He is invested with the
      Vicariate of Romagna--Delegates from Imola and Forli request the
      Pope to appoint Caesar Governor--Caesar is made Gonfalonier of
      the Church--His oath--Caesar’s physical strength--His personal
      appearance.


The campaign in Romagna had been decided upon and Caesar found himself
at the head of a thoroughly disciplined and well-equipped force of
about sixteen thousand men who were held in camp at Cesena.

Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere, whose brother was assured Sinigaglia
by the betrothal of his nephew, Francesco, with Angela Borgia,
abandoned his kinsmen, the Riario, to their destruction. In a letter
dated October 12, 1499, the cardinal thanked the Pope for the proposed
marriage and promised to look after Valentino’s interests with the King
of France.

November 9th the army broke camp, Caesar taking the cavalry to
Piacenza, whence, accompanied by the Bishop of Tulle and a single
servant, he came quietly to Rome and remained at the Vatican with
the Pope until the 24th, when he rejoined his troops and set out for
Imola. Girolamo Riario’s wife, Caterina Sforza, had been given Imola
as part of her dowry and, her husband having died in 1488, she acted as
regent for her son Ottaviano. Of Caterina Sforza Gregorovius says: “The
grandchild of the great Francesco Sforza of Milan, natural daughter of
Galeazzo Maria and sister of Bianca, wife of the Emperor Maximilian,
she was the ideal of the heroic women of Italy who were found not
merely in the poems of Bojardo and Ariosto but also in real life. To
understand the evolution of such personalities, in whom beauty and
culture, courage and reason, sensuality and cruelty combined to produce
a singular organisation, we must be familiar with the conditions from
which they sprang--Caterina Sforza’s experiences made her the amazon
that she was.”

Shortly after her marriage to the untutored nephew of Sixtus IV.,
Girolamo Riario, Count of Forli, her father met a tyrant’s death in
Milan. Subsequently her husband was stabbed to death and his naked body
flung from the walls of the castle of Forli by conspirators. Caterina,
however, ferociously avenged the murder of her husband and succeeded
in holding his estates for her children. Six years later her brother,
Gian Galeazzo, died of poison administered by Ludovico il Moro. Finally
her second husband, Giacomo Feo of Savona, was slain by conspirators
in Forli, and the heroic Caterina mounted her charger and with a small
body of men pursued them to their lair and put them all to the sword,
with their women and children--thus she deserved Sanudo’s description,
“a courageous woman and most cruel virago.”

[Illustration:

  _Towns taken by assault_
  _Towns surrendered_

MAP OF THE CAMPAIGN IN ROMAGNA. TOWNS UNDER CAESAR BORGIA’S RULE.]

She ruled her little domain with force and cunning; and later, when
she fell into Caesar’s clutches, few lamented her fate and Giangiacomo
Trivulzio cynically remarked: “She has now fallen into the hands of two
men who can satisfy all her desires.”

She was a woman of heroic character, such as the Renaissance described
as a virago, a term expressive of admiration, not reproach. The virago
corresponded to the man who possessed what the Italian called _virtu_,
which has nothing to do with virtue, but which comprises energy,
intellect, will, the sum total of attributes which enabled a man
successfully to cope with his adversaries--in brief, the qualities
most dear to the Italian heart of the fifteenth century.

When the Pope had declared that the lords of the Romagna, having failed
to pay the annual tribute to the Holy See, were deprived of their
possessions, Caterina Sforza set up the claim that the Holy See still
owed her a large sum of money which had been due her husband as Captain
of the pontifical army; she therefore announced that if they persisted
she would resist, and her first move was to send her younger children
and her jewels to Florence for safety.

Knowing in advance that her people, because of their hatred of the
Riario, would betray her, she retired to the castle of Forli and,
filling it with arms and munitions of war, calmly awaited the enemy.

When Caesar was still some distance from the city, delegates appeared
in his camp and offered to surrender the town to him without
resistance. The capitulation was signed November 26th and Valentino
entered the city the following day.

The castle independently of the town was defended by Dionigi di Naldo,
whose wife and children were held by Caterina Sforza as hostages in
the stronghold of Forli. Naldo held out for some time, but was finally
forced to surrender, and December 13, 1499, Cardinal Giovanni Borgia,
legate for Romagna and Bologna, received the oath of fidelity to the
Holy See, in the Church of S. Domenico in Imola.

The smaller places in the county of Imola having been captured
without difficulty, Valentino advanced against Forli, December 15th.
On learning of Caesar’s approach, Caterina, who had retired to the
castle, dispatched her brother, Alessandro Sforza, to urge the citizens
to resist, saying that she herself would fight to the last. They,
however, refused, and she took advantage of the last moments to send
her eldest son to Florence for safety. The citizens were determined
to surrender, and they so informed both the Countess and Valentinois.
The two commissioners--who never returned--had scarcely delivered
their message when she directed her artillery on the city and partly
demolished the town hall.

Caesar arrived before the gates of Forli December 17th, but refused to
enter as conqueror until the articles of capitulation had been given
him. Two days later he made his entry without opposition, the citizens
preferring him to their lord, Girolamo Riario, who had burdened them
with heavy taxes and administered the laws in the most partial manner.

The castle still held out and Caesar immediately began preparations for
its capture. On Christmas Day Caterina raised the flag of Venice, the
lion of St. Mark, to make the enemy believe that the republic was her
ally, but Caesar was not deceived.

After attempting to make a breach, Valentino decided to try to effect
an agreement of some sort, and for this purpose presented himself
before the walls, where the Countess herself talked to him from the
ramparts; but she refused all offers; the Duke made two other equally
unsuccessful attempts, and did not open fire until December 28th.

The Countess succeeded in repelling all his attacks until January 12,
1500. She was everywhere on the ramparts encouraging and directing
her men. When the outer walls were stormed, Caterina, before retiring
to the keep--the last resort--ordered all the supplies to be set on
fire, thinking thereby to compel the enemy to retreat, but it was too
late, for Yves d’Allegre and his French company succeeded in forcing
their way into the tower, and a Bourguignon, in searching the halls,
found the heroic Countess of Forli surrounded by a band of her faithful
people. Eager for the reward of twenty thousand ducats which had been
offered for her capture alive, he declared her his prisoner.

That same evening the Countess left the fortress with the honours
of war; she rode forth, mounted on her charger, between the Duke of
Valentinois and Yves d’Allegre, who conducted her and her maids to the
palace of the Numai.

Immediately after the capture of Forli, Caesar dispatched Yves
d’Allegre to secure the surrender of the remaining small towns, while
he devoted himself to reorganising the government of the conquered
territory. His solicitude for the proper administration of justice
and the prompt restoration of order at once won him the respect of
the Romagnols, and from Imola and Forli envoys were sent to ask the
Pope to appoint Caesar--who had declared himself to be merely the
representative of the Holy See--their Governor in place of the tyrant
he had expelled.

Caesar signed his first decree: “Caesar Borgia De France, Duke of
Valentinois, Count of Diois and Issoudun, Pontifical Vicar of Imola and
Forli,” and at the head of the province he placed Don Remiro de Lorca,
the Spaniard who had been his constant companion, and whom we shall
meet again.

After the capture of Imola, Cardinal Giovanni Borgia, papal legate
to Romagna, had gone to Urbino, where he suddenly died, January 14,
1500. In spite of the fact that seventeen days had intervened between
his departure from Caesar’s camp and his death, it was rumoured that
Valentino, actuated by jealousy, had poisoned him. Sanudo was the first
to attribute the Cardinal’s death to Caesar, but--as in the case of
the murder of the Duke of Gandia--there is not the slightest evidence
that he had anything to do with it. The Cardinal had been in Rome, and
on his way to Urbino had been seized with a fever from which he died.

Caesar readily consented that all the benefices of the deceased should
be given to his brother, Ludovico, who was made Governor of Spoleto.

The general hatred of the Borgia explains the facility with which these
rumours spread and the universal credence they obtained.

January 24th it was decided to set out for Pesaro the following day;
but in the night the Swiss mutinied, and the Bailli of Dijon went to
the castle where Caterina Sforza was held, and, declaring that it was
contrary to the rules of war to hold a woman prisoner, and that his
sense of honour was outraged, escorted her to the palace where he
lodged and refused to surrender her to Valentino, who intended to take
her to Rome and deliver her to the Pope.

The revolt lasted a day, and Yves d’Allegre, having been hastily
summoned by Caesar, returned in the evening, and Valentino, now sure
of being able to repress the rebels with the aid of the French and
the Spaniards, addressed the mutineers and threatened them with dire
punishment. It was finally agreed that the bailli should surrender
the Countess, “who shall be retained in the discretion of the King of
France,” and an understanding with the Swiss mercenaries was reached.

The evening of January 25th the army set out for Cesena, Caterina
Sforza, in a black satin gown and heavily veiled, riding between the
Duke of Valentinois and Monsieur d’Allegre.

At Montefiore, January 26th, news reached Caesar that Ludovico il Moro,
who had fled from Milan, had learned of the dissatisfaction of the
people under French rule, and, having gathered an army of 1,300 Swiss
and Bourguignons, was advancing on Como. Trivulzio, who had been left
in charge of Milan, hastily sent for Yves d’Allegre, whose withdrawal
from Caesar’s army terminated operations in the Romagna for a time, as
it deprived Valentino of his artillery, and left him with only about
five hundred cavalry and a thousand foot-soldiers.

In Milan the French were defeated as easily as they had conquered, and
the people displayed the same enthusiasm on the return of the Moor as
they had shown on his overthrow.

Caesar had left a small force to hold each of the towns he had captured
in Romagna, and he had placed five hundred horse, under the command
of Ercole Bentivoglio, conveniently situated to go to the aid of any
garrison that might be threatened.

Valentino, having with him the Countess of Forli, who had again been
placed in his charge on the departure of Yves d’Allegre for Milan, set
out January 30th with five hundred horse, and passing through Fano,
Urbino, and Spoleto, arrived in Rome February 26, 1500.

The Pope evidently wished to make the entrance of the Duke of
Valentinois--returning from his victorious campaign in the
Romagna--into the Eternal City as imposing as possible, for he
instructed all the Church dignitaries then in Rome to meet the
illustrious Caesar, with their suites. Several of the cardinals had
already gone to greet him at some distance from the city, and now the
orators of the various powers, the abbreviators of the Roman Curia, and
the secretaries rode forth to welcome him. The Duke entered the city
late in the afternoon, and was met near the Church of Sta Maria del
Popolo by the Church dignitaries.

First came a train of wagons laden with chests filled with the Duke’s
personal effects; then there were a thousand of his foot-soldiers,
Swiss and Gascons; these were followed by a papal escort of lancers,
with the flag of St. Andrew. Caesar followed, riding between Cardinal
Orsini and Cardinal Farnese, who had gone forth to meet him. They were
accompanied by a bodyguard of a hundred men clad in black velvet.
Caesar wore a black velvet cloak reaching down to his knees. Just
behind him were several flute-players wearing his arms, and then came
two heralds of his own and one of the King of France. After them were
the Duke of Bisceglia on the right and the Prince of Squillace on the
left; then the Archbishop of Ragusa on the right and the Bishop of
Treguier on the left of the orator of the King of France; then came the
Bishop of Zamora and the orator of Spain, who were followed by the two
ambassadors of Navarre, who engaged in an altercation with the orators
of Naples and England regarding the question of precedence--the former
lost and dropped out of the procession in a tiff. Then came the envoys
of Venice, Florence, and Savoy, who were followed by a great rabble,
who crowded and pushed so rudely that the prelates were unable to
secure their proper places.

The Pope had taken up his position in a room above the entrance to the
palace, and with him were the Cardinals of Monreale, Alessandria and
Capua, together with Cesarini and Farnese.

When the Duke reached the Vatican the Pope went to the Chamber of the
Papagalli with several cardinals, and when the doors were thrown open
Caesar and a great swarm of nobles and prelates entered. Valentino
advanced, and kneeling before the Holy Father, addressed him briefly
in Spanish, thanking him for the honours he had conferred upon him.
The Pope replied in the same tongue, “which I did not understand,” says
Burchard. Thereupon the Duke kissed the Pope’s feet and right hand, and
his Holiness kissed his son on the lips. Then such of the nobles who
desired to do so kissed the Pontiff’s feet. Sanudo says the Holy Father
was so overjoyed at the return of his son, that he laughed and wept at
one and the same time, and that he would not grant any audiences that
day.

The Master of Ceremonies describes the decorations of the Castle
of St. Angelo and the pageants and festivities at great length,
and “never before had I beheld such extravagance and display,” he
concludes. February 27th, the day after Valentino’s arrival, there was
a magnificent pageant representing the “Triumph of Julius Caesar,”
in which there were eleven cars, the last bearing the Roman Emperor.
The procession went to the palace, where the car of Julius Caesar was
left, whence some writers have concluded that Valentino took the part
of the Emperor. Burchard says that Caesar rode on horseback from the
palace to the Agona quarter, where the festivities of the citizens were
held according to their custom. The games, which included races of
horses, asses, bulls, buffaloes, lasted until March 5th, when Caesar
began to pay his calls on the cardinals. He went unaccompanied by any
of the Church dignitaries, but had with him a few of his officers and
a military escort of a hundred men clad in black velvet. He displayed
his usual tact, and surprised the cardinals by always allowing them the
place of precedence.

Caesar had brought his prisoner, Caterina Sforza, to Rome, but the
story that he compelled her to grace his triumphal entry into the
Eternal City is undoubtedly false, because, had he done so, Burchard,
who chronicles the most insignificant details regarding his entry,
would certainly have mentioned her, and he does not refer to the
Countess. The stories of her having been led through the streets
of Rome with golden chains on her wrists were probably picturesque
inventions of the enemies of the Borgia.

When the Countess was confined in the Belvedere she made an
unsuccessful attempt to escape, whereupon Alexander had her removed
to the Castle of St. Angelo, from which, on the expiration of about
eighteen months, she was liberated, owing to the intervention of
certain French gentlemen, especially of Yves d’Allegre. His Holiness
gave her permission to go to Florence, and commended her to the Signory
in a letter which is a masterpiece of hypocrisy. In it he refers to our
“beloved daughter in Christ”; “we have,” he says, “not only exercised
mercy with respect to this Caterina, but also, so far as we were
able, with God’s help, have looked with paternal solicitude after her
welfare”--and more of the same sort.

In Florence Caterina Sforza married Giovanni de’ Medici, and, dying in
1509, left a son of the same mettle as herself, the famous Giovanni of
the Black Bands, the last of the great condottieri.

March 15, 1500, Alexander signed a bull investing Caesar with the
vicariate of Romagna, seventeen cardinals concurring in his action.
When his Holiness had held the consistory to find ways and means for
securing money for recovering the Church domain, which was being held
by the great lords who refused to pay tribute and acknowledge the
Pope’s authority, it was for the purpose of restoring the territory to
the Holy See.

Twice delegations had come from Imola and Forli to ask Alexander to
sign the agreement made by these cities to have the Duke of Valentino
for their governor. Had the Pope needed an excuse for handing this
territory over to his son, he could not have had a better one. The
cardinals readily yielded to the persuasions of Alexander and Caesar.
To render the transaction perfectly legal, the Riario were formally
deprived of their domain by a decree of the camerlengo for having
failed for a number of years to pay the tribute to the Holy See--a
thousand gold florins for Forli, two hundred for Imola, and two silver
cups for Mauri.

Caesar signed the agreement, March 15, 1500, with the citizens of
Imola, by which he promised to govern them with justice and mercy; to
maintain them in peace, and defend them in time of war; to preserve
their communal rights and restore those usurped by Count Girolamo
Riario and his successors. The great seal which the document bears
has the bull of the House of Borgia and the three bands azure of the
family of Doms, quartered with the lilies of France. Caesar signs as
lieutenant of the King.

Alexander had his son invested with the office of Gonfalonier and
Captain-General of the Church, March 29th, in the Church of St. Peter,
himself bestowing the insignia of the office--the biretta, the baton,
and the gonfalon--on Caesar.

The ceremony is described by Burchard in detail. The Duke was clad in
a doublet of brocaded gold velvet, with large pearls for buttons; on
his head he wore a scarlet velvet cap. The biretta of investiture,
according to the Master of Ceremonies, was of the height of two palms,
bordered with ermine, and embellished with four large pearls; on top
was a dove, fashioned also of pearls.

Caesar received the baton and the gonfalon as his unfortunate brother
the Duke of Gandia had before him. The Pope in blessing the standard
repeated the prescribed formula, and then, after performing the
necessary rites, Caesar came forward, removed his biretta, knelt before
his father, and in a firm voice repeated the solemn words:--

“I, Caesar Borgia of France, Duke of Valentinois, Gonfalonier and
Captain-General of the Holy Roman Church, swear now and henceforth
to be faithful and obedient to the Blessed Peter and to you, my most
holy Master, Alexander VI., Pope, and to your legally constituted
successors. Never by deed or word will I enter into any conspiracy to
destroy or injure you, or to imprison you by treachery, in short to lay
violent hands on you or your successors in any manner whatsoever, or to
do you any violence under any pretext whatsoever. The commissions which
you or your successors entrust to me either directly by messenger, or
by letter, will be disclosed to no one, and no one will receive from
me any advice which could turn to your disadvantage or to that of
your successors. I will aid you, and those who shall come after you,
to preserve and defend the Pontifical State and the royal rights of
St. Peter against any and all enemies; I will honour the legate of
the Apostolic See on his coming and on his going, and I will lend him
my aid when he shall have need of it; I shall take care to preserve,
defend, augment, and extend the rights, honours, privileges, and
authority of the Roman Church under you and your successors; I will
take no part in any projects, acts, or treaties which might cloak any
criminal design or enterprise prejudicial to you or your successors,
or finally to the Roman Church; and if I should learn that any such
project has been arranged or is under way I will use all my strength to
prevent it, and as promptly as possible; and I will inform you or your
said successors or some one who may inform you of it in my stead. So
help me God and the Holy Angels!”

The Duke remained kneeling before the Pope, who handed him the
standard. Thereupon the golden rose was brought to the Pope, who
presented it to Caesar, who was still kneeling, with the following
words:--

“Receive this rose from our hands, from the hands of him who, however
unworthy, holds the place of God on earth. It signifies the joy of
the two Jerusalems--that is, of the Church triumphant and the Church
militant--and to the faithful in Christ it symbolises the admirable
flower which is the joy of all the saints, and constitutes their crown.
Receive it therefore, dear son, thou who art noble in all time, and
who art endowed with so many virtues; receive it in order that you may
still further grow in virtue through Christ, our Lord, like the rose
that flourishes on the banks of the streams with abundant waters; and
may Christ, our Lord, deign to grant you His grace, and in His infinite
mercy may you be blessed by Him who is Three in One in the centuries of
centuries. Amen!”

The Duke received the rose, kissed the Pope’s hand and foot, and
Burchard, who conducted the ceremony, placed the toque of the
gonfalonier on Caesar’s head. Thus the hypocritical performance ended,
and Caesar, with a number of the cardinals, accompanied the Pope to the
Curia, where he took leave of his father.

Caesar’s first act as Governor of Imola was to appoint Giovanni
Olivieri, Bishop of Isernia, his lieutenant, April 10, 1500, and a few
days later he empowered him to receive the oaths of allegiance of his
new subjects in his stead. All Caesar’s official letters at this time
are countersigned Agapitus--Agapito Gerardino of Amelia, his first
secretary, who remained with him throughout his career. Valentino
immediately turned his attention to reorganising the government of the
conquered territory and to providing for the administration of justice.

The return of Ludovico il Moro to Milan did not prove a serious
obstacle to Caesar’s plans, for he was completely defeated by the
French, under Louis de La Trémoille, at Novara, April 10, 1500, and
taken prisoner to France, where he died on being released ten years
later--it was said--of sheer joy.

Bull-fighting had been introduced into Italy by the Spaniards in the
time of Calixtus III., and June 24, 1500, Caesar gave an exhibition of
his prowess by dispatching a number of bulls in the open space back
of St. Peter’s. He entered the arena armed with only a short sword
and killed five of the bulls, the last with a single stroke of his
weapon, which excited much enthusiasm among the people and secured
him a reputation for great physical strength. The event is described
more fully by Capello, the Venetian ambassador, than by Burchard. The
orator adds: “Caesar is twenty-seven years of age, handsome of figure,
tall, and well formed; he is most regal and extravagant--which greatly
displeases the Pope; if he lives he will be one of the great captains
of Italy.” His generosity was such that it was described as _liberalita
cesarea_, and his Court was thronged with soldiers, artists, and men of
letters, though we look in vain for any great name among them. The men
of letters were mostly mediocre rhymesters and Latinists whose works
have been consigned to oblivion.

It is hardly to be supposed that an Italian condottiere of twenty-seven
years, engrossed with the actualities of life, fascinated by a dream of
vast power, could take very much interest in the arts. Although Michael
Angelo, Garofalo, Bramante, and Antonio di Sangallo were in Rome at
this time, the efforts of Caesar’s eulogists to find in this, and other
similar circumstances, enhanced glory for the young adventurer should
not be taken too seriously.

He undoubtedly had relations with Leonardo da Vinci, as he availed
himself of the artist’s services as an engineer in remodelling certain
fortresses and designing machines of war. Vasari says that Pietro di
Cosimo, the Florentine artist, who died in 1521, painted many portraits
of distinguished persons in Rome, “including those of Virginio Orsini,
and Roberto Sanseverino, and also that of the Duke Valentino, son of
Pope Alexander VI., which portrait is now lost as I know, although
the artist’s preliminary sketch is in the possession of Cosimo
Bartoli.”[22]




CHAPTER VI

  Murder of Alfonso of Naples, Duke of Bisceglia--The second campaign in
      Romagna--Pesaro surrenders--Caesar’s private life--Pandolfaccio
      Malatesta gives up Rimini--Astorre Manfredi--Faenza’s brave
      resistance--The Pope threatens Bologna--Faenza surrenders--
      Caesar returns to Rome--Astorre Manfredi flung into prison--
      Giovanni Bentivoglio--Giuliano and Piero de’ Medici--Caesar’s
      agreement with Florence--Piombino invested--Caesar returns
      to Rome--Coalition of the Pope and the King of France for the
      destruction of the House of Naples--Yves d’Allegre comes to Rome--
      Berault Stuart, Commander of the French Army, enters the city.


Alexander VI. nearly lost his life in an accident which occurred in
the Vatican, June 27, 1500, when the ceiling of a room fell down and
he was buried in the rubbish, from which, however, he was finally
extricated, having received only a few scratches. His escape, according
to his Holiness, was due to the Blessed Virgin Mary; solemn thanks were
therefore rendered her July 2nd. She, however, did not interfere about
two weeks after Alexander’s providential escape to prevent the brutal
murder of Lucretia Borgia’s second husband, Alfonso of Naples, Duke of
Bisceglia.

Early in the evening, July 15th, Alfonso was attacked at the entrance
to St. Peter’s by several armed men and wounded in the head, the right
arm, and the leg. The ruffians, about forty in number, ran down the
steps of the church, hastily mounted their horses, and escaped by the
Pertusa Gate. Such is Burchard’s account of the affair.

The orator of Naples adds: “And the prince ran to the Pope and told him
that he had been attacked and wounded, and Madonna Lucretia, who was
with the Pope, fainted.” Alfonso was placed in a room in the Vatican,
and his wife and his sister, Sancia, consort of the Pope’s son Giuffre,
Prince of Squillace, took entire care of him, even cooking his meals
themselves for fear of poison, owing to Valentino’s hatred of him. The
Pope had him guarded by sixteen men, fearing the Duke might murder him.
Only on one occasion, when the Pope went to see Alfonso, did Caesar
accompany him, and then he was heard to remark to his father, “What
is not finished at dinner may be finished at supper.” When the orator
asked the Pope about the affair his Holiness told him that Valentino
said, “I did not attack Alfonso, but if I had done so, it would have
only been what he deserved”; but one day--August 17th---Caesar
entered the wounded man’s room, drove Lucretia and Sancia out, and
ordered Don Michele to strangle the youth, and that night the body was
buried--a murder so cold-blooded that all Rome was horrified, though
no one dared mention it openly. Finally Valentino admitted that he had
caused Alfonso’s death because he feared the Duke would murder him.
Such is Capello’s account. Burchard adds that Alfonso’s physicians and
attendants were arrested and examined but immediately set at liberty,
as there was no doubt of their innocence.

Alfonso, sacrificed by his father for political reasons, had married
Lucretia, and when the plans of Alexander and Caesar required his
elimination she was unable to save him. He had been frequently warned
by his friends that Rome was a dangerous place for him. Caesar hated
the House of Aragon, and he had derived no greater profit from his
sister’s marriage with Alfonso than he had from her former union with
Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro. Valentino apparently had another alliance
in mind for his sister which he hoped would prove more advantageous to
himself.

As a son had been born to Lucretia and Alfonso, the marriage could
not be set aside as easily as the former had been; therefore heroic
treatment was necessary. When the war broke out in Milan Alfonso left
Rome, and he returned only on the urgent solicitations of his wife
and the Pope, his fears having been somewhat allayed by the warm
congratulations which Caesar had sent him on the birth of his son.

In a dispatch of July 19th the Venetian ambassador says: “It is not
certain who wounded Alfonso, but it is said to have been the same
person who killed the Duke of Gandia!”

Burchard merely records: “Alfonso was strangled in his bed about the
nineteenth hour, and in the evening, about the first hour of the night,
the body was carried to the basilica of St. Peter, accompanied by
Francesco Borgia, Archbishop of Cosenza, and his household.”

Various reasons have been adduced to explain Caesar’s hatred of his
sister’s husband. It has even been said that Caesar wished to have
him out of the way in order that he himself might enjoy her favours;
however, although this charge and others equally hideous, which
were made at the time, are no longer believed, they show to what
extremes calumny would go in those days and how ready chroniclers and
historians, inspired by hate, were to repeat slanders; but they also
show the execration and abhorrence in which the Borgias were held.

There was a Neapolitan party in Rome, and Alfonso may have been a
member of it; his sister Sancia was the wife of Giuffre, Caesar’s
brother, and probably the latter’s mistress. Subsequently she and
Valentino became bitter enemies, and she was the only person about the
Vatican who dared oppose him in anything.

All Rome, prelates, citizens, Lucretia, Giuffre, the Pope himself
seemed afraid of Caesar. Of the Pope it was said that he both loved and
feared him--_ama ed ha paura_. Valentino, hating the House of Naples,
and especially Sancia, whose strong nature and unprincipled character
clashed with his own, could easily bring himself to compass the death
of her brother because it would also leave his sister free for him
to marry her into some powerful family which would prove of great
assistance to him in his far-reaching projects.

Lucretia and Alfonso, whom his contemporaries described as one of
the handsomest men in Italy, apparently loved each other. She had
been greatly distressed when he fled from Rome, and had begged him
to return. On his death Lucretia, who was wholly without will and
character, who had none of the traits of the virago, such as Caterina
Sforza possessed, retired to Nepi for a time.

In speaking of the prompt release of Alfonso’s physicians and
servants, “because they were innocent,” Burchard adds the significant
remark, “as those sent to arrest them knew perfectly.”

The attack on the Duke of Bisceglia evidently was well planned, and he
was subsequently strangled within the very walls of the Vatican. The
servants and physicians were immediately exonerated. Who, then, was
responsible for the murder?

All the chroniclers, historians, and ambassadors either openly or by
implication charge Caesar with the crime. According to the standards
of that perfidious and brutal age, he had ample grounds for the
murder--grounds based on both personal hatred and on political ambition.

The conquest of Romagna was intimately connected with the aims of the
King of France with respect to Naples, and Alfonso was an obstacle
in Caesar’s path. The Neapolitan House had refused Valentino one of
its daughters for wife, and he had married a French princess; the
destruction of the Aragonese family was therefore the logical sequel.

When Alfonso of Bisceglia was murdered, Lucretia was only twenty years
of age; she was beautiful and wealthy, and had powerful kinsmen and
a considerable domain of her own; it would be a comparatively easy
matter, in view of these attractions, to find her another husband in
one of the great families of the peninsula, who would be of help to
Alexander and Caesar in subjugating Romagna, and in any other ambitious
projects they might evolve.

Alfonso of Bisceglia was useless to such practical men as Valentino
and his father; he was honest, gentle, and weak, and such men had even
less place in the swift movement of the Renaissance than they have in
modern politics and industry, and he had to be removed.

Alexander perhaps recognised his own blood in Caesar, and discovered
in him the same cynical contempt for all laws, human and Divine, that
he himself felt. If he had any horror of his son’s deed, it was not
of long duration, for Capello, wrote in September, a month after the
murder: “The Pope is daily growing younger; his greatest sorrows pass
in a night; he is of a most cheerful disposition, and never undertakes
anything but what promises to turn to his own profit; all his thoughts
are directed to a single end--to make great personages of his
children--to all else he is indifferent.”

Efforts have been made to place the responsibility for the murder of
Alfonso on the Sanseverini, who were robbed of the Principality of
Salerno in order that it might be given the prince; and on the Gaetani,
who had been despoiled of the Duchy of Sermoneta that it might be
bestowed on Alfonso’s infant son, Rodrigo. However, neither of these
families, who must also have had their enemies, was ever charged with
the crime by their contemporaries, and had Caesar and Alexander ever
suspected either of them, they certainly would not have treated the
affair with such indifference. The only one charged with it at the time
was the Duke of Valentino.

An ingenious eulogist of the Borgias has suggested that the strangling
in the Borgia tower, which was doubtless reported by Lucretia or
Sancia, was no strangling at all, but probably tetanic convulsions
due to infected wounds caused by the daggers--poignards usually being
cleaned in the earth; he, however, neglects to explain away the attack
when the daggers were used two weeks before.

Early in July the Pope had placed the ban on Faenza, on the ground
that Astorre Manfredi had refused to pay the tribute; the reduction of
Faenza and Rimini, therefore, was decided upon by the Pope and Caesar.
By his ambassador, Villeneuve, Louis XII. sent his consent for the
undertaking, and also his promise to help as far as he was able. In
addition the Venetian ambassador assured the Vatican of the neutrality
of his Government.

Valentinois had formed an army which he was holding in Umbria, in order
that it might be near at hand to be used to destroy the Colonna, who
were allies of Federigo of Naples, or for the operations in Romagna.

According to the statement of the Venetian orator, the King of France
was to furnish six hundred men-at-arms and the same number of Swiss,
in case it should be necessary to crush the Bentivoglio of Bologna,
who might attempt to aid their kinsmen in Faenza, Rimini, and Pesaro.
On the advice of the King they had withdrawn their protection from the
Malatesta and the Manfredi.

When the letter of the Signory was delivered by the ambassadors,
Capello and Giorgi, the Pope was so delighted that in spite of his
promise to keep it secret, the whole palace knew of it at once, and the
same night a great banquet was given in celebration of the event.

When Valentino was ready to set forth on the second campaign for
the conquest of Romagna, he had about ten thousand soldiers, partly
enlisted by himself and partly by Paolo Orsini and Giampaolo Baglioni,
who were waiting for him and his army in Perugia.

Caesar’s departure from Rome having become known, October 5th,
Pandolfo Malatesta sent his wife and children to the Court of his
brother-in-law, Giovanni Bentivoglio, in Bologna, and fortified himself
in the castle of Rimini, knowing he could no longer count on the help
of Venice.

To secure funds for the second campaign in Romagna, Alexander created
twelve cardinals, charging each of them one-tenth of the ecclesiastical
revenues. To this was added the plunder derived from the Gaetani and
other Roman nobles, and large sums were borrowed from the great banker
Agostino Chigi. This was one of the worst scandals of Alexander’s
reign. At this creation two members of the Borgia family were made
cardinals--Francesco of Sueca and Pier Luigi, the Pope’s nephew. All
the cardinals except the last paid well for the dignity. The Bishop
of Catania paid the highest--the enormous sum of 25,000 gold ducats;
Louis, Bishop of Acqui, and Jacobus, Archbishop of Oristano, paid 5,000
each; while D’Albret, Caesar’s brother-in-law, was charged ten thousand.

It is Burchard himself who gives the amount each cardinal was required
to pay. This creation was entirely political. Caesar had found that
he needed money for his undertakings, and he had enjoined the Sacred
College to ratify the nominations, and he had fixed the prices himself.

September 26th Capello wrote the Signory: “I understand that orders
have been given so that--the cardinals having been selected--the
Duke of Valentinois may set out in two or three days, provided the
astrologers say that the moment is favourable.”

The Holy Father, by the agreement with the King of France, was to help
Louis in case he decided to undertake the conquest of Naples, and the
King was to aid Caesar, to whom he now sent a considerable force under
Yves d’Allegre.

Caesar’s foot-soldiers were clad in red and yellow doublets with his
insignia, and were armed with short pikes and swords and casques of
iron. They were well drilled, and far superior to the earlier troops,
which had been little more than poorly armed mobs.

The army set forth the last of September, and it soon became known that
it was Caesar’s intention to drive Giovanni Sforza from Pesaro, and the
last of the Malatesta from Rimini. Sforza was a military commander of
no little reputation, and he decided to resist. He first endeavoured to
secure the help of his former wife’s brother, Francesco Gonzaga, and
also that of the Emperor Maximilian, with whom he was connected through
Bianca Sforza.

Early in 1500 Gonzaga had asked Valentino to stand as sponsor for his
infant son, a child who two years later was betrothed to Caesar’s
own daughter by Charlotte d’Albret. Giovanni Sforza plainly had not
appreciated the relations of Valentino with the Gonzaga family, who,
like all the princely families of Italy at that time, were ever ready
to ally themselves with the stronger and especially with the Papacy.

Struggling for existence, all were playing a desperate game of
politics. The duplicity of the age is again disclosed by the fact that
Gonzaga did send one hundred men to the assistance of the Lord of
Pesaro, who had only two hundred of his own. Giovanni had not been an
altogether unjust ruler, consequently a considerable portion of his
subjects remained loyal to him. While the nobles opposed him he could
count on the support of the lower classes; the middle classes, as is
usual, held aloof, ready to go over to the victor.

Most of the petty lords in the Romagna were upstarts and adventurers,
and as such were tyrants and entirely indifferent to the welfare of
their subjects; being politicians, they were wholly unable to look
ahead and provide for the future--their measures were always mere
temporary expedients to provide against present difficulties, chiefly
of a personal nature; being both ignorant and egotistical, they had no
just appreciation of their actual position, which they were compelled
to hold by force; the result was that they themselves were constantly
the victims of the treachery of their subjects--if treachery it could
be called, for their people professed no loyalty. For them a change
of masters only meant a change of evils, with the chance that for a
while, at least, their condition would be ameliorated. When the people
did not actually oppose their lords, they were indifferent to them.
This explains why many of the cities in Romagna made no resistance and
voluntarily opened their gates to Caesar.

[Illustration: PESARO.

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 166.]

Pesaro promptly surrendered to Bentivoglio, Caesar’s lieutenant, but
before the town yielded Giovanni Sforza managed to make his escape, and
October 27th the Duke himself entered the city with his usual brilliant
array of nobles and officers, by which he knew he could impress the
vulgar imagination. Valentino was theatrical in whatever he did, and
he studiously preserved an air of mystery at all times. When in Rome
he would keep himself in seclusion, and then suddenly on some pretext
would exhibit himself to the populace.

The castle of Pesaro was famous for its strength, and Caesar had
sketches made of it, which he sent to his father, who was interested in
affairs military.

Pandolfo Collenuccio, Ercole d’Este’s orator, arrived in Pesaro the
very day Caesar entered the place, and the Duke sent Don Remiro de
Lorca to call on him.

Collenuccio, a humanist of great reputation among the writers and
jurists of the day, had been exiled in 1489 by Giovanni Sforza in order
that he might confiscate the scholar’s property, and at the same time
be rid of an honest counsellor. After holding offices in various cities
of Italy, he had entered the service of the Este of Ferrara.

Caesar sent the orator a present of grain, wine, candles, a sheep,
and a number of capons and chickens, and in writing to his master,
Pandolfo said Caesar was “brave and generous--and it is believed he
will take care of deserving men. He is determined in his vengeance;
his is a great soul, eager for glory and power, but he seems more
anxious to acquire new States than to give those he already has a
good government”--a statement which does not wholly agree with those
of others. Pandolfo, however, failed to secure a public office,
consequently he discovered some of the Duke’s defects.

One day when conversing with the ambassador, Caesar remarked: “I do
not know what Faenza will do, but she will not cause us any greater
difficulties than the other places have--still, she may try to hold
out.” To which the accomplished diplomatist replied: “If she does it
will only give your lordship another opportunity to display your valour
and skill in taking the place.”

In one of his letters to the Duke, Ercole d’Este, Collenuccio gives
a description of Caesar’s personal habits which is interesting, as
details regarding his private life are few. “The Duke’s life is
as follows: he goes to bed between eight and ten at night. At the
eighteenth hour it is dawn; at the nineteenth the sun rises, and at the
twentieth it is broad daylight. Then he rises and immediately sits down
to the table. After this he gives his attention to business affairs.”

While Caesar was in Fano and Pesaro, Astorre Manfredi--the only tyrant
in that part of Italy who enjoyed the confidence and affection of his
people--was preparing to defend himself in Faenza.

Aid came to him from an unexpected quarter, for Giovanni Bentivoglio,
fearing that Valentino would attack him if Faenza fell, determined
to help the youthful tyrant. Bentivoglio had managed to secure the
goodwill of the French, and had entered into treaties with several of
his neighbours. Among others, Florence had promised to aid him if he
would assist her when she attacked Pisa. Late in October the Pope sent
a letter to Bentivoglio, commanding him, under pain of excommunication,
to take no part in the affairs of Faenza--the only effect of which
was to increase his determination to help Manfredi by sending him
additional troops. At the same time Bentivoglio strengthened his own
defences.

When Valentino left Pesaro, he placed a Spaniard, Marco Suere, in
charge of the citadel. Rimini was surrendered without a struggle by its
pusillanimous lord, Pandolfaccio Malatesta.

Astorre Manfredi, who was only eighteen, had discovered as early as
January, 1500, that Caesar had designs on his territory, although he
had been assured by Valentino of his friendship.

Early in November Caesar’s captain, Vitellozzo Vitelli, occupied
Brisighella, which was the key to Faenza, and all the petty powers of
the neighbourhood hastened to go over to Valentino, feeling certain
that he would win. Astorre had counted on Venice, but he soon found
that she had allied herself with the Pope, for in October Caesar’s
name was inscribed in her “book of gold,” and the Senate had voted him
a palace for residence in Venice, although it had refused to grant
him the title, which he had coveted, of Captain of the Armies of the
Republic.

Manfredi was brave, but he saw that his cause was hopeless. In his
extremity he suggested to his people that they make no resistance in
order that useless bloodshed and destruction of property might be
avoided, but to their great credit and his own they decided to support
him to the last. In the meantime Bentivoglio had succeeded in getting a
thousand infantry to Manfredi.

Faenza was invested November 10th, and Caesar offered the besieged
their lives if they would surrender; promises were followed by threats,
but the inhabitants of the place remained firm. Winter was drawing
near and Faenza was well protected with walls. Caesar established his
camp on the side towards Forli, and attempted to storm the walls,
but failed. Valentino had expected the youthful tyrant to offer him
a pitched battle, but Manfredi wisely refrained, and Caesar’s troops
suffered so from the severe weather that he decided to go into winter
quarters. The people of Faenza had destroyed all the timber in the
vicinity; the troops were encamped in a low, wet place, and they
were constantly harassed by the enemy. Astorre’s men were well fed
and sheltered, and were able to rest at night, while the besiegers
were never secure; Caesar therefore decided to raise the siege, and
announced he would return when the season was more favourable. He
withdrew December 3rd, but was careful to secure all roads leading to
Faenza, and to invest the city in such a manner that no provisions
could be introduced into it. He passed the winter in Cesena, remaining
until April, 1501. The time was spent in all sorts of spectacular
sports and amusements, and when he departed he left behind him the
memory of an amiable and affable lord, and at the same time that of
an able governor and severe justiciary. The accounts we have of his
daily life are chiefly by panegyrists who were enjoying his bounty and
protection, consequently, as evidence of his actual character, they are
worth little more than are the ferocious attacks of the enemies of the
Borgia.

While Caesar was in Forli, the usual number of avaricious artists
and literary men flocked about him, greedy for money or honours, and
clamouring for permission to dedicate their works--works for the
most part now lost--to him. This servility is a curious phase of the
literary character of those and even later days, and the ridiculously
bombastic dedications of books to various tyrants and adventurers,
stained with every crime, and incapable of appreciating anything
upright and noble, is nauseating. However, the painters and poetasters
who shone by the reflected light of some political adventurer as a rule
passed away with him, and such of their works as have been spared by
time are of a nature to console us for those which have been lost. All
these dedications and panegyrics were inspired by the hope of reward
in some form, and as evidence that the person addressed possessed any
characteristics worthy of admiration they are of no value. The names of
Caesar’s eulogists were legion, and in him they discerned every virtue,
just as his political adversaries and their sycophants discovered
every vice. While Caesar was in Cesena the youthful Manfredi, although
definitely abandoned by both Bologna and Florence, was holding out
bravely.

Alexander, knowing that Louis XII. would require his investiture
for the realisation of his designs regarding the Kingdom of Naples,
complained to him that his ally, Giovanni Bentivoglio, had frustrated
Caesar’s plans with respect to Faenza, although their failure was due
more to Manfredi’s stout resistance and the severity of the winter than
to the assistance of the tyrant of Bologna. His Holiness even went so
far as to demand possession of the territory of the Bentivoglio.

January 28, 1501, the Pope threatened Bologna with the interdict in
case lodging and supplies were not ready for Caesar’s troops within
six days. The King of France, however, was more diplomatic, for he
dispatched a letter from Blois, January 30, 1501, in which he “besought
his great and good friend of Bologna to aid our said cousin of
Valentinois with men, provisions, and artillery.”

Bentivoglio did furnish lodgings, supplies, and men, but absolutely
refused to allow the castle of Bologna to be occupied by Caesar’s
troops, because, as he said, this would endanger his authority too
much. Alexander had demanded possession of the stronghold on the ground
that it was required for Caesar’s operations in the Romagna, but
Bentivoglio was not to be deceived.

Valentino spent the early months of the year 1500 organising the
government of the territories bordering on the Adriatic, but he kept
a close watch on Faenza, which he again attacked about the middle
of April, but without accomplishing anything. The skill and valour
of Manfredi and his followers won the admiration of all Italy, and
Isabella d’Este, writing to her husband, the Marquis of Mantua, April
20th, said: “The people of Faenza have saved the honour of Italy”; and
Caesar is reported to have remarked: “Had I at my command an army like
the defenders of Faenza I could confidently undertake the conquest of
the entire peninsula.”

[Illustration: GIO·II·BENTIVOGLIO SIG·DI BOLOGNA

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 172.]

Manfredi, however, was finally reduced to the necessity of asking
for an armistice to arrange the terms of surrender and the night of
April 21st he was received by Caesar at his headquarters with marked
courtesy. The terms of the capitulation were drawn up in Caesar’s name
by Battista Orfino, and Michelotto Corella was placed in charge of the
stronghold.

The brave Manfredi was to be allowed to go whithersoever he wished; his
officers also were permitted to depart; the people and their property
were to be respected; the coins struck by the prince were to remain
current in the State; his debts were to be paid by Caesar, and to
enable the people to regain their prosperity they were to be granted
certain exemptions in the matter of taxes.

Manfredi, deceived by Caesar’s promises, instead of going to his
friends and kinsmen in Bologna or Venice, accepted the Duke’s
invitation to remain in his camp, and he probably stayed with Valentino
until his arrival at the Vatican, June 17, 1501. A few days later he
was flung into prison in the Castle of St. Angelo.

After the fall of Faenza Valentino directed his attention to Giovanni
Bentivoglio, demanding possession of Castle Bolognese in the name
of the Pope. When Bentivoglio learned that Caesar was advancing
with troops he dispatched ambassadors, who were promptly seized by
Vitellozzo, who had captured the strongholds of San Pietro, Frumina,
Guelfo, and Medicina. Bentivoglio, seeing that Caesar was determined,
decided to yield, but he cunningly planned to secure him as an ally at
the same time. April 30, 1501, Paolo Orsini negotiated a treaty between
Caesar and Bentivoglio by which, in return for the surrender of Castle
Bolognese, the former was to serve the latter as condottiere for three
years with adequate pay, in all undertakings except such as might
be directed against the King of France. Caesar was also to furnish
a certain number of troops. Giulio and Paolo Orsini and Vitellozzo
Vitelli signed the treaty for Caesar, who had remained at Medicina
and who was for the first time designated as the Duke of Romagna in
this document, his father having just conferred this title upon him.
Caesar’s consent to this arrangement is explained by the fact that the
King of France had demanded the return of his troops and the Pope had
instructed Valentino to come to Rome without molesting the Florentines.

Giuliano and Piero de’ Medici, anxious to recover possession of the
city from which they had been expelled, proposed to enter into an
alliance with Caesar. Giuliano joined him at Bologna, intending to
remain on his staff as he advanced through Tuscany and rally his own
adherents. Piero also came from Rome to join Caesar, who knew that
their presence in his army and the hatred of his captains for Florence
would constitute a menace to the Republic; he therefore refused to
enter into any agreement with Piero, and on the way to Bisagno he
compelled Giuliano to stop at Loiano.

Notwithstanding this the Signory of Florence felt that he had some
sinister purpose with respect to themselves, consequently they sent
Machiavelli to watch and study Caesar’s movements.

Valentino had asked permission to lead his troops through Florentine
territory, and the request, with certain restrictions--among them one
requiring him to avoid the fortified places--was granted. The Duke
did not wait for the envoys but continued his march, and when they
did appear he was already on Florentine territory. They threatened to
lodge a complaint, but Valentino upbraided them for the attitude of
their Government towards himself and his undertakings. He did not wish
to declare himself an enemy of the Republic, but he needed time to
consider the situation; he therefore made an appointment to meet the
envoys again at Barberino di Mugello.

Owing to her long and exhausting war with Pisa and to her intestine
troubles Florence was in no position to risk a struggle with the Duke
of Romagna; the Signory had therefore decided to grant his request.
Appreciating the danger of having a large number of armed men in their
territory, the Council of Ten made arrangements for resisting any
sudden attack. Caesar finally entered into an alliance, both offensive
and defensive, with Florence, and the Signory took him into its employ
as condottiere, furnishing him the number of troops befitting his rank
and promising him suitable remuneration. The arrangement was for three
years.

Caesar had agreed to continue his march as soon as the convention was
signed, but May 17th he was still at Forno dei Campi, and he asked for
half the artillery belonging to Florence for use against Piombino and
also for his first quarter’s salary. The Signory replied that these
requests were not included in the agreement, and Caesar did not insist.
He, however, dispatched Vitellozzo Vitelli to the Pisans to demand
their siege pieces. On the march towards Pisa Caesar’s troops committed
great depredation, sacking, burning, and plundering. His captains, the
Orsini and Vitelli--especially the latter, whose brother had been
executed by the Florentines--may have been responsible for this. The
Pope had sanctioned Caesar’s undertaking with respect to Piombino,
whose lord, Giacomo d’Appiano, after a feeble resistance before the
city, retired to the stronghold, which was well fitted to resist a
siege. Here it was that Giacomo’s grandfather had bravely defended
himself fifty years before against the ferocious condottiere Sigismondo
Malatesta, son of Pandolfo, Lord of Rimini.

By his agreement with Louis XII. Caesar was compelled to join the
French army about the middle of June. He therefore left a part of his
forces to invest Piombino, which surrendered to his lieutenants after a
two-months siege, and set out for Rome, where he arrived June 17, 1501.
His purpose in coming to Rome at this time was to join the French army
which was about to set forth for Naples. While in the city he concealed
himself from public gaze in the apostolic palace, rarely showing
himself.

[Illustration: RIMINI.

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 176.]

Nothing illustrates the duplicity of the age better than this coalition
of the head of the Christian Church and the King of France for the
destruction of the House of Naples. Only four years before Caesar, as
cardinal-legate, had crowned the last of the Aragonese Kings of Naples;
three times Alexander had endeavoured to marry one of his children into
this family, and he had become connected with it by the marriage of his
son Giuffre with Doña Sancia, and that of his daughter Lucretia with
Alfonso, Prince of Bisceglia, whom Caesar had murdered--and in this
perfidious age the most perfidious of all was the head of the Christian
Church.

In 1499 Louis XII. had secured the Pope’s consent to his undertaking
with respect to the Kingdom of Naples and the Duchy of Milan.

This, as we have seen, was one of those immoral bargains which powers
and potentates still make at the expense of weaker States, although the
bald egoism of the ruler is now less in evidence in these transactions
than it was during the Renaissance. To-day the heads of government,
being shorn of autocratic power, do not represent personal ambition or
achievement; they are either simply survivals of mediaevalism or the
representatives of some interest or faction--of an industrial unit of
some sort; therefore in advanced countries the actual egoism of the
ruler is of slight moment.

In the age of the Borgia the personality of the ruler was more
important; the extension of his power--in fact, his very tenure of
office and position--depended on his physical strength, his cunning,
his powers of dissimulation, his predilections, his ambitions, his
morals. He was hampered by no constitutional restrictions and his
dynasty required for its perpetuation something more than law; the
domination of his family could be secured only by force and fraud.
The heads of governments to-day being mere accidents of birth or the
product of economic interests, their accession to positions of nominal
power and their abandonment of those positions have no appreciable
influence upon the destinies of States; they are products of one class
of economic or social factors just as the despots of the Renaissance
were the products of another group.

Louis XII. was a ferocious egoist just as were Alexander VI. and Caesar
Borgia. He had desired a divorce from Jeanne of France in order that
he might marry Anne of Bretagne. Superstition, if not universal, was
then general, and was not, as it is now, confined to the ignorant and
depraved; rationalism and personal independence had not reached the
stage when mankind sees how absurd and preposterous it is to entrust
the conscience to the care and guidance of another man and especially
a bad one. During the latter half of the fifteenth century, when the
Popes were more depraved than they ever were before or have been
since, other monarchs were especially anxious to secure the pontiff’s
assent to their own egotistical undertakings and the more determined
to avoid his weapon of excommunication, ridiculous as it was. Louis,
therefore, had made a bargain with the Pope by which the latter was to
sanction and aid in the destruction of Naples and Milan, and also to
grant the necessary dispensation to enable the King to put aside his
wife. In return the King had created the Pope’s son, Caesar, Duke of
Valentinois, and had secured for him the hand of a French princess;
the bargain had been made and formally sealed, and now Louis was
endeavouring to compel the Pope to perform his part of the agreement.
The House of Aragon, by right of conquest, which it may be observed is
no _right_ at all, had ruled Southern Italy for a hundred years, but
its days were now numbered. To give his project an appearance of right
Louis had based his claim to Naples on the imaginary rights of the
House of Anjou.

Caesar came quietly to Rome the evening of June 17, 1501. The 19th
Yves d’Allegre arrived with his men-at-arms, who were to be placed
under Valentino’s command. Acqua Traversa was selected for the French
camp, and Burchard enumerates the supplies required for the troops;
wine, bread, meat, eggs, cheese, fruit, and even sixteen harlots were
allotted them. He also informs us that certain Florentine merchants
who were required to lodge the officers paid the Governor of the city
two hundred ducats to be relieved of the burden, and that the official
accepted the money, but, nevertheless, when the French officers arrived
compelled the Florentines to lodge them.

Berault Stuart, commander of the main body of the French forces,
entered Rome June 23rd and was received by all the cardinals and the
Pope’s household with great honours. He immediately repaired to the
papal palace and was conducted to the Pope in the Chamber of the
Papagalli.

“To-day the King’s lieutenants and several of the captains of the
French army went to see the Pope in his palace in Rome, where a great
many cardinals and nobles of the city were gathered. The Pope is a
Spaniard and a poor Frenchman, but he concealed his real feelings
and received the French officers with great cordiality and conversed
with them good-naturedly. To Monsieur Berault Stuart, the King’s
Lieutenant-General, he presented a grey charger, strong and swift,
perfectly broken, and richly caparisoned. The rest of the day was spent
in sports and various pastimes until evening, when the Cardinal of
Sanseverino, Bishop of Maillezais and brother of the Count of Gayas,
entertained the officers at a formal banquet at which the viands were
_exquises et plaisants_. The banquet was given in Cardinal Ascanio’s
garden amid the oranges, lemons, pomegranates, and other rare and
esteemed fruits and fragrant flowers of various sorts, while singers
and players, both tragic and comic, displayed their arts. The banquet
over, the Frenchmen went and took leave of the Holy Father. This done
they returned to their camp. It had been decided that the army should
set forth the following morning, to go directly to Naples and continue
the work begun.”[23]




CHAPTER VII

  The expedition against Naples--The taking of Capua--Naples
      surrenders--Caesar returns to Rome--The orgy in his apartments in
      the Vatican--The Pope divides the conquered territory in Romagna
      among his family--Negotiations for the marriage of Lucretia
      Borgia and Alfonso d’Este--Caesar receives the Ferrarese envoys--
      Lucretia’s marriage--Her character--The Pope and Caesar go to
      Piombino--They visit Elba--Caesar and Leonardo da Vinci.


His Holiness took up his position at a window in the Castle of St.
Angelo, June 28, 1501, and “with great joy” watched the armies of
France file by and out of the city on their march to Naples to destroy
the Aragonese dynasty. Burchard says that there were about 12,000 foot
and 2,000 cavalry, 26 wagons, and 36 mortars. Jean d’Auton describes
the departure of the French troops, the infantry and the cavalry
leading, the file two miles long. The “men-at-arms in good order and
fair array, encased in their armour and, with lances on thighs, wearing
their casques ready for battle--thus they traversed Rome, the trumpets
and clarions sounding, and the great Swiss drums thundering. On the low
battlements of the Castle of St. Angelo stood the Pope, surrounded by
bishops, archbishops, and cardinals. The illustrious Duke of Romagna
and numerous other gentlemen of Rome were with him, and as the army
marched by the Holy Father gave it the apostolic blessing; then the
troops passed through the city gates and marched forth in the direction
of the Kingdom of Naples and they moved rapidly and in perfect order.”

Caesar remained in Rome until July 9, 1501, when he left for Naples,
but Burchard adds that he believed he returned to the city again the
same evening.

In a secret consistory, June 25th, Frederic of Aragon had been declared
deprived of the Kingdom of Naples, and the King of France invested with
it. The 29th the league between the Pope and Louis XII. was solemnly
proclaimed in St. Peter’s, the _Te Deum_ was sung, and his Holiness
repeated the Lord’s Prayer and gave his benediction.

On the way to Naples the French destroyed Marino and Cavi, while
San Germano opened its gates to the invaders. Fabrizio and Prospero
Colonna, who had abandoned their domain to the Pope, were Frederic’s
only allies, but in his employ he had the famous condottiere Rinuccio
da Marciano, who with Fabrizio Colonna had command of the forces
in Capua. On the approach of the French Frederic promptly retired
to Naples, where he was pursued by D’Aubigny, while Valentino and
Sanseverino laid vigorous siege to Capua. The siege lasted for eight
days, at the end of which time Fabrizio Colonna, seeing that further
resistance was useless, endeavoured to arrange a meeting to agree upon
the terms of surrender, but in the meantime a traitor had opened the
gates and the French army rushed into the town.

“After the wall was destroyed and a breach effected large enough
to permit of the assault, the King’s lieutenants had the trumpets
and clarions sound the charge, and the drums beaten to arouse the
army; the men-at-arms were given all the wine they wanted--to lend
them courage--that the valour of France might humble the pride of
Italy--and Messire Berault Stuart, Lieutenant-General of the King,
addressed the men; on the conclusion of his speech the French were
fired with courage and resolved to stand firm in the midst of the
terrible adventures of war--and there, whether they lived or died, to
maintain the justice of their King’s quarrel. And the assault was given
about eleven o’clock on the morning of July 25th and was begun by the
infantry, and a hand-to-hand fight ensued and the air was filled with
spears and arrows and flashing swords--and beyond was the fire and
smoke of the artillery--in the streets of the town pikes and halberds
clashed--rude was the attack--but so bravely met that in less than half
an hour more than two hundred French and Germans were killed in the
breach--and the men of Don Frederic--of a truth they received their
share of the blows and many were slain--and the troopers had no rest
and it would have gone ill with the French if their men-at-arms had
not come to their aid--and the shedding of human blood was each man’s
care--and the Neapolitans and the Colonna maintained their quarrel with
the sweat of their brow and the blood of their bodies--but the French
continued to attack so furiously that the enemy knew not how to save
themselves, except by flight--so they fell back and the French gained
the breach--and they carried the town by assault and entered--and
rivers of blood were shed and men innumerable slaughtered--the soldiers
destroyed all whom they found armed in the streets, or hiding in the
houses--giving quarter to none--whatever his condition--so that down
the streets in great streams ran the blood. I will not describe the
groans and shrieks of despairing women who beheld their husbands
murdered, or the cries of the children over their slaughtered fathers,
or the grief of the old men who saw their homes robbed and their city
destroyed--but I will say that besides the butchery of the men, many
maidens and women were violated and forced, which is the culmination of
the horrors of war. The foot-soldiers of the Duke of Valentino managed
to secure thirty of the most beautiful women of the city, who were
carried away prisoners to Rome.”

The chronicler Jean d’Auton adds that to escape dishonour numerous
women committed suicide; that many of the soldiers made themselves
rich for life with the plunder, which caused them henceforth to be all
the more eager for war. Between seven and eight thousand people were
killed. Those of the men who were left, together with the women and
priests, fled and hid in the belfries and towers of the churches, in
the caves, and among the rocks, but the next day they were hunted out
and held for ransom.

Fabrizio Colonna was captured, and his enemy, Giangiordano Orsini,
generously furnished his ransom. Rinuccio da Marciano, wounded in
the fight, was taken prisoner by Valentino’s men and died two days
later--Guicciardini maintains of poison. Giovio says Marciano’s wounds
were poisoned by Vitellozzo in revenge for the death of his brother
Paolo, who had been condemned by Rinuccio’s faction in Florence.

[Illustration: FREDERIC II. OF NAPLES.

_From a drawing by Boudan in the Bibliothèque Nationale_

            To face p. 184.]

July 26th news reached the Pope of the capture of Capua by Caesar,
_per ducem Valentinum_, says Burchard; but the importance of Caesar’s
part in it seems to have been exaggerated, although he was one of
the signers of the agreement between the King of France and King
Frederic of Naples, by which the latter was to retire to Ischia for
six months, and if he obtained help within that time he was to be
allowed to denounce the armistice and endeavour to recover his throne.
He was permitted to remove all his property, except his artillery and
provisions. In case he failed to secure assistance within six months
he agreed to abandon Ischia and Salerno, and was to be allowed to go
wherever he wished. In about a month he saw that further resistance was
useless and set sail for France, where he was received by Louis XII.,
who presented him with the Duchy of Anjou and a pension suitable to his
rank. The unfortunate King of Naples died an exile September 9, 1504.
When he left his kingdom he was accompanied by Sannazzaro, the famous
poet, who was one of the bitterest of the enemies of the Borgia, and
whose epigrams have perhaps done more than anything else to perpetuate
the memory of their infamy.

Before Caesar returned to Rome the King of France sent Edouart Buillon
to Naples to thank him for his services. The instructions to the envoy
are dated August 8, 1501. He is to tell Valentino that the King has
been informed of his great and good services in the conquest of Naples,
for which he thanks him with all his heart, and that the King also
recognises the goodwill the Duke bears him and which he purposes to
reward by assisting him in his own affairs and treating him as his good
friend and relative.

The King further requests Valentino to withdraw all his forces, except
his own company, from the Regno, and to hold them in readiness and
good order for use should occasion arise. He explains that this is
necessary on account of the great gathering of men about Naples and the
difficulty of providing for so many. He also enjoins him to prevent his
men from robbing and pillaging.[24]

Caesar’s lieutenants in the north--with whom he remained in
communication while he was in Naples--had advanced his projects
to some extent, Vitellozzo Vitelli and Paolo Orsini having secured
possession of Piombino, September 3rd.

Valentino returned to Rome with his men September 15, 1501.

Burchard describes an orgy which took place in Caesar’s apartments in
the apostolic palace shortly after his return, to which fifty harlots
were invited. After the supper they danced nude and indulged in various
performances, the Pope, Caesar, and Lucretia looking on. Matarazzo
also gives an account of the bacchanalia, but slightly changed. A
description of it is likewise included in the letter to Silvio Savelli,
and this is repeated by Sanudo in his diary.

August 20th the Pope had pronounced the ban against the Colonna and
the Savelli, and the confiscation of their property, and shortly
afterwards by a bull, dated September 17th, he divided their domains
and the estates of the Gaetani, of the Savelli, of the Estouteville,
and of the barons of Pojano and Magenza between the two Borgia infants.
Rodrigo, the two-year-old son of Lucretia and the murdered Alfonso,
received Sermoneta, Ninfa, Norma, Albano, Nettuno, and Ardea; while
Giovanni was given Nepi, Palestrina, Paliano, Rigano, and other
cities. The Pope erected Nepi, Sermoneta, and Palestrina into duchies,
while he bestowed Subiaco with its eighteen castles on the Borgia
family in perpetuity; the bull was signed by all the cardinals then
in Rome, nineteen in number, among whom were Caraffa, Sanseverino,
Cesarini, Farnese, Palavicini, and Medici, not one of them opposing
this high-handed robbery of the Ghibelline lords of Latium by the Pope
for the benefit of his own family--and with the help of the funds and
offices of the Church. Almost the entire patrimony of St. Peter was now
in the hands of the Borgia, for Caesar controlled all of Romagna.[25]

In one bull the Pope describes Giovanni Borgia as Caesar’s son, but in
the second he calls him his own “son by a certain woman”--this woman
was Giulia Bella. It would be difficult to believe such effrontery
possible if the bulls, both of which are dated September 1, 1501, were
not in existence to prove it.

Negotiations for the marriage of Lucretia Borgia and Alfonso d’Este
had been in progress for some time. It had become known that he was
looking for a wife, and his Holiness immediately discerned the
advantages a union with the powerful House of Ferrara would afford.
Ferrara would serve as a bulwark against the Venetians, who, the
Pope knew, had designs on Romagna. The Duke of Ferrara was not very
favourably disposed toward a marriage with a Borgia, and when Alexander
suggested an alliance between his daughter Lucretia and the Duke’s son
Alfonso, Ercole received the suggestion coldly. Moreover, Louis XII.
had partly promised to find him a French princess for a wife for his
son. Louis, however, being more anxious to please the Pope than any
other Italian sovereign, had the Cardinal of Rouen inform Ercole that
he could look to him for nothing. Lucretia had twice lost her husband
under tragic circumstances, and Alfonso himself had little inclination
for the match, while his sister Isabella d’Este, wife of the Marquis
of Mantua, was bitterly opposed to the union upon which the Pope’s
heart was set. Alfonso and his father, however, did not dare offend the
Pope and Caesar, so they determined to drive as good a bargain as they
could. The negotiations were wellnigh interminable. At first Ercole
merely demanded a large dowry; then he insisted upon the remission
of four-fifths of the annual tribute due the Church, and in addition
he required the bishopric of Ferrara for his son, Cardinal d’Este.
The dowry was to be 200,000 gold ducats, secured by liens on fiefs in
Romagna, and an agreement was finally reached. In secret consistory,
September 7th, all the cardinals present had consented to the remission
of the Church’s tribute for the purpose of advancing the family
interests and political ambitions of Alexander and Caesar Borgia.

[Illustration: LUCRETIA BORGIA.

_After Titian._

            To face p. 183.]

Valentino had returned to Rome about the middle of September, and the
23rd he received the envoys of the Duke of Ferrara, who found him lying
on a bed, but dressed. October 6th they again had occasion to confer
with him, and they brought the list of those who were to come to Rome
to escort the bride to Ferrara. Valentino was especially gracious;
the orators gave a detailed account of their interview, because, as
they explained, it was a favour usually accorded only to cardinals. It
seems to have been difficult to obtain an audience with Caesar; when
the Ferrarese orators again tried to see him two days later they were
refused; they complained to the Pope, who appeared greatly annoyed, and
said: “Caesar turns night into day, and day into night; the ambassadors
of Rimini have been in Rome more than two months without securing an
audience.” They also reported that Alexander was much displeased with
Caesar’s conduct, and that he remarked that he was not certain that his
Excellency would be able to hold the conquered territory.

The preparations for the wedding were interrupted for some days by
the absence of the Pope and Caesar, who, accompanied by a number of
cardinals and their suites, went to Civita Castellana and Nepi to
inspect the changes which had been made in the stronghold of the latter
place, and the fortress which was being constructed in the former town
by Antonio di Sangallo.

During their absence Lucretia had been left as regent in the Vatican,
according to Burchard, just as she had been on a former occasion, with
authority to open letters and transact ecclesiastical business.

The escort which was expected to come to conduct Lucretia to Ferrara
was delayed several times, and they were still looking for it at the
end of October; finally Ercole announced that, owing to the inclemency
of the season, he had decided to postpone the matter; the true reason,
however, was the fact that the Emperor Maximilian had given him to
understand that the alliance with the Borgia to which he had committed
himself was highly displeasing to himself.

It was at this time that the remarkable “Letter to Silvio Savelli” was
received in Rome; it was a small book printed in Germany. Its author is
unknown, but it is supposed to have been written by a Colonna. Savelli
had been robbed of his property by Alexander, and was an exile living
at the Court of Maximilian. Gregorovius remarks: “This is an authentic
document revealing the condition of Rome under the Borgia; no other
writing so well exhibits the iniquity of these people, their corrupt
politics, in great as well as small affairs, and the terror that ruled
the city, which was filled with their spies and cut-throats.”

The universal execration in which they were held is also well revealed
in the epigrams of the day, one of the most famous of which is the
following:--

 “Vendit Alex. claves, altaria, christum,
    Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest.
  De vitio in vitium, de flamma crescit in ignem,
    Roma sub Hispano deperit Imperio.
  Sextus Tarquinius, Sextus Nero, Sextus et Iste.
    Semper sub Sextis perdita Roma fuit.”

Alexander VI. read and enjoyed the letter to Silvio Savelli, as he
was used to these satires, but Burchard remarks that Caesar regarded
them more seriously, and cites the case of the rhetorician Jeronimo
Mancini of Naples, who, having spoken ill of the Duke, was seized,
and suffered the loss of the end of his tongue and a hand, which were
exposed at a window in the Curia S. Crucis for two days. Some have
ascribed the authorship of the famous letter to Mancini. January 28,
1502, a Venetian, who, it was said, had sent something he had written
against the Pope to Venice, was seized, and when his ambassador went
to intercede for him that night, he was informed that the unfortunate
wretch had already been executed. Costabili, the Ferrarese ambassador,
when he spoke to the Pope about the Duke’s vindictiveness, was told by
his Holiness, “The Duke is good, but he cannot bear insults; and,” he
added, “once when I told him he should profit by my example and let
them write all the satires they wished, he became angry, and exclaimed
he would teach these scribblers good manners.”

In the meantime Ercole d’Este, having no excuse for further delay,
dispatched the escort--December 7th--for Rome, where it arrived
the 23rd. In the cortège were Cardinal Ippolito and Fernando d’Este,
brothers of the groom, with their suites, numbering more than five
hundred persons. Valentino, accompanied by the French ambassador,
Monseigneur de Trans, went to meet the princes. He embraced the
cardinal affectionately, and when returning to the city rode on
Ippolito’s left. At the gates they were met by nineteen other
cardinals and their “families.” They were received by the Pope and his
Court in the Vatican, after which Caesar conducted the princes to his
sister’s apartments. The wedding gifts were magnificent--the least of
all was that of Florence, a present of cloth of gold and silver to the
value of 3,000 ducats. The betrothal took place December 28th, and the
church ceremony the 30th.

Burchard describes the wedding with a wealth of detail that would
do credit to a modern society reporter; the gowns, the jewels, the
presents, the guests, the bride, the groom--all are there; the games
for the entertainment--all are described.

Another move in the great political game had been made; the declining
House of Naples had been eliminated as a factor in the Borgia plans by
the murder of Alfonso of Aragon, and the support of the great House
of Este, secured by the marriage of Ercole’s son, the future Duke of
Ferrara, with Lucretia, who was apparently a passive instrument in
the hands of Caesar and the Pope in their machinations. The final
historical estimate of her is that she was not the virago, the baneful
fiend she is represented to have been, but a colourless, characterless
personality, wholly lacking in will, and completely under the control
of Caesar and the Pope. She had none of the characteristics of Caterina
Sforza. She left Rome to go to her future husband, who had been
represented by a proxy, and she never returned. She appears to have
made an excellent wife and mother.

Caesar remained in Rome until February 17, 1502, when he and the
Pope, accompanied by several cardinals, left for Piombino, where
they arrived the 21st. On the 25th they sailed for Elba to inspect
two strongholds which Caesar was having his engineers construct on
the island. When they were returning, March 1st, there was a severe
storm, which made it impossible for them to leave the vessels for five
days, and Burchard remarks that the Pope and cardinals who were in the
captain’s ship were so frightened that they fell ill. They did not
succeed in getting back to Rome until the 11th of March.

The strongholds on the island of Elba were probably built by Leonardo
da Vinci, who had left Cesena in the fall of 1501 to go to Rome to
confer with Caesar, and not by Antonio di Sangallo, who was engaged on
the works in the vicinity of Civita Castellana during the early months
of 1502.

In October, Caesar had declared his intention of attacking Camerino,
but, owing to various causes, had been compelled to defer his
undertaking. We have few details regarding Valentino during the months
which he spent in Rome, but the chroniclers have left minute records
of the administrative measures of his lieutenants in the Romagna. The
petty States had been allowed to retain their own laws and customs,
and, so far as possible, their own peculiar governmental systems; but
all officials were responsible to the Governor of Romagna, Don Remiro
de Lorca, an overbearing martinet, feared and hated by every one.




CHAPTER VIII

  The third campaign in Romagna--Caesar goes to Spoleto--The Duke of
      Urbino flees to Florence--Valentino takes possession of Urbino--
      Florence sends envoys to him--Machiavelli’s first impression
      of Caesar--The King of France warns Valentino not to molest
      Florence--Caesar plunders the palace of Urbino--Michael Angelo’s
      “Cupid”--Camerino surrenders to Valentino’s lieutenants--Louis
      XII. receives Caesar and Alfonso d’Este at Milan--The King and
      Valentino enter into an agreement--Caesar goes to Imola--Affairs
      of Bologna--Valentino prepares to attack Giovanni Bentivoglio of
      Bologna.


Caesar was compelled to wait until the conclusion of the Neapolitan
campaign before he could resume his own projects in the Romagna, where
there were a few independent lords still left--these few knew that
their time would soon come; among them were the Varano of Camerino and
the Duke of Urbino, Guidobaldo di Montefeltre, who was greatly beloved
by his people.

To complete his conquest of Romagna, Caesar determined to secure
possession of Camerino, Urbino, and Sinigaglia. The early months of
1502 had been occupied with the trips to Piombino, Elba, and the towns
belonging to the Colonna, and he was obliged to remain in Rome until
after the Easter festivities; he was, therefore, unable to set about
the execution of his projects until June.

Shortly before his departure the body of the youthful Lord of Faenza,
who had so heroically defended his domain, was found in the Tiber,
“strangled and dead.”

On surrendering to Caesar, Astorre’s life had been spared, and he had
been allowed to depart with his personal belongings, and, as we have
seen, trusting in Valentino’s word, he had gone to Rome, where he had
almost immediately been thrown into prison.

He was held in the Castle of St. Angelo almost a year, and under date
of June 9, 1502, Burchard has the following entry in his diary:--

“This day there was recovered from the Tiber, strangled and dead, the
Lord of Faenza--a young man of about eighteen years, so fair, and
handsome of form that among a thousand scarcely could his equal be
found. A great stone was tied to his neck.”

The same day the river gave up the bodies of several other persons,
among them two young men, one fifteen, the other twenty-five, both
bound, and also a woman.

Vettori states that Manfredi perished at the hands of Bianchino di
Pisa by order of Caesar, who was in Rome at the time. Manfredi was
in the power and possession of the Borgia at the time of his death;
consequently, whoever actually performed the murder, Alexander VI. and
Caesar Borgia were responsible for it.

The murder of the Lord of Faenza shocked all Italy, and served to
strengthen the suspicion that Valentino had caused the assassination
of his brother, the Duke of Gandia, and also of his brother-in-law,
Alfonso, Prince of Bisceglia.

Caesar’s motive is perfectly clear; he was determined to rule in
Romagna. Manfredi was magnetic and brave, and skilful in war. His
subjects had fought valiantly to save him, and were broken-hearted at
his departure. Of all the petty sovereigns of Italy, he was almost the
only one who enjoyed the love of his people, who continued loyal to him
and looked forward to his return. In addition, his powerful kinsmen,
the Este of Ferrara and the Bentivoglio of Bologna, might take it into
their heads any day to restore him to power. Manfredi dead, Caesar’s
progress would be easier and more certain. In spite of Valentino’s able
administration of the government of Faenza, he had utterly failed to
secure the goodwill of the people. Faenza was the least certain of his
conquered territories. Before setting out to attack Camerino and Urbino
it was, according to Caesar, the part of wisdom to eliminate Astorre
from the desperate game which the virtuosi of renascent Italy were
playing.

This deliberate planning of the destruction of a prince or a reigning
family, for the sole purpose of securing possession of their property
or power, seems peculiarly monstrous.

Caesar Borgia, aided by his father, Alexander VI., was building up a
great power in central Italy for himself and his family, of which he
clearly regarded himself as the head. Politics, parties, and dynasties,
although apparently of vital importance to a people, are now really of
slight moment, and it is only when the headstrong exercise of power
leads to oppression that a people revolts. In the Far East the people
are wholly indifferent to a change of rulers, consequently conquests
in Asia are as easy as they are fruitless; the people pursue the
even tenor of their way regardless of who their masters are, except
so far as their economic situation is concerned--and the people of
Italy during the Renaissance resembled them in this particular. We
have seen how ready the cities of the Romagna were to open their gates
to Caesar Borgia, and the same phenomenon has been noted elsewhere in
the peninsula. In Naples whether France or Spain prevailed was of no
importance. In Milan the people were equally indifferent to Ludovico
il Moro and to Louis XII., and in Florence not until the greed of the
Medici passed all bounds did the people drive them out. With advancing
civilisation party lines vanish; one party usurps the principles of
another, and modifies them sufficiently to cause them to appear to
accord, or be identical, with its own doctrines; and just in proportion
as party lines disappear the one enduring relation which has existed
from all time, the relation of exploiter and exploited, stands forth
more clearly--in fine, the whole organisation of civilised society is
reducible to the hedonic postulate.

Caesar had collected an army in the neighbourhood of Spoleto, and
thither he went June 12, 1502. His forces consisted of about 10,000
men--6,000 foot-soldiers, and 700 men-at-arms; in addition he had
about 2,000 men conveniently placed in Romagna. Large bodies of troops
were likewise held in reserve about Sinigaglia, Urbino, and Verruchio.
Valentino had issued an order requiring every family in Romagna to
furnish one man-at-arms. Resorting to cunning, he then announced that
he intended to attack Camerino, and he went to the Duke of Urbino
and asked for his artillery for his lieutenant, Vitelli; he also
requested him to send supplies to Gubbio, assuring Montefeltre the
while that “among all the princes of Italy there is none more dear
to me than you are.” While he was advancing by way of Nocera and
Costaciaro, he dispatched 2,000 men to secure Cagli, which they entered
June 20th without resistance. There was nothing left for the Duke of
Urbino’s representative to do but to warn his master of the advance of
Valentino, “who will appear as an enemy before the gates of Urbino on
the morrow.”

The Duke of Urbino was so confident that Caesar had no designs on his
domain that he had gone to one of his suburban villas for a brief
sojourn, and he was still there when his representative at Fossombrone
informed him of the advance of a large force by way of Isola di Fano.
Montefeltre, learning that the roads leading to the fortress of San
Leo, which was regarded as impregnable, were already in Caesar’s
possession, determined to flee to Florence. With him he had only a few
servants and soldiers, whom he soon dismissed, and disguising himself
as a peasant, he fled to Mantua, where he arrived about the end of the
month.

Just four hours after the flight of Montefeltre, who was entirely
unable to count on any support on the part of his people, Caesar
entered Urbino, and all the officials of the place immediately repaired
to him to pay their respects.

[Illustration: URBINO.

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 198.]

No sooner was Valentino installed in the beautiful palace of Urbino
than he dispatched Pedro de Oviedo to Florence to demand the person
of the Duke of Urbino, who, he had reason to believe, was within her
borders, and to ask what her intentions were with respect to himself.
To this the Signory replied by sending an embassy consisting of the
Bishop, Francesco Soderini, and a secretary, the astute Machiavelli,
who, however, after two interviews with Valentino, returned to report
to the Signory.

The envoys on their first meeting with Caesar lost whatever illusions
they may have had concerning his intentions regarding Florence.
Valentino complained that the Florentines had shown a want of faith
towards him; but notwithstanding this he was desirous of forming an
alliance with the Republic, and it was for this that he had requested
that plenipotentiaries be sent him; and to make sure that there would
be no violation of faith, he demanded that the government of the
city be changed and a new one established upon whose word he could
rely, “otherwise,” he remarked to the two envoys, “you will very soon
understand that I will not long endure the present state of affairs,
and if you do not wish to have me for a friend you shall have me for
an enemy.” The envoys endeavoured to excuse the Republic’s breach of
faith, and assured the Duke that she only desired his friendship. As
to a change in the government they replied that the city had the best
government that could be found; but Caesar insisted, and regretting
that this was not that for which they supposed they had been summoned,
and was not what the city expected, they took their leave. In one of
their dispatches the envoys stated that Caesar was _molto solitario e
segreto_--very solitary and secret. Valentino informed them that he
had no desire to seize the property of any one--that it was not his
purpose to make himself a tyrant, but, on the contrary, to drive out
the tyrants.

Machiavelli alluded to the fate of the Duke of Urbino, “whose death
had been announced simultaneously with the disease,” to which Caesar
replied, “that the fate of Urbino showed the rapidity with which he
reached his goal.”

Caesar literally dazzled and disarmed the envoys with his dash and
cunning and effrontery, and Machiavelli wrote: “This lord is splendid
and magnificent, and in the profession of arms his boldness is such
that the greatest undertakings present no difficulties for him; when
he sets out to acquire glory and enlarge his domains, he knows neither
rest, fatigue, nor danger; his arrival in a place is no sooner known
than he is gone; he understands how to win the love of his men, and he
has the best troops in all Italy--and this circumstance, together with
most extraordinary good luck, makes him a conqueror and a formidable
adversary.” In one of his dispatches Soderini says: “It is difficult to
answer him, so numerous are his arguments, and his speech and wit so
ready.”

The negotiations, however, were protracted, and Machiavelli returned
to Florence, while his colleague remained to divert Caesar, so that
the Republic might have time to appeal to France. July 6th a messenger
arrived from Louis XII., who commanded Caesar not to molest Florence;
his Majesty also stated that he would regard any act of violence
against the Republic as an affront to himself. The King’s action had
been taken at the request of the Signory, who thus wished to show
Valentino that they enjoyed the favour of France. In the meantime
Caesar’s unchecked captains continued their aggressions by seizing
Anghiari and Borgo San Sepolcro. July 9th the orator in Urbino informed
the Duke that his Government would enter into an alliance with him, but
demanded that he order Vitellozzo Vitelli to withdraw from Florentine
territory. To this Caesar would not consent until an agreement had
been reached, but to show his goodwill he proposed a suspension of
hostilities. The Florentines, however, having been informed that the
King of France with 20,000 men was on the way to Italy, procrastinated.
They answered that while they would be glad to please him they would
first have to consult with his Majesty. Soderini was directed to
prolong the negotiations as much as possible to give the French lancers
time to reach the field of action. After considerable fencing the envoy
took leave of Valentino July 19th.

It appears that Caesar had already added to his numerous titles that
of Duke of Urbino--“the weak State,” which he regarded as of slight
importance, and in whose beautiful palace he found numerous works of
art, which he caused to be removed to Cesena, not the least valuable of
the treasures being the famous library. Among the statues was Michael
Angelo’s “Cupid,” which Caesar himself a few years before, when still a
cardinal, had presented to Guidobaldo di Montefeltre. Isabella d’Este,
after Caesar’s occupation of Urbino, having expressed a desire for
this work of art, and for a certain “Venus,” the Duke sent them to
her, although when she had asked her brother Ippolito to procure them
for her, she had explained that “she did not wish to have anything to
do with the Duke of Romagna.” Isabella had supposed the “Cupid” to
be antique, but Caesar informed her that it was the work of Michael
Angelo. Writing to her husband, Isabella said: “I will not describe the
beauty of the ‘Venus,’ as I think you have seen it, but the ‘Cupid’ has
no equal among modern works.”

No sooner had Soderini departed than Caesar, disguised and accompanied
by only four servants, also left the city, intending to go secretly
to the King of France in Milan. Just as he was about to take horse
envoys arrived to congratulate him on the fall of Camerino, which had
surrendered to his lieutenants July 19th.

The Varano family were the overlords of Camerino, and their head,
Giulio Cesare, a man of seventy, who had been a condottiere in the
pay of Venice, was one of the tyrants Valentino had singled out
for destruction. Pope Alexander, on the ground that the Varano had
neglected to pay the tribute due the Church, had at the time of
Caesar’s first successes declared their States confiscated. Early in
June Valentino had dispatched two of his captains, the Duke of Gravina
and Oliverotto da Fermo, from Rome to take possession of Camerino.
Giulio Cesare Varano had sent his two younger sons to Venice for aid,
and had kept the two elder with him in Camerino. There they made some
resistance, but their relations with their subjects were similar to
those of most of the Italian tyrants with their people, consequently
they found but lukewarm support; there was even one faction, composed
of their most determined adversaries, who were anxious to open the
gates to Valentino’s lieutenants. Giulio Cesare Varano and his two
sons were taken to Urbino and cast into prison. The Colonna, who had
assisted in the defence of Camerino, succeeded in making their escape.
July 20th Caesar informed his sister Lucretia of the capture of
Camerino in the following letter:--

  “Illustrious and most excellent Lady, and our dear sister.
  Knowing that in your present illness no medicine could be more
  efficacious and more helpful than the announcement of good news,
  we inform you that we have just received a reliable report to
  the effect that Camerino has been taken. We beg you to honour
  this message with an immediate amelioration in your health and
  to inform us of it; for, distressed as we are, knowing you are
  so ill, nothing, not even this happy event, can give us any
  pleasure. We beg you to communicate this present news to the
  Illustrious Sr. Don Alfonso, your husband and our dearly beloved
  brother-in-law, to whom I cannot write to-day. Urbino XX July
  MDII.

            “CAESAR
              “AGAPITO.”

Valentino always maintained friendly relations with Ercole and Alfonso
d’Este, who never neglected to congratulate him on his successes.

Caesar evidently was anxious regarding his sister’s health, for he sent
a famous physician of Cesena, Niccolò Marsini, to consult with his
own physician, Gaspare Torrella, who had been previously dispatched
to Ferrara. A few days later Caesar, disguised and with only a small
suite, went to see his sister; he remained only two hours with her,
and then, accompanied by his brother-in-law Alfonso, set out for Milan
to meet the King of France.

Louis had been informed of their coming, but had kept the matter secret
from the numerous deposed princes who had hastened to him. To the
astonishment of the entire Court, which included the Duke of Urbino,
the Lord of Pesaro, Varano of Camerino, and the Marquis of Mantua, who
had offered to place himself at the head of a league for the purpose of
dispossessing Caesar of his domains, the King received the new-comers
most cordially. The courtiers had supposed that Louis would undertake
to discipline Valentino for threatening Florence, but instead he
received Caesar and his brother-in-law with the highest honours. The
dethroned princes therefore immediately divined that the King and the
Vatican were in perfect accord. Louis needed the Pope’s support in his
plans with respect to Naples, and Caesar was astute enough to know that
his Majesty would not seriously interfere with his own projects.

About this time Louis XII. and Valentino entered into a formal
agreement regarding Bologna, by which his Majesty promised to furnish
the Duke with three hundred lances “to help him to conquer Bologna in
the name of the Church and subdue the Orsini, the Baglioni, and the
Vitelli,” while Caesar promised to hold himself in readiness for three
years to assist the King in any enterprises in which he might see fit
to engage.

On returning from Milan Caesar immediately--September 10th--went
to Imola to meet Cardinal Borgia, Bishop of Elne, and Don Remiro de
Lorca, Governor of Romagna. Leonardo da Vinci had just completed his
inspection of the Romagnol stronghold and castles, and had drawn up
plans for strengthening them; he had also made designs for certain
engines of war. Caesar remained in Imola until the 16th conferring with
his lieutenants. In the meantime Alexander had sent an envoy to Bologna
to demand that Giovanni Bentivoglio submit to his authority. At this
juncture Claude de Seyssel, ambassador of Louis XII.--who had returned
to France--appeared in Bologna to make known the wishes of his master,
who had always regarded himself as the protector of the city. The
Bentivoglio were loyally supported by the citizens, who refused to
allow Giovanni’s sons, who had been summoned to the Vatican, to go to
Rome; and the political parties, which had divided Bologna, laid aside
their differences in the face of the threatening danger.

The Bolognese had found allies in Caesar’s own camp. The Orsini, the
Baglioni, and Vitellozzo Vitelli had become estranged from him by his
treatment of Bentivoglio and his efforts to compel Vitelli to surrender
Milan to Florence. The condottieri, in Caesar’s name, had entered into
an alliance of friendship with Bentivoglio during the last campaign; it
therefore is not surprising that they refused to break this treaty and
finally took sides with the House of Bologna against him.

Caesar was now isolated, and his only support was the small army of
Romagna, which was not sufficient to permit him to attack Bologna;
nevertheless, counting on the French lances which the King had promised
him at Milan, he prepared to make an assault upon the city.




CHAPTER IX

  The conspiracy of Caesar’s captains--Machiavelli and Valentino--
      Vacillation of the conspirators--They offer to return to Caesar--
      They again take heart--A reconciliation is effected--Caesar
      separates the conspirators--He enters into an alliance with
      Bentivoglio--The rebels return to Caesar--Paolo Orsini takes
      possession of Urbino in Caesar’s name--Execution of Don Remiro
      de Lorca--Caesar goes to Sinigaglia and meets his commanders--
      The trap at Sinigaglia--Fate of the rebels--Caesar informs the
      Italian princes of his act--The Orsini and their adherents in
      Rome are seized--Cardinal Orsini’s palace is plundered--Fermo
      and Perugia surrender to Valentino--He puts Paolo and Francesco
      Orsini to death--Cardinal Orsini dies in prison--Caesar demands
      that the Sienese expel Pandolfo Petrucci--He ravages the country
      about Siena--Activity of the Orsini in the neighbourhood of Rome--
      Caesar returns to Rome--He lays siege to Ceri--Contemporary
      opinions of the Pope and Caesar--Gonsalvo de Cordova in Naples--
      The Pope and Caesar are stricken by the plague--Death of Alexander
      VI.--Rumours of poison--Caesar recovers--He takes possession of
      the dead Pope’s property.


Caesar’s preparations for attacking Milan were the signal for the final
rupture with his captains, who met at Todi, where they had concentrated
their troops. Here they entered into a formal agreement to refuse
to obey any of Caesar’s orders directed against their ally Giovanni
Bentivoglio. The first meeting was held about the end of September, and
a second one took place a little later at Magione, near Perugia. Those
present were Ermes and Annibale Bentivoglio, Cardinal Orsini, the Duke
of Gravina, two other members of the Orsini family, Guido Petrucci
(who also represented Pandolfo Petrucci), and Gentile and Giampaolo
Baglioni. Vitellozzo Vitelli, who was ill, had himself carried to
the meeting on a litter. At this meeting of the conspirators it was
resolved not only to refuse to attack Bentivoglio but also to take
active steps against Caesar, their former commander.

October 2nd news of the conspiracy reached the Vatican. In the north
Bentivoglio was advancing on Imola; in the south the Orsini and Vitelli
were preparing to attack Urbino. Caesar was in Imola awaiting the
arrival of the French lances, and there he learned of the revolt of
his lieutenants. The loss of the Orsini was especially serious, and he
endeavoured to win them over from the conspirators. In the meantime
he sent out agents to enlist new troops. As soon as the condition of
affairs became known soldiers of fortune hastened to him from all
directions; among the first to appear were Gasparo Sanseverino, Luigi
della Mirandola, Galeazzo Palavicini, Raffaelle de’ Pazzi, Ranieri
della Sassetta, and Francesco de Luna. The Romagnols hurried to his
assistance, and he placed them under the command of his ablest leaders,
Dionigi di Naldo, Marc Antonio di Fano, Gabrielle da Faenza, Guido di
Vaini, and Giovanni Sassatelli. To his Spanish captains he entrusted
the command of the cities and strongholds, upon which the security of
his new duchy depended.

In the meantime the Pope had used his influence with Giulio Orsini, who
was now ready to desert Vitelli, while Pandolfo Petrucci, dismayed by
the preparations Caesar was making to crush his enemies, dispatched a
messenger to Imola to assure his former commander of his loyalty.

To secure the support of Florence Caesar now requested the Republic to
send an ambassador to him to confer on matters of mutual interest, and
again the envoy selected was Machiavelli.

No other man was so well fitted as he to read the devious mind of
Valentino; he had given evidence of the greatest perspicacity and
shrewdness, and if any one was a match for the son of Alexander VI.
the Florentine secretary was. Not only his friends the Adriani, the
Soderini, the Valori, but even his opponents approved of the selection.
Machiavelli accepted his commission eagerly; he was naturally restless
and was intensely interested in the political life of the day. He had
met Caesar a few months before, and he regarded him as the Italian
ideal, a personification of _virtu_, the aggregation of the qualities
most dear to the Italian heart; it is therefore not surprising that he
eagerly embraced the opportunity to study Valentino and match wits with
him.

Machiavelli having promised his young wife, Marietta di Ludovico
Corsini, whom he had married but a few months before, that he would
return in eight days, set out for Imola. On the road he met Agapito
Gerardino, Caesar’s secretary, on his way to Florence to ask aid of the
Signory. The Pope also, foreseeing the danger, had dispatched an envoy
to the Republic. Caesar’s secretary decided to turn back and accompany
Machiavelli to Imola, where they arrived October 7th.

Machiavelli explained to Valentino that he had come to assure him of
the friendship of the Republic and to inform him that it had refused to
join his enemies. Valentino received the envoy cordially, and thanked
him for the professions of friendship on the part of his Government.
They discussed the political situation at great length, and Caesar
appeared very anxious to conclude some sort of an agreement with
Florence for their mutual support, but Machiavelli was unable to get
any very definite suggestion from the Duke. The Borgia, who was then
only twenty-six, showed himself a consummate diplomatist and more than
a match for the Florentine secretary.

October 9th Machiavelli had another interview with Caesar, who, to
strengthen the demands he had made for an alliance with Florence,
produced a letter from the King of France in which aid was promised
for the undertaking against Bologna. Valentino seemed much elated.
“Now, you see, secretary, this letter is an answer to my request for
permission to attack Bologna.”

Machiavelli did not allow himself to be deceived by Caesar’s astuteness
and eloquence, but he carefully weighed the causes for the Duke’s
confidence in the success of his projects; he estimated his actual
military strength and the number of troops he could collect, and he
found that Caesar was far from weak, but also that his enemies were
much more powerful than he had represented them to be.

The Florentine was greatly impressed by Valentino’s astuteness, but he
was, nevertheless, able to discern his real purpose. Caesar had boldly
stated that if he effected a reconciliation with the Orsini it would be
impossible for him to enter into any treaty of friendship with their
enemy Florence, and Machiavelli knew that this was true, consequently
he wrote the Signory that it would be well to make some sort of compact
with the Duke at once.

Machiavelli’s first impressions of Caesar were vague and uncertain. The
Duke was not more perspicacious than the secretary, but he had greater
self-control, had a sharper insight into motives, and he possessed
powers of dissimulation which Machiavelli entirely lacked. Above all
else Caesar was perfect master of himself. He therefore succeeded in
hiding much of his real purpose from the secretary.

The Signory of Florence, however, attached the greatest importance to
Machiavelli’s report of his interviews with Caesar, and Valori wrote
him, October 11th, saying his “relation was clear cut, exact, and
sincere--and to be relied upon.”

Among the conspirators it had been decided that Bentivoglio should
attack Romagna, while the Orsini and Vitelli should try to take Urbino.
Some of the leaders had hesitated and the plan was still in abeyance
when an unexpected event gave them new courage.

The Castle of San Leo, the bulwark of Urbino, was seized by a supporter
of the Montefeltre early in October, and Caesar had been informed of
the fact before Machiavelli reached Imola. Valentino was not disturbed
by the news, and the Florentine envoy says that he expressed his pity
for those who had chosen such an unfavourable moment to attack him; he
made light of the loss of a State he had no intention of retaining;
he could recover it any time he saw fit. He even showed Machiavelli
copies of the orders he had sent his lieutenants to retire within their
lines of defence.

These commanders, Ugo Moncada, Michelotto de Corella, Bartolomeo
Capranica, and Giovanni de Cordova, retreated, but destroyed the
villages that lay in their way, delivering them over to fire and
pillage. Pergola and Fossombrone were laid waste and all their
inhabitants, men, women, and children, put to the sword. The news
of these crimes reached Imola October 12th, and Caesar exultingly
exclaimed to Machiavelli, “The stars this year seem to be unfavourable
to rebels!”

One after another the towns in Urbino revolted, but still the
conspirators hesitated. Paolo Orsini announced that he would return to
Caesar if he would relinquish his intention of attacking Bologna and
direct his energies against Florence; Vitelli, at first the most active
of the conspirators, now offered to follow Valentino if he would assure
him of his safety. That all Italy was afraid of Caesar and the Pope
there is no doubt.

The Duke pretended to believe in the sincerity of his captains and
received them again into his favour; he even dispatched them to the
support of the garrisons in Urbino that were still loyal to him.
Vitelli had advanced as far as Castel-Durante, and the Baglioni were
at Cagli. The Orsini were in the neighbourhood of the stronghold of
San Leo, holding aloof from both Caesar and Montefeltre, who had taken
refuge in Venice, where he had recruited a considerable number of
troops. October 12th a courier arrived in Urbino with the news that
Montefeltre was advancing to the aid of the garrison. This meant that
Venice was helping the conspirators, who consequently again took heart
and threw off the mask. The 15th the Orsini, who had apparently been
willing to return to Caesar, fell upon the troops of Ugo Moncada and
made him prisoner. Michelotto was forced to flee to Fossombrone, and a
few days later the Duke of Urbino again entered his capital.

Had the conspirators with their united forces attacked Caesar at this
moment, it is highly probable that he would have lost the greater
part of his domain; but each appeared to be concerned only with his
own interests and much time was lost by remaining inactive in Urbino.
Finally the rebels began to be suspicious of each other. Giampaolo
Baglioni, knowing that Fano was Caesar’s most loyal town, asked
permission to enter as his lieutenant. Pandolfo Petrucci of Perugia had
always hesitated because he feared the Borgia would finally outwit the
conspirators; and a few days after the return of the Duke of Urbino
he sent a messenger to suggest in the name of all that a new treaty
or agreement be made by which they would again enter his service and
recover the territory which had been lost.

Louis XII., unable to accomplish his purpose with respect to Naples
without the help of Alexander VI., declared those who opposed the
Holy Father’s plans regarding the Romagna were also his enemies. The
King had promptly discovered the part Venice had played in effecting
the return of Montefeltre to Urbino, consequently he threatened the
Republic with his wrath in case it lent any further aid whatsoever to
the enemies of Valentino; this again strengthened Caesar.

Furnished with a safe conduct from Valentino, Paolo Orsini came to
Imola October 20th, and the terms of a reconciliation having been
arranged, he was allowed to depart unharmed a few days later. All were
to be forgiven, and Caesar agreed to protect the estate of each of his
lieutenants, and in return they were to defend him and his territory
and those of the Pope, and, theoretically at least, also those of all
the princes of the House of Borgia. There was to be a special agreement
regarding Bologna, and Cardinal Orsini, Pandolfo Petrucci, and
Valentino himself were chosen to arrange the terms.

Machiavelli heard Caesar’s confidant, Agapito of Amelia, laugh at the
conspirators and speak of them as rebels after the compact had been
signed--“a child would laugh at such a treaty.” In Rome, too, the
agreement was not regarded very seriously.

Only a short time elapsed between Paolo Orsini’s departure from Imola
and his arrival in Urbino, where he informed Vitelli of the terms
of the agreement he had signed in the name of the conspirators with
Valentino. In the meantime Vitelli had been very active; he had aided
the Duke of Urbino in every way possible; he had attacked Caesar’s
lieutenants, and had even put some of his civil officers to death.
Oliverotto da Fermo, another of the conspirators, had been equally
active and Baglioni had not been idle. Romagna, however, had remained
faithful to Caesar.

Vitelli rejected Caesar’s offer and persuaded Baglioni also to join
him in supporting the Duke of Urbino. The situation, however, was
serious. Caesar was frequently heard to remark that he was “eating the
artichoke leaf by leaf.” Having detached Petrucci and Orsini from the
band of conspirators, he endeavoured to win over Bentivoglio. Finally
an agreement was reached with the Lord of Bologna and the treaty was
signed in Rome by his representative, Francesco Parato and the Pope’s
chamberlain, Michele Romolino. Giovanni Bentivoglio had been left to
his fate by the conspirators, and when he entered into the treaty with
the Vatican he was acting solely in his own interests without regard
to any of the others. The treaty, whose purpose was to assure the
integrity of the domain of the two parties, was signed in the Vatican
November 23rd. The King of France, the Duke of Ferrara, and the Signory
of Florence stood sponsors for the alliance. Bologna agreed to furnish
Valentino a hundred men-at-arms and two hundred light cavalry “for
one or two enterprises the Duke was planning.” In addition Caesar was
engaged by Bologna as a condottiere at an annual salary of 12,000
ducats. The treaty was finally signed November 23rd and was sent to
Caesar for ratification.

Giustinian, the Venetian ambassador, in his dispatch of that date
reports that he had heard that Cardinal Orsini and the Bolognese envoy
had engaged in a violent altercation in the presence of the Pope, the
former charging Bentivoglio’s representative with endeavouring to
effect an agreement with Caesar and the Vatican without regard to the
Orsini.

Vitellozzo Vitelli, finding himself deserted, hastened to accept the
terms offered him in Caesar’s name by Paolo Orsini, who, bringing the
agreement signed by all the conspirators, arrived in Imola November
27th, before Valentino had formally ratified the treaty between Bologna
and the Pope. Two days later Orsini set out for Fano to assume command
of the troops and advance on Urbino. He was accompanied by Antonio del
Monte, Valentino’s special commissioner for the city of Urbino, bearing
letters of amnesty for the rebels, and delegated to take possession of
the duchy in the name of his master.

His recent comrades having sworn to recover Urbino, Guidobaldo di
Montefeltre gave himself up for lost. In vain some of his loyal
subjects urged him to resist; at Valbona the women offered him their
jewels to procure means to secure troops and supplies, but he decided
to flee. Before doing so he had the strongholds of Pergola and Cagli
razed. Early in December Paolo Orsini entered the domain of the
Montefeltre and, halting a few miles from Urbino, sent a messenger
to ask for an interview with Guidobaldo, who was suffering from an
attack of the gout and had to be borne on a litter to the place of
meeting. December 7th he took leave of such of his subjects as had
remained faithful, and two days later Paolo Orsini entered Urbino
and assumed the office of Governor of the domain of the Montefeltre,
although the four strongest castles in the territory, San Leo,
Maggiolo, Montecuccolo, and San Marino were still held by Vitelli, who,
notwithstanding the fact that he had signed the agreement with Caesar,
still seemed to be hesitating as to his course.

December 10th Valentino departed for Forli and from there he went to
Cesena, where he made preparations to go to Rome by way of Ancona.

It had been decided to make war on Sinigaglia, Cardinal Giuliano della
Rovere having failed to convince the Pope and the King that he had not
aided Guidobaldo di Montefeltre in the last rebellion. The Cardinal
exerted himself to save his nephew’s estates but failed.

The day before Caesar left Cesena for Pesaro a terrible sight met the
eyes of the peasants as they entered the town in the early morning
bringing supplies. Thrown in the public square was a bleeding and
headless corpse clothed in a rich costume; near by, impaled on a
pike, was the head, which the inhabitants of the capital of Romagna
immediately recognised as that of their Governor, Don Remiro de
Lorca. One of Caesar’s political maxims was: leniency for small
offenders, severity for great ones. Numerous charges of malfeasance in
office--among others that of having sold for his own profit grain which
Valentino had imported--had been made against the Governor and he had
been tried “to satisfy justice and our honour, and that of those he had
injured--and as a salutary example for all public officials present and
to come,” condemned, and executed.

Machiavelli, who saw the body exposed in the public square, observes:
“It is not clearly known what was the cause of his death--unless it
was simply the pleasure of the prince, who shows that he knows how to
make and unmake men according to their deserts.” There were rumours,
however, that Don Remiro had been plotting with Caesar’s enemies.

The 29th of the month, while in Fano, which had remained faithful to
him, Valentino received a delegation from the citizens of Ancona, who
had come to assure him of their loyalty. With them was a messenger from
Vitelli, bringing news of the capture of Sinigaglia, after a feeble
resistance, about the end of December, 1502.

Caesar’s commanders, to prove their good faith, had not only offered
their services for his movement against Sinigaglia but several of them
had gone there in person. Paolo Orsini and his son Fabio, Francesco
Orsini, Duke of Gravina, and Oliverotto da Fermo were there, and
Vitellozzo Vitelli and one of his nephews appeared on the 30th. The
only ones absent were Giampaoli Baglioni, who, distrustful of Caesar,
had sent him word from Perugia that he was ill; and Giulio Orsini, who
was in Rome under the protection of the all-powerful head of the house,
Cardinal Orsini.

How astute men, living in an age of unparalleled duplicity, when every
man’s hand was against his neighbour, when treachery and assassination
were regarded as fine arts, and poison and poignard perfectly proper
tools in political machinations, could have rushed into such a trap is
difficult to understand. Caesar’s character was known to all of them;
he was more than a match for any one of them in cunning, intellect,
astuteness, determination, and what is of still more importance, he had
even less moral sense; he had frequently shown that mercy, compassion,
pity, were no part of his nature, and these men, having betrayed him,
conspired to destroy him, ruin him, rob him of the estates he regarded
as his own, deliberately placed themselves in his power! It would not
have been surprising if one or two had been deceived, but there were
seven or eight; in fact, there was only one, Baglioni, who had not
fallen into the trap.

The only explanation is that the conspirators were utterly
panic-stricken; they found their coalition was gradually being weakened
by Valentino--in fact, that he was “eating the artichoke leaf by leaf”
as he said--and that they were doomed; they perhaps thought that by
surrendering and again entering his employ there would be at least
a chance of being forgiven; with many men this would have been the
case, but they had failed to grasp what was perhaps Caesar’s chief
characteristic, his utter implacability, which, in conjunction with his
extraordinary powers of dissimulation, made him the most dangerous of
the Italian despots. All the members of his own family, not excepting
his father, the Pope, feared him. He possessed all the characteristics
of all the other Italian condottieri but in a more highly developed
form. Caesar immediately saw that the hour for vengeance had
arrived--all the rebels were together.

The conspirators informed the Duke that the territory had surrendered
to them, but that the stronghold still held out because, as the warder
said, he would relinquish it only to the Duke in person.

The 30th of December Caesar sent them word from Fano that he would be
in Sinigaglia the next day with the artillery to reduce the castle in
case it still refused to yield.

December 31st the army left Fano with Don Michele and two hundred
lances in the van, followed by Caesar with the men-at-arms. When they
reached the bridge crossing the Misa just before Sinigaglia, Don
Michele halted the light horse to allow the infantry to pass and enter
the town.

Oliverotto da Fermo had remained in the city, but Paolo and Francesco
Orsini and Vitellozzo Vitelli, who had taken possession of some of
the neighbouring castles, came to meet Caesar, who received them
graciously, shook hands with them in the “French fashion” and kissed
them. According to Machiavelli, seeing that Oliverotto was not with
them, Caesar made a sign to Michele to go and find him, which he did
and told him to come with him to Caesar.

Valentino entered Sinigaglia on horseback, riding between Vitellozzo
Vitelli and Francesco Orsini, and on arriving at the palace the four
prepared to take leave of him, but he asked them to go in with him to
confer--or perhaps to have luncheon. This they did, but no sooner had
they passed the portals than they were seized by Valentino’s guard.
The accounts differ in some unimportant details but the above is the
generally accepted one.

That evening when Machiavelli reached Sinigaglia he found the streets
filled with soldiers and the place in a tumult. As he was about to
enter the palace he saw the Duke come forth, armed from head to foot,
mounted on his charger. Caesar called the Ambassador to him and told
him of the arrest of the Orsini and Vitelli. The Florentine secretary
was dazzled by this masterpiece of treachery which he described as _il
bellissimo inganno_--“the most beautiful piece of deception.”

When news of the capture reached the troops of Vitelli and Orsini they
at once realised their danger, and rallying about Fabio Orsini and
Vitelli’s nephew, withdrew from the town. Encountering no further
opposition, Caesar’s men overran the place, robbing, plundering,
violating, until he himself issued from the palace with a guard and
hanged a number of the rioters in the public square.

Caesar decided to take Orsini to Rome, while Oliverotto and Vitelli
were condemned to death after a semblance of a trial, the Duke
apparently desiring to give his action an appearance of right. The
order was given for them to be executed the same night. It is related
that the youthful and proud Oliverotto tried to stab himself to avoid
the shame of death at the hands of the executioner. As to Vitelli--“in
his last hour he showed himself unworthy of his past life, for he
begged to be allowed to plead with the Pope for forgiveness--and
Oliverotto turned his back on him.” At the tenth hour of the night they
were strangled.

Immediately after the execution Caesar wrote all his friends among
the Italian princes telling them what he had done; his officers had
conspired to destroy him, and although he had forgiven them they had
met at Sinigaglia expressly for the purpose of again entering into a
compact to secure his overthrow; having learned of this, he himself had
gone to that place with his troops and seized the traitors, who had
been duly tried and condemned. The letter to Venice concludes with the
remark, “I am certain your Serenità will be pleased.” To the Romagnols
he wrote: “All the world ought to be pleased, and especially Italy,
seeing that by their death the country is relieved of a dangerous
pest,” and he urges them to “thank God for putting an end to the
calamities the country suffered owing to these misguided ones,” who,
it may be observed, had until recently been among his most capable
commanders.

Many of the princes congratulated Caesar, and Isabella d’Este sent him
a present of some masks, and in her letter referred to the “favourable
progress you are making.”

During the night of January 2, 1503, news was brought the Pope of the
capture of Sinigaglia, and the next morning he sent a messenger to
Cardinal Orsini to inform him that he desired his presence.

According to the Master of Ceremonies, when the cardinal and his
suite reached the apostolic palace their horses and mules were led
away to the Pope’s stables, and when Orsini entered the Chamber of
the Papagalli he found himself surrounded by armed men and--says
Burchard--was frightened.

The Prothonotary Orsini, Bernardino d’Alviano, brother of the
condottiere Bartolomeo, Santa Croce, a supporter of the Orsini, and
Rinaldo Orsini, Archbishop of Florence, were arrested at the same time.
Santa Croce, however, having promised that he would appear when wanted
and given bonds, was set at liberty, but Cardinal Orsini was thrown
into prison in the Castle of St. Angelo, and the Governor of Rome took
possession of his palace and personal property.

January 3rd the Holy Father informed the Signory of Florence of what
had taken place at Sinigaglia and in Rome, and the following day he
told Giustinian that Caesar’s commanders and Remiro de Lorca, Governor
of Romagna, had conspired to destroy him, and that this was the reason
Remiro had been executed at Cesena.

A few days later nearly the entire Sacred College went to the Pope to
ask him to release their colleague Cardinal Orsini, but the Holy Father
insisted that he had been the very heart and soul of the conspiracy and
refused to accede to their wishes; he also justified Caesar’s action
and showed that he regarded the terrible vengeance he had wrecked on
his condottieri as a brilliant stroke of genius.

Giustinian gives particulars of the plundering of Cardinal Orsini’s
palace. “Everything, even to the straw, was carried away and
taken to the Vatican. A vast quantity of silver vessels was found
there--estimated to be worth more than 10,000 ducats--the most
beautiful tapestries and other household furniture--of money it is
not known how much, but it is said to have been less than had been at
first supposed. The cardinal’s mother was dragged from the house with
only what she had on her back, and a few of her maids. The cardinal was
taken to S. Angelo and every one has given him up for dead.”

In his dispatch of January 5, 1503, the ambassador says that Pope
Alexander held a convocation the evening before and explained to the
cardinals why he had imprisoned Cardinal Orsini, and he also informed
them that everything he had heard regarding the prelate’s treachery
toward himself and Caesar had been confirmed since his imprisonment;
that all this and more, too, was true. The cardinals begged for mercy
for their colleague, to which his Holiness replied that he would be
governed by a sense of justice in whatever he did with respect to
Orsini; that he would see that he was not wronged, and was treated
with perfect justice; then he assured them of his love and of his
appreciation of their recommendation--and his words confirmed all in
their belief that he intended to have Orsini put to death.

The same day the Pope’s son Giuffre and Jacopo Santa Croce, probably as
the cardinal’s representative for form’s sake, with an adequate force
rode to Mount Rotundo, and in the name of his Holiness took possession
of it and of all the other property of the Orsini, including the abbey
of Farfa.

The day after the murder of Vitelli and Oliverotto Caesar set out for
Perugia and Siena, having with him his prisoners Paolo and Francesco
Orsini. Before he left Sinigaglia Andrea Doria had surrendered the
citadel to him on receiving Caesar’s permission to retire whithersoever
he wished.

On the way Valentino took possession of Vitelli’s capital, Città di
Castello, which had been abandoned by the inhabitants. Then he set
out for Perugia, where the Duke of Urbino and the Prince of Camerino,
Vitelli’s nephew, had found refuge under the protection of Giampaolo
Baglioni, who had announced his intention of resisting. Caesar had,
however, no sooner reached Gualdo--January 5th--than the Duke of
Urbino fled to Pitigliano, and Baglioni, abandoning his wife and
children, who fell into the hands of Caesar’s men, made his escape, and
joined Pandolfo Petrucci in Siena.

Their leaders having deserted them, the people of Fermo and Perugia
sent messengers to Valentino offering him their allegiance, which he
accepted, and, having appointed Vincenzo Calmeto and Agapito Gerardino
Governors of these places, he set out for Siena. When he reached
Assisi--January 7th--he was met by envoys from Siena, come to ask him
what terms he would grant. His first demand was that they surrender
Pandolfo Petrucci, and without waiting for an answer he pressed forward
in the direction of Castel della Pieve. While there he made public
the treaty into which he had entered with Giovanni Bentivoglio, who,
to prove his sincerity, immediately announced that he was ready to
dispatch the troops he had agreed to furnish. At the same time the
marriage contract of the sister of the Bishop of Elne, a relative of
the Pope and Caesar, with Costanzo Bentivoglio was signed--this had
also been stipulated in the treaty.

Caesar reached Castel della Pieve January 18th, and there he had
Paolo and Francesco Orsini strangled. He had stated that he intended
to imprison them in Civita Castellana, but he probably found their
presence hampering to his movements and concluded that there was no
reason to defer their death, upon which he was resolved. The papal
Master of Ceremonies calmly records the fact: “January 18th Francesco
Orsini, Duke of Gravina, Paolo Orsini, and the Chevalier Orsini[26]
were killed and strangled by Michelotto and Marco Romano by order of
the Duke Valentino.”

When the Pope was asked about the affair he replied coldly, saying that
he knew nothing about it, as he had received no letters from the Duke;
and to give an appearance of truth to what he said he added that the
Duke had entered upon the Sienese expedition without his consent.

[Illustration: VITELLOZZO VITELLI

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 220.]

Cardinal Orsini had been in prison since January 2nd. For a time his
mother, who was then eighty years old, was allowed to bring him his
meals, but this was finally forbidden. In vain she and her son offered
large sums for his liberty; she even sent the Pope a very valuable
pearl which he had admired; he accepted it and again allowed her to
furnish the cardinal his meals; “but it was believed he had already
drunk the cup the Pope had prepared for him.” The Holy Father continued
to tell Orsini to be of good cheer and to look to his health, and
he informed the cardinals in consistory that he had directed his
physicians to take the best of care of the prisoner. His age, the
humiliation he had suffered, and the confinement were, however, more
than he could withstand. About the middle of February it was rumoured
that the cardinal was ill of the fever, and the 22nd of the month
he passed away. Immediately the report spread that he had died of
poison, and to disprove the rumour the Pope ordered the corpse to be
carried to the church on an open litter and with the face uncovered,
and he further commanded all the Orsini in Rome to attend the funeral.
Giustinian clearly believed that the cardinal had been poisoned.
In this connection it is worth remarking that while the Venetian
ambassador is hostile to the Borgia he would not intentionally distort
what he believed to be facts in his dispatches to his own Government;
he was in Rome to watch Alexander and to keep the Senate fully informed
of every event. Had he misled his Government his services would have
been worthless and he would have been promptly recalled.

Burchard’s comment is as follows: “To-day, February 22nd, Cardinal
Orsini died in Castle S. Angelo--and may his soul rest in peace. Amen!
His Holiness directed my colleague D. Bernardino Guttieri to take
charge of the funeral of the deceased--therefore I did not wish to
know anything more than was necessary, I was not present--and I took
no part in it.”

Soderini, the Florentine orator, in a letter of February 23rd, says:
“Cardinal Orsini was buried yesterday at the twenty-fourth hour in S.
Salvatore, the church of the Orsini; by the Pope’s order the corpse was
accompanied by his family and by those of the cardinals of the palace.
It lay uncovered on a cloth of gold, clad in a chasuble of red damascas
silk embroidered with gold flowers. On the head was a white miter.”

In the meantime, in defiance of the Pope and Caesar, the inhabitants
of Siena remained faithful to Pandolfo Petrucci, and January 27, 1503,
Valentino sent word from his camp in Pienza that he would give them
twenty-four hours to expel their chieftain. The same day the Pope
dispatched a brief to the officials of the _Balia_ of Siena containing
a similar demand. Both documents are given by Alvisi. Caesar lays aside
all diplomacy and writes in a tone of mastery and confidence:--

“To-day, the 27th of the month, at the twenty-third hour we received
a letter from Cipriano, our chancellor, written yesterday in Siena,
from which we learn that you have failed to execute the stipulations
contained in the treaty into which we entered. If by the day named you
have not expelled Pandolfo from your city and domain we shall proceed
against you; we will make you understand that we are not to be deceived
by you. We have justly conceived such contempt for your conduct that we
are unable to find words to express it in a letter; and we swear by God
that when you have received this letter, if you have not already driven
forth, without any more delay, the said Pandolfo we will regard each
one of you as the same as Pandolfo, and forthwith proceed to the total
destruction of all your subjects, goods, and domain, and of your city
and of yourselves.”

Then he scolds them for their ingratitude, and reminds them that with
his own troops and without their aid and with no expense whatsoever to
the Republic he stands ready to relieve their country of a scheming
tyrant. He signs the letter _Caesar Borgia de Francia Dux Romandiolae
Valentiaeque Princeps_.

The Sienese refused to comply, and Caesar proceeded to execute his
threat by sending out troops to ravage the country. The towns of
Pienza, Chiusi, Castel della Pieve, and San Quirico were destroyed and
the inhabitants put to the sword; the people of Viterbo, Acquapendente,
and Montefiascono suffered the same fate; old men and women were
tortured and killed; the fruit-trees were cut down and everything that
might offer shelter for the fugitives was destroyed. Burchard records
that at San Quirico Caesar’s soldiers suspended two old men and nine
old women by the arms and lighted fires under their feet to torture
them into revealing where they had hidden their valuables; they,
however, would not disclose the place, and died in torment.

The people of Siena, terrified by the cruelties of Caesar’s troops,
sent a delegation to the _Balia_ to say that it was wrong for all to
be destroyed for the sake of one. Petrucci thereupon decided to leave,
and he authorised the Council to treat in his name, but he reserved
the right to remove with all his troops. Caesar and the Pope, knowing
the city was well supplied with men and munitions of war and admirably
situated for withstanding a siege, decided it was wise not to impose
too harsh conditions. The Sienese were brave and determined, and they
had the support of Giampaolo Baglioni, an able captain. Furthermore,
Siena, which enjoyed the favour of the King of France, had never been
part of the papal domain. The undertaking against Siena was therefore
abandoned for the time being.

Caesar and the Pope may have thought that the Orsini in and about Rome
were becoming too dangerous; they and their followers were swearing
vengeance for the murder of their kinsmen Paolo and Francesco, and the
imprisonment of the cardinal, Giambattista Orsini.

Giulio Orsini had collected a considerable force at Pitigliano, and
Fabio and Organtini held Cervetri, while Giovanni and a number of the
family’s supporters had fortified themselves at Ceri. In addition
Silvio Savelli had joined the Orsini forces in the Campagna, and all
were determined to fight to the death.

Caesar hastened to Rome and the Pope urged him to proceed against the
Orsini immediately; but the son, no less resolute than the father, was
even more astute and thought it best to delay, for which he readily
found a pretext. Niccolò Orsini, Count of Pitigliano, was a condottiere
in the pay of Venice, and this was one of the reasons why Valentino
decided to temporise. When Alexander wanted him to seize Bracciano,
Caesar objected on the ground that its lord, Giangiordano Orsini, was
in the service of the King of France in Naples and, like himself, was
a member of the Order of St. Michael, therefore he could not make
war upon him, and of this Louis XII. took occasion to remind him by
a special messenger. Valentino was too shrewd to incur the King’s
displeasure at this juncture, and he concluded it would be wiser to
secure and establish order in the States he had already won than it
would be to endeavour to add to his domain.

The King of France undoubtedly had misgivings regarding Caesar’s
growing power. Pisa, the relentless enemy of Florence, the King’s
protégé, had requested Valentino’s aid, and if Perugia and Siena fell
into his hands a formidable power would be established in central Italy
under an energetic, brave, and daring soldier--one who would hesitate
at nothing and who already enjoyed great prestige.

Louis XII. therefore immediately set about forming a coalition,
comprising Siena, Lucca, Florence, and Bologna, to curb Caesar’s
ambition.

Alexander was annoyed by what he considered the King’s unwarranted
interference, and accused Caesar of weakness with respect to the
Orsini. The Duke, however, persisted in his determination to leave
Bracciano and Pitigliano alone and to lay siege to Ceri.

The ancient town of Ceri was famous for its stronghold. The castle had
been regarded as impregnable; it had resisted numerous sieges from
Roman days down through the Middle Ages. It was defended by a large
number of troops with able leaders, consequently Caesar’s task was a
difficult one.

The Duke went to Rome about the middle of February, but never left the
palace except disguised. The Pope was so displeased by his refusal to
proceed against Bracciano that he threatened to excommunicate him and
deprive him of his estates. Although Caesar probably did not regard
these threats as very serious, he prepared to go to Cervetri, where
he had left his captains--Ludovico della Mirandola, Ugo Moncada, and
Michelotto de Corella. He left Rome April 6th for Cervetri, but on the
way learned that the town had capitulated to the Count of Mirandola.
The defenders threw themselves on Caesar’s mercy, and he conducted
Giulio Orsini to the Pope and interceded for him so effectively that he
was restored to liberty.

Giangiordano Orsini betook himself to Celle, in the Abruzzi, and while
he was there the Pope offered to give him the principality of Squillace
if he would relinquish all claims to his estates in the Romagna. These
terms were accepted and, with the aid of the French ambassador, were
embodied in a treaty which was drawn up April 8th.

Caesar had now become a power in Italy; soldiers of fortune flocked to
his standard; he was the most dreaded man in the entire peninsula; the
wealth of the Church was at his command and the influence of the Papacy
was behind him. All the castles in the Patrimonium Petri were held by
his lieutenants. Matarazzo says he was now the first captain in Italy,
not owing to great knowledge of the art of war but to his treachery and
corrupt use of money--he had reduced the science of warfare merely to
a consummate art of deception.

He, however, had great and loyal admirers because the Italian of the
sixteenth century had not learned that the success of men in an evil
environment is commensurate with their own capacity for iniquity; that
in human competition the ethical sense, the finer feelings, often
preclude great achievement. All that Caesar had won he had secured by
treachery and crime.

The politicians of the day attributed his success chiefly to the favour
of the Pope and of the King of France, while the astrologers held
the stars responsible, pronouncing him _filium fortunae_. Official
astrologers, however, like the sycophants of the present, were not
blind to their own interests. Cardinal Francesco Soderini says that
among the attributes of greatness in Caesar and the Pope was their
ability to recognise their opportunities and to avail themselves
of them to the utmost--but this they could not have done had they
possessed even a suggestion of the altruistic sense; theirs was simply
the success of utter, merciless egoism.

The dispatches of the day are filled with suspicions and rumours
regarding the aims of the Pope and Caesar; some said the former was
plotting with the Spaniards to secure the Kingdom of Sicily for his
son; others thought he had his eye on Tuscany. Machiavelli wrote:
“Caesar having always thought little of Venice and still less of
Florence, it would be well for the latter to build up such a powerful
State in Italy that her friendship would be desired by some other
potentate.” The secretary also says that Caesar doubtless aspired to
the dominion of Tuscany, which, owing to her situation, would serve
well with the other States he possessed to form a kingdom. Alvisi
thinks that these suspicions and rumours were due to the universal fear
of Caesar and he also suggests that the talk of a crown for Valentino
may have been due to the steps Alexander VI. had taken to erect the
Duchy of Romagna into the Kingdom of Adria, which had already been
attempted by Clement VII. in 1379, for a prince of the house of Anjou.
This action, however, would not have enlarged the domain he already
possessed, and it is even possible that the Pope actually did intend to
restore the entire Campagna to the Church after crushing the barons who
were withholding it.

While Caesar’s captains were occupied about Ceri the Pope, with his
own guard and a few of Valentino’s men took possession of Palombara,
Lenzano, Cervetri, and other towns belonging to the Savelli.

The Spaniards in the Regno were successfully resisting the French, and
Louis’s influence was rapidly waning. He was, however, still actively
supporting the league which he had formed against Valentino.

After Pandolfo Petrucci’s departure from Siena the people became
uneasy; the King therefore caused him to return.

Valentino’s grasp on the duchy was far from secure; many of the
strongholds of the Montefeltre were still holding out against him;
Lattanzio da Bergamo, shut up in San Leo, felt he could defend himself
until the Duke of Urbino returned to relieve him. At the same time,
the continued activity of the Orsini and their numerous adherents made
it necessary for Caesar to remain in, or near, Rome and postpone for a
time at least his projected conquests. In fine, conditions were such
that he would be fortunate if he succeeded in conserving what he had
already secured.

The extraordinary record of events in the Vatican, Burchard’s
_Diarium_, breaks off abruptly in February, 1503, not to be resumed
again until the following August, but Caesar’s presence in and about
Rome is attested by numerous documents and letters.

Louis XII. having established a league comprising Florence, Siena,
Lucca, and Bologna, Pandolfo Petrucci, escorted by a French troop,
returned to Siena, March 29, 1503. Discord, however, arose among the
allies and gave Caesar renewed hope. The dominion of the Pope and
his son Caesar did not extend beyond the Patrimonium Petri and even
there it was limited by Ferrara and Bologna. Valentino, profiting by
conditions in the Regno, began to plot with Spain, who saw in him an
able ally against France.

In April, 1503, Gonsalvo de Cordova had begun a brilliant campaign
in Apulia; the French commanders Aubigny and Nemours were repeatedly
defeated and finally Gonsalvo entered Naples, May 14th, the remnant of
the French forces retreating to Gaeta.

Louis XII. sent all the troops he had at Genoa, under the command of
the Marquis of Saluzzo, to aid the beleaguered army in Gaeta and in the
meantime Gonsalvo had decided to attempt the capture of the place and
also of Castel Nuovo, the last strongholds of the French. The latter
place surrendered, but the former held out until the arrival of the
Marquis of Saluzzo, who forced the Spaniards to retreat to Naples. In
the meantime Prospero Colonna, who was in the service of Spain, had
been uniformly successful in Calabria and the Abruzzi.

Caesar and the Pope anxiously followed the course of events in the
south; the defeat of France would permit them to renew their efforts
against Siena and Perugia, and also against Giangiordano Orsini.
Valentino could accept the lordship of Siena, which the inhabitants had
offered him but which Louis, out of regard for Florence, had compelled
him to refuse, and once in possession of Pisa he could attack Florence.

Caesar had been forced to defer his own projects in Romagna because of
the sending of forces from Genoa by Louis to aid the besieged at Gaeta.
By his agreement he was required to assist the King of France, and he
had already dispatched some of his captains--among them Fracasso and
the Count of Mirandola--to the French camp, and by the middle of July
he had gathered a considerable force about Perugia.

The rumours that the Pope and Caesar were plotting with Spain
continued, and the tyrants whom they had been endeavouring to crush
asked permission of the King of France to proceed against the Duke.
Above all, Guidobaldo di Montefeltre hoped his relative, the Marquis
of Mantua, would help him to return to Urbino.

In the meantime--July 28th--in public consistory, the Pope announced
Caesar’s departure for the field. August 7th the Venetian ambassador
wrote that the Pope had told him Caesar would set forth the following
day; at the same time his Holiness stated, placing his hand on his
heart and swearing on the word of Christ’s Vicar, that it was not his
intention to engage in any undertaking against any one, but simply to
attend to his own affairs, and especially the state of Urbino, where,
he said, “those in San Leo are constantly trying something new.”
Then, turning to Cardinal Adriano, he said: “Bring these Florentine
shopkeepers here to-morrow--I wish to assure them that the Duke’s
expedition is not against them, or any one else, unless some one should
justly provoke him”--and he displayed considerable impatience.

The heat in Italy that year--1503--was intense, and the plague
broke out in Rome and elsewhere. The 1st of August Cardinal Borgia of
Monreale was stricken, and the 9th Alexander prepared a bull appointing
the Cardinal of Este perpetual administrator of the diocese; the bull,
however, was never issued, for the Pope himself and Valentino fell ill
of the plague August 12th.

The next day the Holy Father was bled and he seemed somewhat better,
for he called a number of the cardinals to his bedside and interested
himself in watching them play cards. The 14th the fever returned and
again the 16th. The doors of the palace were closed and the physician
and attendants were not allowed to leave his Holiness. Then they
bethought them of a saintly woman who lived immured in a cell in the
Vatican and asked her to pray for the Holy Father, but she said that
there was no hope. August 18th the Pope confessed to the Bishop of
Carniola and then, seated on the bed, received the Sacrament. The
same evening the Bishop administered the extreme unction and, in the
presence of the datary and a few officials of the palace, the monster
who for eleven years had occupied the throne of St. Peter expired.

On the death of Alexander all sorts of rumours were circulated,
including, of course, one to the effect that he had been poisoned.
It is, however, practically certain that he simply died of a tertian
fever. Burchard’s notes are extremely clear and concise.

In his dispatch of August 11th Giustinian says “the Pope did not enter
the chapel at the celebration of the anniversary of his elevation to
the Papacy with his usual cheerful demeanour”--which the Ambassador
attributes, probably incorrectly, to worry caused by the political
situation. The 13th he gives particulars of the illness of the Pope
and of Valentino, and refers to a dinner given by Cardinal Adriano
di Corneto about a week before, and states that all the guests had
fallen ill, which of course strengthened the suspicion of poison;
the host himself was the first to be stricken. Giustinian endeavours
to follow the course of the fever in the Pope and Caesar, but great
secrecy was maintained by those who were admitted to the palace. The
Venetian ambassador clearly discerned what the death of either or of
both of them meant for Italy and he tried to keep his Government fully
informed.

August 18th at the nineteenth hour the ambassador again wrote his
Government saying that a messenger had just come from the Bishop of
Carniola, who was constantly with his Holiness, asking him to send his
secretary to the Vatican, which he did; whereupon the Bishop informed
him that the Pope was in the throes of dissolution and could not live
through the night. He adds that while his courier was waiting for the
dispatch a messenger came to inform him that a member of the Pope’s
household had gone to the warder of the Castle of St. Angelo and
directed him to place all his men under arms, load the artillery, and
put the stronghold in a state of defence.

At the twenty-third hour the orator again wrote the Senate saying that
the Pope’s physician, Scipio, had informed him that his Holiness could
not survive the night. The physician--_omo excellente nell’ arte
soa_--stated that the Pope’s illness, in his opinion, began with a
stroke of apoplexy. He also said that the Duke was in no danger, that
he had no fever and could leave his bed any time he desired so to do.
For his own safety Valentino was preparing to remove that night to the
Castle of St. Angelo, whither the two children, Giovanni, the Pope’s
youngest son, and Rodrigo, Lucretia’s boy, had already been sent. Early
that morning Caesar’s troops had been ordered to Rome with all speed
and they had been pouring into the city all day. They had been massed
in the Borgo and drummers had been sent about the city to call the
guard to arms; the palace was entirely surrounded by troops, foot and
horse.

At the first hour of the night Don Alvarotto di Alvarotis, a member of
the household of the Cardinal of Santa Prassede, informed Giustinian
that while he was with the cardinal the Duke’s chamberlain, Don
Romolino, had come and told them that his Holiness had just passed
away. The ambassador was also informed of the death of the Cardinal
of Trani. The same morning, according to the messenger, Caesar had
dispatched a courier to Prospero Colonna to ask his support and to
offer to restore his estates to him.

Gregorovius inclines to the theory of poison, but Burchard records
no such suspicion. The corpse was “monstrously swollen and
discoloured--black, a most horrible thing to behold, and many suspected
poison,” wrote Beltrando Costabili to his master, Ercole of Ferrara.
“Never since the beginning of Christianity has there been seen such a
terrible and horrible thing. It was the most bestial, monstrous, and
horrible body, without the form or face of a man.” Wonderful were the
stories told; while he lay ill Alexander had even seen the devil in the
form of a monkey enter his room to bear his soul away.

The grounds for believing that the Pope had been poisoned are so
slight that they may be disregarded. It is clear from the statements
of Burchard and Giustinian, who was hostile to the Borgia, that
Alexander VI. died of a tertian fever, or the plague, which in that
year destroyed a vast number of people in Italy. The Pope was a fleshy
man, well advanced in years, and the appearance of the corpse, even if
it were as hideous as it was described, would not necessarily indicate
that he had died of poison.

Beltrando Costabili, the Ferrarese orator, concluded a letter dated
August 14th with the remark: “It is not strange that the Pope and
Caesar are sick, because almost all the prominent men in Rome are
ill--and especially in the Vatican, owing to the bad air.” Stories of
the poisoning began to circulate as soon as the rapidity with which the
body putrefied became known.

Guicciardini’s account has been followed by all later writers until
the present day, and he was one of the bitterest of the enemies of
the Borgia. According to his statement, before Caesar’s departure for
the field he and the Pope were invited to dine with Cardinal Adriano
di Corneto. Romolino, Valentino’s intimate, and two other cardinals
were also present. One of the Borgia, desiring to secure possession of
their host’s property, decided to poison him, but the servants confused
the glasses and gave Alexander and Caesar the envenomed cups. This
account was based on a letter written by Peter Martyr of Anghiara, from
Segovia, November 10, 1503--that is, about three months after the
death of the Pope. None of the ambassadors in Rome, who were closely
following events in the Vatican, even hinted at poison at the time.

The facts, briefly summarised, were as follows: The dinner took place
August 5th; Caesar and the Pope fell ill the 10th; the latter was
feverish the 12th; the 16th he was bled copiously and his illness
became serious; the 17th he was given an exceedingly powerful draught
of some sort which failed to relieve him; the 18th, feeling that
his end was approaching, he confessed to the Bishop of Carniola,
who administered the Communion. Later, Mass was celebrated at his
bedside in the presence of five cardinals. The Pope was extremely weak
and he declared that he felt death was near. The Bishop of Carniola
administered the Extreme Unction and a few hours later the Holy Father
expired--thirteen days after the dinner in Cardinal Corneto’s garden,
which precludes the idea of poison.

Giustinian makes no mention of poison. Beltrando Costabili, the
Ferrarese ambassador, who followed the course of the Pope’s illness
from hour to hour, likewise does not suggest it. Alexander VI. was
probably merely one of the many victims reaped by the plague in Rome in
1503.

The rumour of poisoning spread through the city and found many
believers who, hating the Borgias and believing they had dispatched
many by means of poison, were only too glad to conclude that they had
fallen victims to a plot which they had laid for another. Caesar’s
illness at the same time further strengthened the conviction, as did
also the horrible condition of the Pope’s body. Not until after the
funeral does Costabili refer to the suspicion of poison.

Valentino, being young and vigorous, recovered in spite of the heroic
treatment to which he, according to reports of the day, was subjected.
It was said that his physician, Gaspare Torrella, had him wrapped in
the warm entrails of a disembowelled mule; another story was that he
had been placed in an enormous amphora filled with ice.

Whatever the means employed to save his life his appearance had greatly
changed. Formerly accounted one of the handsomest men in Italy--not
excepting King Ferdinand of Naples--he was described now as altogether
revolting, and the marks of the severe treatment he had undergone
persisted until his dying day.

The ambassadors--whose function it is to flatter publicly--had
frequently spoken of Caesar as “blonde and handsome”--“like the
Emperor Tiberius, the handsomest man of his day”; but Paul Jovius says
“his face was disfigured with red blotches and pimples; his eyes, which
were very deep set, had a cruel and venomous look and seemed to dart
flames.”

When the Pope passed away the Duke, who was still ill, sent Michelotto
with a number of men to lock all the doors of the palace, and when
the Cardinal of Casanova hesitated to give up the keys one of the
swashbucklers drew his sword and threatened to cot his throat and throw
him from the window, whereupon the cardinal in terror surrendered the
keys. Then they took possession of all the money they could lay their
hands on--about 100,000 ducats. Later the servants of the palace
rushed in and appropriated everything that was left. The Duke did
not go near the Pope during his illness, and his Holiness never once
mentioned him or Lucretia. The minute Master of Ceremonies describes
the obsequies at great length; he also gives an inventory of the dead
Pope’s effects--that is, such as had escaped Caesar’s henchmen and the
servants.

The very day of the funeral Silvio Savelli returned and took possession
of his house and of the prison of the Sabelle, from which all the
prisoners were immediately released.




CHAPTER X

  The enemies of the Borgia pour into Rome--Fears of the Sacred
      College--Orsini and Colonna--The Cardinals and Valentino--Caesar
      enters into an agreement with France--The Cardinal d’Amboise--
      Scheming before the conclave--Caesar leaves Rome--Return of
      Giuliano della Rovere--The conclave--Election of Francesco
      Piccolomini to the Papacy--The new Pope supports Caesar--
      Valentino’s fortunes ebb--Death of Pius III.--Machinations
      preparatory to electing his successor.


Rome was in a tumult; the enemies of the House of Borgia and of the
Spanish party began to pour into the city. The Orsini were the first to
appear; Fabio, Niccolò, and Giangiordano, with their followers, at once
prepared to take possession of their estates in the Romagna. Prospero
Colonna led his army up to the very gates of the city. The Vitelli were
advancing on Città di Castella, Giampaolo Baglioni attacked Perugia;
Urbino, Camerino, Cagli, and Piombino were ready to revolt; Caesar’s
domain was to crumble away in a day. Valentino did not lose courage; he
was resolute, defiant; he had--so he told Machiavelli later--prepared
for everything, even for the death of the Pope--for all but one
contingency, and that was his own illness.

The streets were thronged with troops; the Spanish cardinals,
officials, retainers, hangers-on, spies, informers, bullies were
panic-stricken; they barricaded their doors and armed themselves.
It was feared the French would seize the opportunity and advance on
the city, and to the south not far away was the army of the King of
Spain. The Sacred College, whose duty it was to elect a successor to
Alexander, had no military force at their command, and they were afraid
to appeal to Caesar, who, with his well-disciplined troops and able
commanders, was still the strongest power in the city.

The Orsini and the Colonna, now at the very gates of Rome, were ready
to fly at Valentino’s throat. The cardinals Santa Croce, Cesarini, and
De’ Medici went to the warder of the Castle of St. Angelo, Francesco
de Roccamura, a Spaniard, to assure themselves of his support, and,
although he was one of Alexander’s creatures, to his great credit and
in spite of Caesar’s efforts to win him over, he remained faithful to
the Sacred College as the representative of the papal power. He trained
his cannon on the streets leading to the castle and his men shouted
“Collegio, Collegio! Chiesa, Chiesa!” The same afternoon the Spanish
mob burned the Orsini palaces on Monte Giordano.

August 21st the cardinals, to the number of seventeen, again met in
the Minerva, and the question of entering into some agreement with
Valentino was discussed at length. The Duke had professed loyalty and
devotion to the Sacred College, and Pandolfo, a notary, was directed to
confer with Caesar’s secretary, Agapito of Amelia.

August 22nd, through his secretary, Caesar swore obedience to the
cardinals, who confirmed him in his office of Captain-General of the
Church. The cardinals had warned both the Colonna and the Orsini to
keep away from Rome, but, disregarding their orders, Prospero Colonna
entered the city with a small force of cavalry. The next day Ludovico
and Fabio Orsini also appeared with their followers. Determined
to avenge the murder of their kinsmen and the plundering of their
estates, they sought Caesar, and failing to find him, they wrecked
their vengeance on the Castilians generally. Valentino and the Spanish
cardinals kept to the Vatican, and without the whole city was in a
tumult. Gangs of ruffians rushed about shouting “Colonna! Orsini!
Borgia!”

Caesar’s political sagacity coming to his aid, he endeavoured to
separate the Colonna, whom he had injured the least, from the Orsini.
These great rival families had been brought together by the wrongs they
had suffered at the hands of the Borgia. Caesar offered to restore the
property of the Colonna, and this offer Prospero promptly accepted, at
the same time promising in return to support the Duke. This agreement
saved Caesar for a time, and it was thought that in the impending
conclave a Pope favourable to the Borgia might be elected. The Orsini
were frightened and, yielding to the demands of the cardinals, withdrew
from the city during the night of August 24th.

[Illustration: PROSPERO COLONNA

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 244.]

In the meantime the Italian cardinals had been insisting that Caesar
also leave Rome. The Sacred College had secured about two thousand
troops and had placed the city under the protection of the ambassadors
of the Emperor, of Spain, France, and Venice, who--August 25th--went
to Valentino, whom they found in the Vatican stretched upon a bed,
but completely dressed and surrounded by the Spanish cardinals, and
requested him to leave the palace. This he refused to do, saying that
he was ill and that he would be safe nowhere else. Thereupon they
offered him the Castle of St. Angelo for his abode. Caesar asked
permission for his troops also to occupy the stronghold. He was still
Duke of Romagna and he had more than nine thousand men under his
command. He also had large amounts of money on deposit with Alessandro
Spanocchi, consequently he was treated as a reigning prince. Both the
Spanish and French ambassadors knew that his aid would be valuable in
the war in Naples, and Prospero Colonna was endeavouring to persuade
him to enter the service of Gonsalvo de Cordova. At the same time
France was trying to secure him.

Finally, to the utter dismay of Colonna and the Spanish cardinals, he
decided to cast his fortunes with the latter power, for September 1st,
through the mediation of Grammont, the French ambassador, he entered
into an agreement by which he was to place his troops at the service of
France in the Regno and to hold himself in readiness at all times to
aid the King, and to use all his influence with the Spanish cardinals
to secure the election of the Cardinal of Rouen to the Papacy.

No sooner had Georges d’Amboise, Cardinal of Rouen, learned of the
death of Alexander VI. than he set out in great haste for Rome, feeling
certain that he could be elected to succeed the Borgia. The Papacy was
the dream of his life, and he was ardently supported by the King, who
would profit greatly by the election of his minister. In fact, Louis
thought that if Amboise, his intimate friend, his subject, his Prime
Minister, became Pope he could easily make himself master of all Italy.
Amboise, with the French army under the very walls of Rome, promptly
secured a strong following in the Sacred College.

By his agreement with France Caesar was assured the protection of the
King both as to his person and his property. The same day--September
1st--Valentino entered into an arrangement with the Sacred College,
one clause of which required him to leave Rome within three days.
Prospero Colonna had also been compelled to depart, and the ambassadors
of Maximilian and of Louis XII. guaranteed that while the papal throne
was vacant Caesar, the Colonna, and the Spanish forces would not
approach within ten miles of Rome; the orators of Venice and France did
the same with respect to the French army and the Orsini.

Giustinian says it was agreed that Prospero Colonna should leave
September 2nd, and Caesar, with all his artillery, the following
day. Colonna did depart on the appointed day and Caesar withdrew a
little later with all his troops, horse, foot, and artillery. The Duke
himself was so ill that he had to be borne on a litter. The Venetian
orator adds: “Now that Caesar has gone it is thought that the election
will take place quietly and without any disturbance, since every one
respects the Sacred College.” Still, some uneasiness was felt lest
the French should cause a disturbance, because Odoardo Bugliotto, the
King’s valet, had arrived with a large amount of money, determined
to make the Cardinal of Rouen Pope. Monsignor de Trans had told
Giustinian that neither Ascanio Sforza nor any of the other cardinals
then in France would attend the conclave, “nevertheless, yesterday
evening the report was circulated, and this morning it was confirmed,
that Amboise, Sforza, San Malo, and Aragona[27] were already on the
way, and,” he adds, “if this is true there will be much intriguing, for
these men are seditious and shameless and with their astuteness and
machinations cause much disturbance, and may God in his mercy watch
over Christendom.”

The same day--September 2nd--Giustinian informs his Government:
“It is learned that Valentino, without the knowledge of any one, has
entered into an agreement with France.”

Prospero Colonna was greatly chagrined by Caesar’s last trick, and when
he left Rome he took with him the Princess of Squillace--“who will be
some comfort to him--while the Prince went with the Duke. The Princess
departed willingly, hoping to recover her estates in the Regno--in
any event there is little love between her and her husband as they are
entirely unlike.” Owing to the trouble and discord she had occasioned
in the family, the Princess Sancia had been imprisoned by Alexander VI.
in the Castle of St. Angelo.

Burchard describes Valentino’s departure in detail. The very morning of
the agreement he paid his troops and sent thirteen heavy wagons laden
with engines of war forward through Trastevere. He had three large
bombards, two medium, and eight small ones. Then he dispatched his
guard to the Milvius Bridge, there to await him. More than a hundred
wagons were required for his baggage. They left the Vatican by the
Viridaria Gate and proceeded to Monte Mario, the Duke borne on a litter
by twelve halberdiers. After him was led a magnificent charger with
trappings of black velvet, embroidered with his arms and the ducal
crown.

The Spanish and French ambassadors accompanied him as far as the city
gate. Caesar set out for Nepi, a town belonging to his family, the
citadel of which was still loyal to him. Gregorovius says his mother
Vannozza and his brother Giuffre accompanied him.

Valentino was still a power to be reckoned with, and he undoubtedly
hoped to secure the election of a Pope who would be friendly to himself
and the Borgia family, for he knew that he could count on the votes of
the eleven Spanish cardinals.

Alexander’s obsequies began September 4th, and in accordance with the
papal custom continued for nine days. The cardinals, however, soon lost
interest in the ceremonies and were anxious to enter into conclave. One
after another the cardinals who, for various reasons, had been living
abroad returned. All Rome was looking forward to the event which to
Caesar was the most momentous in his entire career--not excepting the
election of his own father to the Papacy--for not only his future but
his very life depended on the outcome.

The French army, under Monsignor de La Trémoille and the Marquis of
Mantua, had entered the Romagna, where they were ordered to remain
until a successor to Alexander had been elected.

Giuliano della Rovere, after an absence of ten years in France,
returned to Italy September 3rd; Cardinal Colonna, who had been hiding
in Sicily for five years, appeared a few days later; the 9th the Romans
received Riario in triumph, and the next day Ascanio Sforza, Georges
d’Amboise, and the Cardinal d’Aragona made their entry. Amboise had
secured Sforza’s release from prison and had brought him with him
from France, counting upon securing his vote. The Cardinal of Rouen
also felt certain that at the proper moment Caesar would throw the
votes of the Spanish cardinals for him, and he believed that the near
presence of the French troops would influence the Sacred College in his
favour, because they would immediately see that the Papacy would be
greatly strengthened by having the support of the armies of France. He,
however, was not slow to discover that Ascanio Sforza was the favourite
of the Romans; moreover, the Sacred College promptly requested Amboise
not to permit any of the French troops to enter the city.

When Giustinian called upon Giuliano della Rovere on his arrival in
Rome the cardinal remarked to him: “I am here in my own interests and
not in those of any one else; I am not here to cast my vote for the
Cardinal of Rouen unless I should see that even without my vote he
could be elected--which I think is impossible.” He added that he was a
good Italian and that he could not be forced to make a Pope unless it
were for the good of the Christian religion and the peace and welfare
of Italy; he also expressed great affection for Venice and promised to
consider her interests.

September 16, 1503, thirty-eight cardinals entered the conclave which
was held in the Vatican. They first drew up an agreement which was
to be submitted to any power that would guarantee their rights; they
also promised to reform the abuses which were wellnigh universal in
ecclesiastical affairs, and agreed to summon a council for that purpose
within two years; they also promised to prosecute the war against the
Turks. The urgency of the situation in which they were placed cut short
the discussion. The Italians and the Spaniards united against Amboise
and agreed to elect a Pope who could not long survive, and, September
22nd, on the second scrutiny they selected Francesco Piccolomini,
Cardinal of Siena, to be the supreme head of the Church. He adopted the
name Pius III.

Piccolomini had been Cardinal-Deacon forty-three years; he was a man
of probity, advanced in years, and a sufferer from the gout, with not
long to live. Giuliano della Rovere, seeing that his own election was
impossible, had secured the elevation of Piccolomini. French politics
had failed signally, and Pius III. promptly compelled the Marquis of
Mantua to withdraw his troops from the Romagna.

The college had been divided into three nearly equal factions--the
French, the Spanish, and the Italian, whose respective candidates were
Georges d’Amboise, Bernardino Carvajal, and Giuliano della Rovere.
Caesar for obvious reasons had supported the French candidate, and had
succeeded in frustrating Della Rovere’s plans; the latter, however,
had immediately discerned the true situation, and with the aid of
Oliviero Caraffa, Cardinal of Naples, and Girolamo Basso della Rovere,
Cardinal of Recanati, succeeded in placing his Eminence of Siena in the
papal chair, thereby giving himself time to perfect his own plans for
securing the great prize on the demise of Pius III., which was sure to
take place soon.

Pius III. was born in Siena in 1439, consequently at the time of his
elevation to the Papacy he was sixty-four years of age. The cardinals
who had procured his election in the hope that he would not survive
long were not disappointed, for he died twenty-seven days after
assuming the tiara--so promptly that the usual rumour of poison
immediately spread. At first it was whispered that Pandolfo Petrucci,
tyrant of Siena, was guilty of the crime, and later the enemies of
Julius II. fancied they discovered the hand of the Cardinal of San
Pietro ad Vincola in the sudden death. Although Pandolfo had committed
many atrocities, it is extremely unlikely that any crime in this
instance had been committed. As to Della Rovere, he knew that the new
Pope could not live long, and therefore had no need to shorten his
days; in fact, he had procured his election for the express purpose of
gaining time to perfect his own plans to secure the throne of St. Peter.

Caesar had also been active in effecting the election of Piccolomini,
who, in the event of his elevation, had promised to confirm him in
his office of Captain-General of the Church and Vicar of Romagna.
Immediately after his elevation to the Papacy the new Pope began to
bestow marks of his favour upon Valentino. Bonafede, Bishop of Chiusi,
Caesar’s representative during the conclave, was made Governor of Rome
the very day the new Pontiff was proclaimed.

September 23rd the Pope granted Giustinian an audience, during which
the Venetian ambassador interceded in favour of the Romagnol barons,
who had returned to their estates. His Holiness replied: “As far as
Cesena is concerned, I agree perfectly with your Illustrious Signory,
but as to the other lords, God has punished them for their sins with
a _tristo_ instrument, and I wish to remind the Senate that all the
troubles of Italy originated in Romagna.” Then he said, smiling,
“Perhaps God will restore these lords after they have done penance.”
Undoubtedly the Pontiff had made some sort of an agreement with Caesar,
for he did not hesitate to maintain the Duke’s rights in Romagna. He
even went so far as to dispatch a legate to Perugia to break up the
league which Valentino’s enemies had formed against him, and he also
sent commissioners through Romagna to urge the people to be loyal to
him.

Thus enjoying the favour of the new Pope, Caesar returned to Rome with
a considerable following October 3rd. He was accompanied by Cardinals
Amboise, Sanseverino, and D’Albret.

The Pope, however, did not support Caesar very actively. In fact,
when he urged obedience upon the Romagnols, he remarked that he would
give the Duke no further aid--he wished, not to be a warlike Pope,
but a pacific one, to bring peace and quiet to Christendom. Regarding
Valentino, the Pope advised the Republic to do nothing, because it
would soon be all over with him--his illness was a punishment from
God. The 29th the ambassador writes: “Valentino has sent messengers
from Nepi to Rome to ask the Pope’s assistance, but the only result so
far is a few briefs.”

Caesar had only 200 men left; Ugo Moncada with the flower of his troops
had deserted him, and 2,000 men who had been under the command of
Romolino also left. Alessandro Spanocchi, the Duke’s treasurer, tried
to send money of his for deposit in Florence, Milan, Bologna, and
Ferrara--14,000 to 20,000 ducats. It was said that the Florentines
offered Valentino a free passage through their territory in case he
wished to go to Romagna.

The following day the Pope issued a brief threatening with
excommunication any one who should refuse to return any money or other
property removed from the apostolic palace during the illness of Pope
Alexander VI.--evidently this was aimed at Caesar and his agents.

Nothing escapes Giustinian. “The Duke is still at Nepi in bad health,
and deserted by nearly every one. The Pope has given him fair words,
but Caesar is distrustful.” October 1st Bartolomeo d’Alviano requested
the Venetian orator to secure the Senate’s permission for him to attack
Caesar in Nepi; he also informed the ambassador that Caterina Sforza
desired to join in the undertaking and had promised him a large sum
of money, but he had refused his consent because he would have been
obliged in return to help her recover her own estates, which would
offend Venice. October 2nd the orator writes that the Duke of Urbino
had sent a courier to Rome with a letter in which he said he had
attempted, but unsuccessfully, to persuade the people of Fano, which
was in the possession of Valentino’s forces, to return to the Holy
See--and he asked permission to compel them to do so. The Cardinal San
Pietro ad Vincola accompanied the messenger and explained all to his
Holiness, who replied that he could not make any open demonstration
against Caesar, but that he was willing that the Duke of Urbino should
do what he could--that it would not displease him; which shows that
the Pope was willing they should do as they saw fit with respect to
this Duke of Valence, provided it did not appear to come from him. The
Pope decided Valentino should return to Rome, and he arranged to put
the palace of the Cardinal of Ferrara near St. Peter’s at his disposal.
His Holiness stated that he could not bring himself to use extreme
measures with respect to the Duke--that he had decided to have pity on
him--however, “the chief reason why the Pope has been so indulgent is
that he heard the Duke was very ill and incapable of taking the field,
and being by nature very determined and avaricious, he hopes in case
the Duke dies, without using force, to get possession of the money and
other valuables he removed from Rome, although I think--and this is
the opinion of many--that in this he will be disappointed, because the
greater part of the valuables have been taken to the castle of Forli
and the money deposited in various places. The reason the Duke asked to
be allowed to return to Rome is because he is afraid of Alviano, who is
trying in every way to get his clutches on him.”

Valentino entered Rome October 3rd with his entire force, about 150
men-at-arms, 500 foot-soldiers, and a few light horse. Burchard’s
mention of Caesar’s return is even more concise.

The Duke was lodged in the palace of the Cardinal of San Clemente, and
many of the high Church dignitaries immediately called upon him. “He
is still sick,” adds Giustinian, “and it is thought he will die.” Two
days later the orator writes, perhaps somewhat regretfully: “Valentino
is not as ill as was supposed; he talks arrogantly and boasts that he
will shortly recover all his domain. To-day the Cardinal of Rouen went
to see him and succeeded in getting 30,000--some say 50,000--ducats
from him. Although the Pope is not very favourably disposed towards
him, Valentino, to obtain his support, is said to have lent him a large
sum of money for his coronation expenses. It is believed here that
the Pope will regard this money as his own and keep it, together with
the other valuables collected after the publication of the brief of
excommunication, and also the 24,000 ducats found on deposit in the
bank in the name of the _duchetti_”--the little Dukes, Don Giovanni
and Don Rodrigo.

The cardinals San Pietro ad Vincola and San Giorgio complained to the
Pope of Caesar’s presence in the city, and the ambassador reports a
conversation he had with his Holiness, in which the latter said: “I am
neither a saint nor an angel, but a man, and one who does not fancy
that he knows everything. I have been deceived. I thought the Duke
would ask to be made Captain-General of the Church, and then I should
have told him that I had no money for soldiers.” It was rumoured in
Rome that the city of Pesaro had been captured in the name of Caesar,
with the aid of Florence, and the Duke became more arrogant and
threatening. The French and the Cardinal of Volterra were scheming to
get him to enter the service of Florence.

The Pope was crowned in St. Peter’s, October 8th, but the event in
comparison with the actions of Valentino was of slight importance in
the opinion of Giustinian; the Florentines were negotiating with him,
and he was busily engaged enlisting soldiers for use in Romagna. The
agent of the Duke of Urbino informed the Venetian orator that Soderini,
Cardinal of Volterra, had asked him in what manner the Republic of
Venice had helped Valentino, and that he had also tried to convince him
that insomuch as Alexander VI. was dead, there was no reason whatever
to accord Caesar any protection any longer; to which Giustinian replied
that it would be a mistake for Urbino to second the endeavours of
Venice, who was trying to get possession of Romagna, for in that case
Valentino, France, and the other powers would take steps against him,
and the Duke of Urbino would lose his domain for the third time; “then
I advised him to make a compact with Florence and the French.” Urbino
was, however, more inclined toward Venice. The very day Pius III. was
crowned he issued a bull appointing Caesar Gonfalonier of the Church.

Valentino felt that his star was again in the ascendant. Favourable
reports were coming in from the Romagna, and about the end of
September the people of Cesena had dispatched an ambassador whom
Caesar received graciously and thanked for the loyalty of his people.
Immediately after the victories of Carpineto and Martirana, he sent
letters to the Romagnols urging them to resist until he should be well
enough to come to their assistance. The States he had more recently
acquired were somewhat doubtful, but most of them remained loyal to
him. His bitterest enemy, Giulio Orsini, had made peace with him, and
the Pope gave him permission to embark on a new campaign to punish
Pandolfo Malatesta for his attempt to seize Rimini, and Sforza for his
movement against Pesaro, and also to chastise the Duke of Urbino for
endeavouring to recover his own property.

Alvisi publishes a brief issued by the Pope October 13th, in which he
requests the Florentines to allow Caesar, “whom he loves tenderly,
paternally, on account of his rare and superior virtues,” to lead his
army through their territory.

It is difficult to judge how sincere the Pope was, but it is certain
that all Italy, except Romagna, feared and hated Caesar, and rejoiced
in his downfall; many were afraid that he might rise again; every
one was eager to betray him; Ferrara, in spite of Lucretia Borgia’s
marriage with Alfonso d’Este, hated him--the daughter of a dead Pope
was of slight account in Italian politics. The Romagnol barons had
entered into a treaty with him, but had no intention of keeping it.
Bartolomeo d’Alviano and Baglioni were gathering an army to crush him,
and, in conjunction with the Orsini, were trying to get possession
of his person; shortly after his return to Rome his enemies entered
into a solemn compact to pursue him to the death. Even Spain’s
representative in Naples, Gonsalvo de Cordova, signed the agreement.

Annibale Bentivoglio came to Rome early in October ostensibly to do
homage to the Pope, but in reality to watch Caesar’s movements. The
Holy Father told Bentivoglio he had written the briefs in Caesar’s
favour in good faith, but that henceforth he would do nothing for
him--but at the same time he was careful to add that he would do
nothing to injure him. Dissatisfied with this, Bentivoglio asked
Cardinal della Rovere to get the Pope’s permission for him to attack
Caesar. This the cardinal promised to endeavour to do, and Riario
likewise agreed to use his influence to this end.

In the meantime Valentino’s forces were rapidly dwindling away; of
the 6,000 foot-soldiers and 600 men-at-arms he had at the time of
his father’s death, not half were left to him. The clouds were fast
gathering; even the Florentines, who pretended to be his friends, were
more than suspicious of him. Gonsalvo de Cordova promulgated an edict
forbidding the Spanish captains to serve under Caesar’s orders, and
commanding them immediately to report to himself to check Louis XII.,
who was advancing on Naples; October 14th the edict, in the name of
Castile, was solemnly proclaimed in Rome before Valentino’s palace and
in two other places. Small companies of men under the lieutenants of
Alviano, of Baglioni, and Orsini were constantly being brought to Rome.
The Pope held a conference with the ambassadors of the various powers,
and asked them to put a stop to Alviano’s operations in the Romagna;
this they diplomatically declined to do.

Caesar’s palace was surrounded; it was impossible for him to escape. In
case he attempted to flee by way of Ostia, Mottino, formerly captain of
Alexander’s galleys, was ready to pounce upon him, and Giustinian says:
“This Alviano is like a mad dog determined to fly at his throat.”

Valentino, however, bribed the guards at the Porta Viridaria, and
Burchard records that he escaped with all his men October 15th, but
that some of his people immediately deserted and returned to Rome. When
Orsini heard of his flight he hurriedly left the city by another gate,
and Caesar, finding his road cut off, returned to Rome, where he was
admitted to the Vatican. All but seventy of his men-at-arms abandoned
him, and they, together with a few foot-soldiers, acted as a guard
before the palace.

On the ground that he was a common criminal the Orsini protested to the
Pope against affording him any protection.

Rome was on the verge of civil war; the Orsini burnt the Torrione gate,
and Fabio Orsini and Renzo di Ceri were ordered to attack the Borgo
which Caesar had fortified. With the Torrione gate destroyed, it was
easy to get into the Vatican. Valentino was driven to the wall, when
Cardinals Borgia, Salerno, Sorento, and Arborea had him conducted
through the subterranean passage to Hadrian’s Mole, where for a time at
least he was safe. With him he had his natural children and the little
Dukes of Nepi and of Sermoneta. His palace in the Borgo was sacked and
plundered. October 16th Giustinian tersely records: “The Duke has
retreated to castle S. Angelo with four or five servants; his people
are scattered; the Orsini have surrounded the castle; they are trying
to persuade the Spanish ambassador to take steps to prevent him getting
away.”

At the same time the Spanish cardinals were endeavouring to induce the
warder to permit Valentino to escape disguised as a friar. But the
Orsini were vigilant and took every precaution to prevent this. Caesar
was deserted by all his people; what little property he had managed
to save was now gone; the captain of the guard, a nephew of the Pope,
secured the greater part of it, and even the magnificent Bartolomeo
d’Alviano obtained two beautiful chargers; all was scattered and
Valentino was in sore straits.

The Orsini, finding themselves baffled, instituted a civil suit against
their enemy for seizing the estates of the barons, and demanded that he
be held in the castle of St. Angelo until a decision could be rendered.

To some extent Caesar still enjoyed the favour of the Pope, and he
conceived the idea of escaping by night and joining Michelotto at the
castle of Soriana, where, he believed, he might collect an army and
recover Romagna. He, however, had no chance to carry out this plan,
for the one friend still left--if friend he could be called--Pope
Pius III., died during the night of October 18, 1503, thus promptly
fulfilling the hopes and expectations of many of the cardinals.
Piccolomini had reigned just twenty-seven days. September 27th he
had undergone a painful operation, and the Venetian ambassador
followed his illness day by day as closely as he had done that of his
predecessor. October 16th he states that fears for the Pontiff’s life
were felt; he was worse the next day and during the night his brothers
removed his valuables from the Vatican to a place of safety. The
Orsini, determined to force the election of a Pope of their choice when
Pius passed away, remained in Rome.

When Alexander VI. died, the most scurrilous epitaphs were found
affixed to the palace walls, but when Pius III. passed away, numerous
laudatory epigrams were discovered. Angelo Colucci drew a striking
comparison of the short but respectable reign of Piccolomini and the
shameless pontificate of his predecessor.

The death of Pius was a great blow to Caesar, who had enjoyed his
support for a time. Even now, however, his courage did not entirely
desert him. Machiavelli, who arrived in Rome October 26th, wrote the
Signory that the Duke was more hopeful than ever of accomplishing great
things--providing a friendly Pope is elected. It was said that Caesar
finally despairing of any other aid, had made some sort of a compact
with the Cardinal of San Giorgio.

The Sacred College, after seriously considering the demands of the
Orsini that Caesar be held until a new Pope was elected, decided
that they had no authority to do so. During the meeting the Cardinal
of Rouen defended Caesar, hoping thereby to secure the support of
the Spanish prelates who were still devoted to Valentino and were
themselves influential and united. The cardinals decided that the Duke
was at liberty to go and come as he saw fit. There was, however, little
likelihood that he would leave, as he was safer where he was than he
would be anywhere else; moreover, when the new Pope should be elected
he would be in the best possible position to secure his favour through
the mediation of the cardinals who might remain loyal to him. How
influential Caesar still was is shown by the orator’s remark that all
those who aspired to the Pontificate were ready to promise him anything
he asked to secure the votes of the Spanish cardinals and “there is one
thing certain,” he adds: “no one will be Pope who does not consent to
all of Valentino’s demands.”

The Spanish prelates seemed to favour the astute Cardinal of San
Pietro ad Vincola, but Santa Prassede and Alexandrino were also strong
candidates.

Burchard records that the Cardinal of San Pietro ad Vincola came to the
apostolic palace October 29th with Valentino and his Spanish cardinals,
and entered into an agreement with them by which he promised, when he
became Pope, to make Caesar Captain-General of the Church, and also
to protect his interests and restore him to his estates; the Duke on
his part was to aid Della Rovere in the conclave, and all the Spanish
cardinals promised to cast their votes for him. The evening of October
30th, the obsequies of the deceased Pope being over, the cardinals
agreed among themselves that the Cardinal of San Pietro ad Vincola
should be his successor. The same day Machiavelli informed his Signory
that Giuliano della Rovere had secured the promise of the majority of
the votes of the Sacred College “by means adapted to this end.”

Giustinian repeats the various rumours current regarding the momentous
event, the election of the new Pope. The very day of the Pontiff’s
death he wrote: “There are three strong candidates--Naples, San Pietro
ad Vincola, and San Giorgio; the Spaniards incline to the second
because he will be able to satisfy their demands the best. The Cardinal
of Naples may get a few votes, but he is suspected of being French.
San Giorgio’s age is against him, consequently Della Rovere is the
strongest candidate. Sforza, Colonna, and Rouen are not mentioned now.”

The day following the Pope’s decease all the cardinals were “intent on
their machinations, some with little respect to God and the dignity
of their office. Bargains are openly made; the terms are no longer in
hundreds, but in thousands and tens of thousands--to the measureless
shame of our religion, and insult to God; there is now no difference
between the Papacy and the Sultanate--it will go to the highest
bidder.”

October 22nd the Orsini complained to the Sacred College of their
treatment and Alessandrino and Medici were delegated to confer with
them and Caesar. The Orsini, feeling that they had been grievously
wronged, and at the same time not wanting to oppose the Holy See and
the Sacred College, promised that if the Duke would leave Italy and
go to France or some other place they would allow him safe passage;
on the other hand, if he desired to remain in Italy in the Province
of Gesia, they demanded that he be required to give security for his
appearance before the future Pope to answer the charges lodged against
him; they also agreed to give bonds to appear and defend an action he
had threatened to bring against them. “It is not known what Caesar
said to these suggestions; many think he will decide to go to France,
but some say he will remain here.” The next day the orator heard that
Valentino had resolved to leave Italy, and that he had asked for eight
or ten days in which to make his preparations; he also demanded that
the Orsini be required to leave Rome and to give him a safe-conduct as
they had agreed. It is clear that he asked for this time to enable him
to persuade the Sacred College to force the Orsini to leave Rome and
also to permit him to carry on his machinations in connection with the
election.

The obsequies of the deceased Pope continued, but attracted little
attention, the impending election of his successor being the
all-absorbing topic--while the electioneering proceeded and the
scandal increased.

Cardinal Colonna went over to the Spanish faction, and this again
rendered the situation more complicated. The 27th of the month the
Venetian ambassador wrote that it was still uncertain who would secure
the great prize. The cardinals of Naples and San Pietro ad Vincola were
now the leading candidates; Ascanio Sforza was also mentioned. The
ambassador adds that while “the wishes of the King of France have some
weight, the Duke’s desires are more important than anything else--and
may God save us from having a Pope who, under obligations to Valentino,
may convulse the affairs of all Italy and even of all Christendom.”

Reports reached Rome that Antonio Ordelaffi had captured Forli and
that Sforza had recovered Pesaro; at the same time Pandolfo Petrucci
had entered Rimini, taken the fortress, and put Caesar’s men to rout;
this renewed activity was directly due to the Pope’s death and Caesar’s
retreat to the Castle of St Angelo.

The Duke was greatly discouraged by this news and dispatched a
messenger to the Venetian ambassador to ask the help of the Senate. By
this time Alviano and the Orsini had, in obedience to the wishes of the
cardinals, left Rome with nearly all their troops.

The Pope’s obsequies were concluded the 29th. Giampaolo Baglioni was
still in Rome under the protection of the Cardinal of Rouen, who stated
he desired his presence for his own security. The Sacred College,
however, to render this unnecessary, enlisted about five hundred
foot-soldiers to guard the conclave. Caesar was still in the Castle
of St. Angelo and daily received visits from Cardinals Borgia, Loris,
Romolino, and Vera to confer regarding the future Pope.

Although Valentino had received the safe-conduct he made no move to
depart; in fact, he had no intention of going before the election of
the new Pope. The morning of the 30th it became known that Della Rovere
had reached an agreement with the Spanish cardinals and Rouen, and
his election was assured. The betting, according to Giustinian, ran
as high as 82 per cent. on Della Rovere as against 6 per cent. on the
field--just how bets were placed in those days is not known.




CHAPTER XI

  Election of Giuliano della Rovere--Julius II. and Caesar Borgia--
      Caesar leaves Rome--Machiavelli and Caesar--Arrest of Caesar--
      Victory of Gonsalvo de Cordova at the Garigliano--Caesar goes
      to Naples--Gonsalvo seizes Valentino and sends him to Spain--
      Caesar imprisoned in the Castle of Chinchilla--Jeanne la Folle and
      Philippe le Beau--Caesar is transferred to the Castle of Medina
      del Campo--His escape.


The last day of October the cardinals entered into conclave, and
November 1, 1503, Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of San Pietro ad
Vincola, was elected Pope on the first scrutiny. Thus the nephew of
Sixtus IV., after nineteen years of waiting, aspiring, scheming, years
of exile, of strife, of hopes and fears, realised the ambition of his
life.

At the fifteenth hour the window was thrown open, the cross held out,
and the announcement made that the most reverend Cardinal of San Pietro
ad Vincola had been elected supreme head of the Christian Church. The
new Pope was pleased to assume the name Julius II.

Giustinian conceives that Venice will profit by the election of Della
Rovere, who was reputed to be a man of his word. He was sixty years of
age and had no nephews for whom it would be necessary to find places.
Caesar therefore felt sure of the new Pontiff’s favour.

Almost immediately after Della Rovere’s election chambers over the
audience-hall were, by the Pope’s orders, placed at Valentino’s
disposal, and there he took up his residence.

The Venetian orator had heard that the new Pope had dispatched briefs
to Romagna of the same tenor as those which Pius III. had issued in the
interests of Valentino, and he went to the Pontiff and asked whether
the report was true, to which his Holiness replied: “Ambassador, do not
for a moment think that I will fail in anything I have promised you;
I give you my word that I have written no such briefs, and I do not
intend to do so, and” he added, “even if I had written them you know
I would at the same time have taken steps to prevent them from doing
any harm”--that is, he would have given those to whom they were sent
to understand that they were not to be observed--modern politics has
made but little advance in duplicity. “It is true Agapito has asked me
to write them, but I will do nothing. Ambassador, it is not necessary
for you to remind me that we should not favour the Duke in the affairs
of Romagna, because this is our office, this territory being ours,
_mediate vel immediate_; therefore whoever holds it holds it as a vicar
or feudatory of the Church.”

The Pope’s coronation was set for November 19th, and as early as
the 3rd Giustinian was informed that Julius had written Guidobaldo
di Montefeltre, Duke of Urbino, requesting him to be present at the
ceremony. This special invitation shows that the new Pope was on the
side of Caesar’s enemies. Although the Cardinal of San Giorgio feared
that if Guidobaldo absented himself from his State it would afford
Caesar a chance to injure him, it can hardly be supposed that the
Pope invited the Duke of Urbino to Rome simply to give Valentino an
opportunity to destroy him or attack his capital city.

It is difficult to see how Caesar, himself a past-master in duplicity
and cunning, could have placed any dependence upon the promises Della
Rovere had made to him to secure his elevation to the Papacy. Just
what were the terms of the bargain is not known; the cardinal had but
one end in view--the assuring of his own election; and once elected,
he would not hesitate to break the agreement he had made. It is true
he carried out some of the stipulations by appointing Valentino
Captain-General of the Church and guaranteeing him the nominal
possession of Romagna, but the very day of his election he began to aid
and encourage the Duke’s enemies.

Alexander VI. had urged the Sacred College never to make Giuliano della
Rovere pope, and he was correct in regarding him as an implacable enemy
of his House. Caesar himself almost immediately discovered that he had
made a mistake and was on his guard. November 12th the Pope formally
took possession of the Castle of St. Angelo, placing the Bishop of
Sinigaglia in command of it.

The following day a council was held by the Pope, Amboise, Soderini,
the Cardinal of Ferrara, the Spanish cardinals, and Caesar, regarding
the departure of Valentino, and it was agreed that he should at
once go to Ferrara and his troops to Imola, which was still held
by his lieutenants. The Duke, however, seemed suspicious and
irresolute--perhaps owing to a sort of stupor into which he had been
thrown by the reverses he had suffered--for he was neither accustomed
to misfortunes nor able to bear them.

Giustinian writes November 6th: “The Duke is still in the palace but
has little reputation; he made every effort to obtain an audience with
his Holiness but failed. He is very submissive and has repeatedly sent
to ask me to come and confer with him regarding his affairs, but I
declined, for various reasons, among them being the fact that he quite
ignored the Republic during his days of prosperity.” Caesar continued
to enlist troops but with what end in view is not clear.

The Cardinal of Cosenza told the orator that his Holiness was
considering an alliance between one of his great-nieces and the little
Duke of Camerino. It was also reported that the Pope intended to give
Caesar the strong Castle of Civita Castellana for his residence, but
this statement was not confirmed.

It was even arranged that when the proposal should be made in
consistory to give the office of Gonfalonier of the Church to Valentino
it should be merely for form’s sake to satisfy him. About the middle of
November it became known that Cesena desired to be freed from Caesar’s
authority and return to that of the Church. The Pope’s coronation was
postponed for a week “on the advice of the astrologers, who stated that
the stars would be more propitious for his Holiness that day.”

“The Pope is most harshly disposed towards the Duke, and it is said
has ordered Pandolfo Petrucci to treat him as an enemy; his Holiness
looks for Caesar’s destruction, but does not want it to appear that he
has any part in it.”

Julius II. had conceived the idea of recovering the strongholds in
the Romagna for himself, and he soon discovered that Caesar actually
expected to retain them. The Borgia, shrewd as he was, was no match
for the Della Rovere in cunning; the Pope outwitted him at every turn,
and he did not hesitate to tell Giustinian that “the Duke shall never
have so much as a single tower of my fortresses. All I owe him is to
save his life and protect his property--in interceding for him with
the Florentines it was really to save Romagna for the Church.” The
Pope told the orator that as soon as he had secured possession of the
castles he would send Caesar away. Clearly his Holiness did not want to
be compelled to use force to get possession of the strongholds; he was
trying to delude Caesar into giving them up, and then he would cast him
aside.

The orator confesses that the Pope’s mind is “ambiguous” to him--_me
ambigua_--but he promptly discovered that he wanted to crush the Duke,
and this view was confirmed by many of those in the Pope’s confidence;
some, however, maintained that he was well disposed toward Valentino.

November 19th occurred the event to which all had been eagerly looking
forward--Caesar’s departure from Rome. He went to Ostia, where he was
met by Mottino with two galleys to take him to Tuscany. There were
various rumours regarding the place where he intended to disembark;
the Venetian orator was told that Viareggio, a town belonging to the
Duke of Ferrara, was his destination. He had with him about 160 horse.

Valentino was greatly changed when Machiavelli saw him in Rome, and
both he and Giustinian regarded Caesar as lost; the latter saw him
“fearful and terrified,” while Machiavelli wrote: “The Duke allows
himself to be carried away by his confident mind”; he also said
Valentino was “changeable, irresolute, and suspicious.”

Worn out by his reverses, he had at first thought of going to Romagna.
But when he embarked he had decided to go either to Livorno or Genoa
and thence to Ferrara. Machiavelli, who had assured him that Florence
would grant him a safe conduct, said that if the Signory failed him
“Caesar would make a compact with the Venetians and the devil and would
go to Pisa and devote all the money, forces, and allies that remained
to him to injuring the Republic.”

The 18th, the very day that Caesar left the Palace, Julius II.
dispatched briefs to Romagna in which he said he had disapproved of
the bestowal of the vicariate upon Valentino by Alexander VI., and
he exhorted the people to raise the standard of the Church, in whose
possession he intended Romagna should remain. A few days later he told
Cardinal Soderini that it would have been wiser, he thought, to have
placed the strongholds of Romagna under Caesar’s command, as it would
be better for him than for the Venetians to have them. Soderini went
to Ostia and made certain proposals to Caesar, which were rejected.
November 24th the Pope ordered Mottino to hold Valentino, and at
the same time he arranged with Soderini to impede the progress of
Michelotto, who had started forward with the Duke’s cavalry. The same
day he appointed the Bishop of Ragusa, Giovanni Sacchi, Governor
of Romagna and Bologna, and directed him to take possession of the
province in the name of the Church, and he again called upon the cities
to raise the papal standard.

The general opinion in Rome was that Julius II. was only waiting for a
more favourable opportunity to give Caesar the final blow, and the joy
felt at his departure was wellnigh universal. Agapito and Romolino, his
two closest friends, men whose names had been connected with some of
his most atrocious crimes, had refused to accompany him and remained in
Rome.

The Pope had also instructed Soderini to demand the surrender of the
citadel of Forli, and Caesar’s refusal to comply was what caused his
Holiness to seize him and hold him prisoner.

Machiavelli reported to his Government the rumours which filled Rome
when Caesar’s arrest became known; it was even said that his Holiness
had ordered him to be flung into the Tiber, and he adds: “If this has
not been done it will be done shortly, in my opinion; we see that the
Pope has commenced to pay his debts very honourably; his pen and ink
are all that are necessary--nevertheless his praise is in all men’s
mouths!”

The night of November 27th the papal guard set out for Ostia to arrest
Caesar, but they did not have to proceed far, for, searching the boats
they chanced to come upon, they found him on a little craft on the
Tiber about two miles from Rome.

The troops he had embarked at Ostia, finding themselves without a head,
left the galleys and went back to Rome, while the gentlemen of his
suite returned to their estates.

At first the Pope had Caesar taken to Magliano, a place about seven
miles from Rome, where he was closely guarded, but not treated harshly.
Julius undoubtedly wished to avoid the use of force with Caesar as far
as possible and to secure his own ends peaceably if it could be done.
He may have feared that if he too openly disclosed his real purpose
Valentino’s lieutenants would surrender the castles they still held
to some other power, for several were casting longing eyes upon them.
Later the Pope ordered Valentino to be brought back to Rome and had him
lodged in the Vatican.

Giustinian informs his Government, November 28th, that the Pontiff, to
justify himself for arresting Caesar, especially in the eyes of the
Spanish cardinals, held a convocation, which was attended by fifteen
cardinals, to whom he explained that as Venice had been active in
Romagna, not against the Church or the Holy See, but only against
Valentino, and also to restrain the Florentines, who appeared to
have designs upon the same territory, he had decided to remove the
cause, in order that the Republic would have no pretext for going any
farther. Therefore he had given the Duke to understand that he must
surrender the territory now in his possession into the hands of the
Pope and must give the countersigns of the fortresses; but for fear
that he would not give the true countersigns it seemed advisable to
his Holiness to have the Duke brought to Rome and kept in a safe place
until their correctness could be verified. This done, the Duke could
go whithersoever he wished. All seemed satisfied. The 29th Valentino
was brought back to Rome and lodged in the chambers of the Cardinal
of Salerno. “The Pope says that when he has secured possession of the
strongholds he will permit him to depart--but God knows what will
become of him,” adds the orator.

The 1st of December news reached Rome that Michelotto had been captured
and all his men slain or dispersed by Giampaolo Baglioni somewhere
between Perugia and Florence. This was a crushing blow to Caesar,
who now had little hope left--he was “no longer considered of much
importance.”

At this time the Cardinal of Rouen was making preparations to leave
Rome for the Court of the Emperor at Florence, and Caesar desired
to go with him, but to this the cardinal would not consent. Before
Amboise set out the Pope commanded Valentino to send one of his
officers, Pedro de Oviedo, accompanied by a prelate, to obtain the
surrender of the places his supporters were still holding in Romagna,
but before consenting Caesar asked Amboise to give him a guarantee
in writing that the Pope would keep the promises he had made to him
before the conclave. Amboise, however, refused to do this, and after
the Cardinal’s departure the Duke, finding his last support taken from
him, acceded to the Pope’s demands. The commandant of Caesar, however,
thinking or pretending to think there was treachery, seized the
unfortunate Oviedo and hanged him from the battlements forthwith as a
traitor to his sovereign.

When he learned of this the Pope was beside himself--in fact, as Carlo
da Moncalieri expressed it, he was “mad as the devil”--_alterato come
il diavolo_--and threatened to put Caesar in prison for life. Believing
that he had found some way to tell the commandant to disregard the
order he had given, the Pope had Valentino confined in the Borgia
Tower. He nevertheless continued to treat with him, and again allowed
him to go to Ostia, this time in charge of the Spanish Cardinal
Carvajal, with the understanding that he was to be given his liberty
when his officers surrendered the strongholds in Romagna.

Giustinian records the hanging of Oviedo December 20th and Caesar’s
transfer to the Borgia Tower, and adds: “Terrified by recent
events, the Cardinal of Sorento and Cardinal Borgia have left the
city--possibly to go to the Spanish camp. It is believed by many
that their flight was due to Valentino’s affairs or because they
had acquiesced in the poisoning of Cardinal Sant Angelo.” When the
Cardinals Francesco Romolino and Francesco Borgia fled to Naples with
the little Dukes to ask Gonsalvo of Cordova for protection Vannozza
and the Borgia ilk were trying to save their plunder. Much of it was
intercepted and seized when they endeavoured to send it from the
city to a place of safety. Some of the wagons dispatched from Rome
to Ferrara in the name of the Cardinal d’Este were stopped by the
Florentines, while others from Cesena were captured by Giovanni
Bentivoglio.

Caesar was wellnigh ruined when an event occurred which immediately
restored the waning influence of the Spanish cardinals with the Pope,
who was a French sympathiser, and this was the victory of Gonsalvo de
Cordova at the Garigliano, December 31st, which finally assured the
Regno to the Spanish crown.

For some time Valentino was partly forgotten, but he was still in the
Vatican as late as January 15, 1504, and was planning to go to Ferrara,
although Alfonso d’Este was by no means anxious to have him. Just what
was to be done with him was a puzzling question. It was finally decided
to send him to Civitavecchia in the custody of the Cardinal of Santa
Croce, and the Pope told the Venetian orator that he wished to make
one more attempt to reach a settlement in order that he might be able
to justify himself in the eyes of the world for the steps he would be
compelled to take against Valentino if the latter failed to keep the
promises he had made to him.

January 18th, through the mediation of Don Diego de Mendoza, the
Spanish ambassador, it was arranged that Caesar should give the
countersigns of all the castles still remaining to him, and that he
himself should go to Ostia in the custody of the Cardinal of Santa
Croce and then, when the strongholds were surrendered, he should be
allowed to depart for France. There was some delay in carrying out
the agreement, due to recent events in Forli and Imola, but February
14, 1504, the Duke set out for Ostia, and in taking leave of him his
Holiness “caressed him and promised him his support.”

The Pope was suffering from the gout, which appears to have been
essentially a papal disease at that time, and had remained in bed the
greater part of the day. Valentino, accompanied by a few of his own
people and Francesco del Rio, the Pope’s treasurer, set out for Ostia
the same night. According to Giustinian, while there he was closely
guarded, and consequently greatly annoyed.

The commissioners, who had been furnished the new countersigns, had
in the meantime again gone to Romagna, but they did not succeed in
securing possession of the strongholds, for the warders of Cesena and
Bertinoro, distrusting the Pope’s promises, dispatched messengers to
Rome to tell him they would surrender the strongholds if he would
release the Duke, but in case he was not willing to set Valentino free
“they could not honourably relinquish the castles,” on hearing which
his Holiness fell into a violent passion and shouted at them: “You want
to brazen it out. Away with you! If you don’t give them up peaceably I
will make you. You wanted to surrender them to the Venetians, but they
would not have them!” And he drove the messengers from the room.

Mottino, who was to take Caesar to France on one of his galleys, had
been directed by the Holy Father not to leave port, even after the
strongholds had been surrendered to the Pope’s representatives, until
he received specific orders to do so.

The Cardinal of Santa Croce, however, when messengers brought the news
that Cesena and Bertinoro had been surrendered, did not wait for
definite orders from the Pope to set his prisoner free, but let him go
February 26th, after obtaining his written promise never to take part
in any war against the Holy Father or any of his kinsmen.

Caesar and two of his people took horse, and, following the coast, rode
to Naples, where he joined Gonsalvo de Cordova, from whom Cardinals
Borgia and Romolino had previously secured a safe-conduct for the Duke.
At Naples several of his family were awaiting him, among them his
brother Giuffre and his sister-in-law Sancia.

About the middle of April Giustinian informed his Government that the
affairs of Valentino, so far as the Pope was concerned, were settled,
and there were no further difficulties to be apprehended.

April 20th the Pope received a letter from Mottino informing him that
Caesar had left Ostia and was on his way to Naples. His Holiness was
much disturbed by this news and immediately sent a messenger to summon
the French ambassador. The Cardinal of Salerno informed the Venetian
orator that the Cardinal of Santa Croce, fearing that the Pope, even
after the strongholds had been surrendered, would on some pretext
refuse Valentino his liberty, had immediately set him free. The Pope
was greatly annoyed by Santa Croce’s action and charged him with breach
of faith. The orator adds: “Many are pleased by Caesar’s departure, but
others are greatly displeased. Opinions differ as to what Valentino
will do; some think he will cause the Pope trouble.” His Holiness
evidently had not intended Valentino should get away.

In a letter to the Cardinal of Salerno, received in Rome May 3rd,
Caesar said he had not yet had an opportunity to speak to the Spanish
commander; he also asked the cardinal to supply him with funds, which
the prelate promptly did.

When Baldassare di Scipione arrived in Rome from Naples he reported
that Gonsalvo had received Caesar in the most cordial manner and had
called on him, as all the other Spanish officers had done. Rome was
filled with rumours regarding the coming of Caesar by the favour of the
Spaniards to help the Pisans.

When the Roman barons in the Spanish army at the Garigliano learned
of the death of Piero de’ Medici they began to take a lively interest
in the affairs of Tuscany and decided to send forces there; while the
Florentines, disturbed by the military preparations about Siena, had
sent assistance to the Lord of Piombino, who felt his people were
opposed to him. Bartolomeo d’Alviano was to have had charge of the
forces which were to be dispatched to Tuscany, but Gonsalvo preferred
Caesar on account of the friends upon whom he could still count in
Piombino and Pisa. Early in May active preparations were well under
way. In Rome Baldassare di Scipione publicly stated that his lord
“would soon return and give his enemies cause to think of him.” The
Pisans sent an ambassador to Caesar and he dispatched Ranieri della
Sassetta with a considerable force to them. Giulio degli Alberini was
waiting in the harbour of Naples to transport the cannons and other
machines of war; everything was ready and the main body of troops was
to start in a few days, when, on the night of May 26th, as Valentino
was coming from a conference with the Spanish captains, he was arrested
by the castellan, Nugnio Campeio.

The Pope had sent a special envoy to Gonsalvo de Cordova to urge him
not to assist Valentino in any way; and there is no doubt whatever
that it was at the instigation of the Holy Father that the Duke was
finally again seized. The very night that Valentino was arrested the
Pope, thinking that the Duke’s treasurer, Alessandro di Franzo, who was
then in Rome, and had in his possession about 300,000 ducats, which he
was about to remove to Naples, might endeavour to leave, had guards
stationed at all the gates of the city and allowed no one to depart.
All the following day the gates were kept closed and watched by the
papal troops. During the night the Governor of Rome had patrols about
the city and all suspected persons were arrested and examined. Even the
house of Madonna Vannozza, Caesar’s mother, was carefully searched.

May 29th Giustinian states that, accompanied by Cardinal Grimani, he
went to the Castle of St. Angelo to see the Pope, who informed them
that the Bishop of Cervia had shown him letters from the Great Captain,
saying that Valentino, having in mind certain undertakings which would
be harmful to Italy, had, by his orders, been confined in the castle,
and also requesting that his Holiness be informed of the fact.

[Illustration: CONSALVO DI CORDOVA

GONSALVO DE CORDOVA.

_From an early engraving._

            To face p. 280.]

Opinions differed as to the responsibility for Caesar’s arrest; some
said the Pope caused it, others the Spanish monarch, and still others
that Gonsalvo do Cordova took the step on his own initiative. Some even
ascribed the affair to the Queen of Spain and Doña Maria Enriquez,
widow of Giovanni, Duke of Gandia. The Pope made no effort to conceal
his pleasure at the arrest and displayed marked evidence of his
favour to the Spanish ambassador, assuring him of his devotion to his
sovereign--“it was judged,” adds the orator, “to induce him to compass
the death of the said Valentino!”

His brother, the Prince of Squillace, was also arrested about the
same time but almost immediately set at liberty. Caesar’s messengers
were likewise seized when they chanced to come within reach of the
determined Julius.

Michelotto, who was closely confined in the Torre di Nona awaiting
trial, was subjected to searching examinations regarding the deaths of
numerous persons, principal among whom were the Duke of Gandia; Giulio
Cesare Varano, Lord of Camerino, and his two sons, Piero and Venanzio,
who were captured when Camerino surrendered and later were strangled
by Valentino’s orders; the Lord of Faenza, Astorre Manfredi and his
illegitimate brother, Giovanni Evangelista; the Duke of Bisceglia,
Lucretia Borgia’s second husband; Bernardino Gaetani da Sermoneta,
slain by Caesar’s orders in 1500, about the same time that Alexander
caused the death in the Castle of St. Angelo of Giacomo Gaetani, the
head of the House, seizing their estates and conferring them on his
daughter Lucretia; and the Bishop of Cagli, who was hanged in the
public square for his brave resistance to Valentino’s lieutenants in
1503.

Caesar’s arrest so pleased his Holiness that he spoke of it as _un’
opera divina_--although it was brought about by himself.

August 20th Gonsalvo had Caesar taken to Spain by sea and by a
refinement of cruelty his jailer on the trip was his bitterest enemy,
Prospero Colonna.

Valentino was destined never again to see the peninsula, and it is no
exaggeration to say that all Italy breathed easier when it became known
that he was a prisoner on board a galley bound for Spain.

The faithful Baldassare di Scipione, inspired by love for his
imprisoned lord, issued a challenge addressed to “any Spaniard who
might dare to maintain: That the Duke Valentino had not been made a
prisoner in Naples in violation of the safe-conduct of King Ferdinand
and Queen Isabella, and owing to their utter want of faith, and all to
their eternal infamy and everlasting shame”--and the challenge was
exposed in public places throughout Christendom, and never a Spaniard
dared reply.

For a long time Romagna suffered for want of a strong governing hand;
the country was being ruined by rival factions, the cities were
deserted, and many there were who regretted the overthrow of Valentino.

With Caesar’s removal to Spain his influence in the affairs of Italy
became negligible. In fact, since that time the Borgia family has been
inconspicuous in the history of the peninsula.

About this time an event occurred in the Vatican which was duly
chronicled by Burchard--the betrothal of Niccolò della Rovere and
Donna Laura, the illegitimate daughter of Alexander VI. by Giulia
Farnese. Gregorovius remarks that the consent of Julius II. to the
union of his nephew with his enemy’s natural daughter is one of the
most extraordinary facts in the personal history of this Pope. It looks
like a pledge of reconciliation with the Borgia. While these men were
his opponents Julius had hated them, but his hostility was not based
on any moral grounds. He had never felt any contempt for Alexander or
Caesar, but on the contrary, like Machiavelli, he had admired their
power and ability. They were his enemies because they tried to crush
him and frustrate his ambitions, and he retaliated.

July 10th the Pope informed the Venetian orator that Gonsalvo had
proposed to aid Caesar with men and cannon in his undertaking against
the Lord of Piombino on account of the latter’s opposition to the
Spaniards, but that, dissatisfied with this, Valentino had endeavoured
to disarrange the Great Captain’s plans, and had engaged in his
customary scheming--this was the cause of his arrest--and “God had so
ordained it on account of his misdeeds--inducing others to do what we
were unwilling to do.”

Ten days later his Holiness informed the Venetian ambassador that
Caesar had been sent to Spain carefully guarded and with a single
servant. He added that certain cardinals had urged him to write a
letter to his Catholic Majesty in Caesar’s behalf and that he had
promised to do so, but he feared even if he merely recommended
protection for Caesar’s life and person, his letter would be
misconstrued and the King would show him greater favour than he had
intended, and might even undertake to recover for him a part, if not
all, of his estates, which would be dangerous to himself; he therefore
had revoked the order to write the brief, and “I assured his Holiness
that he was most prudent and circumspect--and with this I took my
leave.”

Caesar reached Valentia about the end of September and thence he was
immediately transferred to Chinchilla, which is about two leagues from
the town of Albacete in the province of the same name.

Little is known of his sojourn here, but a document now in the archives
of Pau shows that he was still there as late as May 4, 1505, eight
months after his arrival in Spain.

Abandoned by every one, Caesar endeavoured to secure the dowry of
100,000 livres which had been promised by Louis XII. on the occasion of
his marriage with Charlotte d’Albret.

In October letters came from Spain describing the rigour with which
Valentino was held prisoner. It was even said that at the instigation
of Doña Maria Enriquez he was to be tried there for the murder of
her husband, the Duke of Gandia, and for that of his brother-in-law,
Alfonso of Bisceglia, with the intention of putting him to death
for his crimes. Early in 1505 news reached Italy that Valentino’s
brother-in-law, Jean d’Albret, King of Navarre, was endeavouring to
secure his release. The cardinals who were still loyal to him believed
D’Albret would succeed, Caesar’s most determined enemy, the Queen of
Spain, having died.

It is recorded that while he was confined in the castle of Chinchilla
Caesar attempted to kill the warder, Gabriel Guzman. One day Valentino,
who was lodged in the high tower, asked for an interview with Don
Gabriel, and while they were engaged in conversation the Duke suddenly
seized his gaoler and attempted to hurl him from the window. The
governor, however, who was more than a match for Caesar in strength,
succeeded in throwing him to the floor; whereupon, with the effrontery
which never deserted him, the Duke laughed and explained that he had
heard that the warder was a man of colossal strength and he wanted to
test it for himself, and he had found the stories were not exaggerated.

This curious episode undoubtedly was the cause of Caesar’s removal to
the more secure fortress of Medina del Campo, in the northern part of
Spain, which was both a stronghold and a palace and had been used as a
royal residence.

It was about this time that Lucretia Borgia began to exert herself to
obtain her brother’s freedom--efforts which have been taken as proof
of her affection and devotion to him. Requesenz, Caesar’s majordomo,
interceded for his release with the King of Spain, who informed him
that while he was not responsible for Valentino’s arrest, he would,
owing to Gonsalvo’s representations, hold him prisoner, but that,
should the charges made against him prove false, he would accede to the
cardinals’ wishes.

Events conspired to aid the prisoner. Isabella the Catholic,
anticipating that her daughter, Jeanne la Folle, wife of Philippe le
Beau, would never recover her reason, decided to make her husband
Ferdinand regent of Castile on her death. Ferdinand was surrounded by
enemies, and in the kingdom of Naples even the loyalty of Gonsalvo
de Cordova was suspected. Louis XII., in spite of his defeat at the
Garigliano, still maintained his right to the Regno, while the Emperor
Maximilian, whose son Philippe le Beau, husband of Jeanne la Folle,
had been excluded from the regency by Isabella’s will, feeling himself
aggrieved, determined to demand his son’s rights. At this juncture
Ferdinand suggested to Louis XII. that they discontinue their struggle
for Naples, and that, as evidence of good faith, the French King bestow
upon him the hand of his niece, Germaine de Foix, who was then eighteen
years of age, while the King of Spain was fifty-four. As dowry she
would bring her husband half of the Kingdom of Naples which had been
granted the King of France by the treaty of Granada. In addition Louis
was to aid Ferdinand to recover Navarre--which on his death was to be
returned to the crown of France--for Gaston de Foix, brother of the
betrothed and nephew of Louis XII. The treaty of alliance was signed at
Blois, October 12, 1505, and the marriage was performed March 18, 1506,
at Dueñas.

At the same time the Cortes confirmed Ferdinand in the possession of
Castile, disregarding the fact that Isabella had willed it to him only
on condition that he did not marry again. Some of the most powerful
members of the Court refused their consent and declared themselves
in favour of Jeanne and her husband, Philippe le Beau. They elected
the Count of Benavente their leader. The others ranging themselves on
Ferdinand’s side, under Don Fabrique de Toledo, Duke of Alva, civil war
broke out. At first the King’s party was successful, whereupon the
Emperor Maximilian entered into the conflict, and his son, Philippe le
Beau, hastened from Flanders and demanded the regency.

The help which the Count of Benavente later gave Caesar and the
relations of the latter with Maximilian’s ambassadors show that in
prison the Duke was on the side of Philippe, who, as soon as he came to
Spain, established himself at Medina del Campo.

In October, 1505, Ferdinand, who had already recalled Gonsalvo de
Cordova from Naples and decided to supplant him with his own son
Alfonso of Aragon, Archbishop of Saragossa, determined, owing to his
lieutenant’s uncertain attitude, to go to Naples himself. The ten days
Gonsalvo had asked to put the defences in order and arrange his affairs
had elapsed and the King’s suspicions were strengthened. It was then
that he conceived the idea of using Caesar to crush Gonsalvo. Thereupon
he dispatched Don Pedro de Ayala to Philippe le Beau at Medina del
Campo to demand his prisoner, saying that he intended to confine him in
the Castle of Ejerica until he was ready to go to Naples, when he would
take him with him to command his troops.

Fate apparently was about to afford Caesar an exquisite revenge; he
was to lead a Spanish army against the man who had deceived him and
delivered him into the hands of the Catholic monarch. Philippe le
Beau, however, had his own plans regarding Caesar, and while Ferdinand
desired to avail himself of his services against Gonsalvo and Julius
II., Maximilian’s son conceived the idea of using him against the
Catholic sovereign himself in case he persisted in claiming the
regency. From these circumstances it is clear that Caesar’s ability and
energy as a military leader were universally recognised.

To lend greater authority to his refusal to surrender Caesar, Philippe
le Beau stated that he would first have to refer the matter to the
Council of Castile to determine whether the Duke was the prisoner of
the King or of Queen Jeanne. In apprehending him in Naples Gonsalvo
indubitably was acting in the interests of the kingdom of which
Philippe was Regent for his wife, the legitimate heir. Moreover, the
Duke would have to be held a prisoner until the suit instituted by the
Duchess of Gandia was decided. Ferdinand did not give up the fight
when informed of the Council’s decision, but requested Don Bernardino
de Cardenas, Governor of the province of Grenada, to whose care he had
committed Caesar, to surrender his prisoner. Cardenas was disposed to
obey, but asked permission of the Regent, who absolutely refused to
allow Caesar to be given up. The Governor then explained to the King
that even if he freed Valentino, Philippe would at once seize him again
as he did not have a sufficient force to oppose the Regent.

Ferdinand set sail for Naples September 4, 1506, accompanied by his
young Queen, and having with him the flower of his army. About a month
later, October 5th, his son-in-law Philippe, the Regent of Castile,
suddenly died. The Regent was then only twenty-eight years of age,
and he was so strong and active that it was believed that he had been
poisoned. His widow had still sufficient sense left to ask her father
to return to Spain, and to her supplications were added those of his
subjects, who feared the kingdom might become a prey to the contending
factions. Ferdinand, however, was making good progress in Naples and
was anxious to complete his work; he therefore refused to come, and
Jeanne acted as Regent during his absence.

The death of Philippe had left Caesar’s guardian, Don Bernardino de
Cardenas, in a peculiar position; he had directly disobeyed Ferdinand’s
orders, and now, to save himself from the King’s wrath, he proposed
to Luis Ferrer, the Catholic monarch’s ambassador, to send Caesar to
him in order that he might be transferred to Aragon. Ferrer, cognisant
of the machinations which had been carried on by Philippe le Beau and
Maximilian with Caesar in prison, promptly accepted the offer in the
name of his sovereign, but asked Cardenas to keep his prisoner until he
could ascertain Ferdinand’s wishes regarding him. The Spanish monarch,
however, was still in Naples, and Caesar, informed by Don Bernardino
of what he had done, and unwilling to trust himself to him, succeeded
in making his escape, October 25, 1506. He arrived at the Court of his
brother-in-law Jean d’Albret December 3, 1506, suddenly--“like the
devil,” as the chronicler Moret says.

The news of his escape caused consternation in Italy; Julius II. could
never rest as long as Valentino was at large; the Venetians feared him,
and the King of France immediately took steps to defend himself against
his machinations. Caesar’s friends in Romagna, however, immediately
recovered hope.

The Castle of Medina del Campo was the largest in Spain, and for any
one to escape from its gloomy walls had been deemed impossible. Erected
about the middle of the fifteenth century, in 1460 it fell into the
hands of Fonseca, Archbishop of Seville, who on his death left it to a
cousin. In 1473 it was seized by the first Duke of Alva.

The Count of Benavente undoubtedly aided Caesar to escape. Valentino
had been furnished a chaplain, and this man probably was the one who
acted as his agent in dealing with the outer world and also the person
who furnished the rope by means of which Valentino descended from the
tower. One of the servants tried the rope first; it was found to be too
short, and the unfortunate man fell into the moat, breaking some of
his bones; he was left where he fell and later was apprehended, tried,
and put to death. Caesar had almost reached the end of the rope when,
the alarm having been given, it was cut, and he also dropped into the
moat. He was injured and had to be carried to the horse which was held
in waiting for him by his confederates. Putting spurs to their animals,
they never stopped until they reached the little town of Pozaldez;
thence they travelled to Villalon, the seat of the Count of Benavente.
Caesar was now safe. He had escaped from prison, October 25th, and not
until five weeks later did he reach the Court of his brother-in-law at
Pamplona; it had taken nearly all this time for him to recover from his
injuries and regain his strength; but he had also had time to renew his
machinations with the Emperor Maximilian’s ambassadors.

The records of the investigation which followed his escape are
preserved in the archives of Simancas and are exceedingly voluminous.
The order for his apprehension, which was issued in the name of Queen
Jeanne, reads as follows: “Sixteenth December 1506. Commission and
order is given by the Queen [titles] to you, Christoval Vasquez de
Acuña, and to our alcaldes and to all of those to whom this royal
letter shall be shown. You are informed that the Duke of Valentinois,
being a prisoner by my order in the castle of Medina del Campo, the
said Duke has escaped, and I advise you that I have been informed
that he went to the city of Santander; that there were two persons
mounted on horseback and that they left their horses in the town of
Castres with the son of Pedro Gonzales Calderon. Thence they went to
Santander where it is said the Duke was apprehended by an alcalde of
the said town, but that the latter released him on receiving presents
from him; once free he looked for some one to conduct him safe and
sound to Castro-Urdiales to take ship from there. I require that the
Duke be searched for with all possible diligence; that careful inquiry
be made regarding the persons who left the said horses in the town of
Castres; whither they went and where they now are; whether the said
alcalde actually had the Duke in his hands and who these persons were.
If these persons embarked, from what port, on what vessel, and their
destination. In a word I wish you to inform us of everything relevant;
and you will seize the person of the said Duke wherever you may find
him, be this in a church or a monastery, or any other place, however
privileged it may be, and even beyond your jurisdiction, and that,
this done, you keep him in your sight with a strong guard until you
shall have received further orders. For this purpose I send you the
said letter and direct you to begin a searching investigation wherever
and among all persons who may be able to give you any information
regarding this matter; and that you procure all information concerning
the said Duke, and that they give you the means of apprehending him,
and that the sum that you promise them on my account for this purpose,
be paid them in the manner agreed upon. And if any of them conceal him,
cause them to understand that they incur the risk of death and that all
their goods will be confiscated. And if you learn that the persons who
left their horses in the said town of Castres were unknown, they must
nevertheless be held until it is ascertained what they were doing, why
and whither they were travelling.

“To carry out my instructions I give you absolute power with all
the warrants, writs and authority necessary; and if any one in any
way interferes with you he will be liable to a fine of ten thousand
maravedis to be paid into my treasury.

“Given in our city of Burgos, 14 December 1506.--Signed JEANNE.”

       *       *       *       *       *

After leaving Villalon Caesar’s destination was Pamplona, but instead
of going there directly he travelled due north to the Atlantic coast,
probably for the purpose of throwing his pursuers off the track. At
Santander he took a boat. He had two guides, Martin de la Borda, of
Los Passages, near San Sebastian, and Miguel de la Torre. All three
were mounted on horses furnished by the Count of Benavente. The
travellers passed for grain dealers; they stated they had come from
Medina del Campo, where certain moneys had been owing them, which they
had placed in a bank, and that they were now on their way to Santander,
where they expected a boat laden with wheat from France. At Santander
they learned that the vessel had stopped at Bernico, and in order that
they might not suffer by a decline in price they had to embark again
immediately for this port; thus they explained their haste.

When they reached the outskirts of Castres, November 29th, Caesar’s
horse and that of Martin de la Borda could go no farther, and the
travellers entered the town on foot. At Castres they put up at the inn
of one Ruyz Guttierez. Here Valentino found a vessel-owner with whom
he made arrangements to be taken by sea to the port nearest the border
of Navarre. The witnesses examined twenty-one days after these events
even named the dishes the travellers had for luncheon--“three chickens
and a large piece of meat.” Scarcely had they seated themselves at
the table when the arrival was announced of the lieutenant of the
corregidor, who had been informed of the coming of the mysterious
strangers who had no sooner entered the town than they hurried to
Francesco Gonzales de Santiago, a vessel-owner, and offered him an
extravagant price to take them by sea to Castro-Urdiales.

The official was accompanied by a notary and an alguazil, and they
questioned the three travellers, who told a plausible story, and were
allowed to go their ways.

Mary Gonzales de Pertillon, one of the servants about the inn,
testified that one of the travellers had spoken little; that he
was wrapped in his cloak; that he was a man of medium height,
somewhat heavy, his nostrils wide open, his eyes large, and that his
hand--doubtless injured--was bound up in a piece of linen.

Owing to the high sea the travellers were unable to set sail before
sunrise, but they finally reached Castro-Urdiales, where, being unable
to procure horses, they were compelled to remain two days. At last they
obtained some mules and continued their journey, and some time between
December 1st and 3rd they reached Pamplona. The investigation disclosed
every move made by Caesar and his companions from the time they left
Castres until they reached the Court of Navarre.

Valentino, informing his friends in Italy of his escape, stated that he
had arrived at Pamplona December 3, 1506.

When the Council of Castile received the Queen’s order to institute an
investigation, Caesar was entirely safe; in fact, he had been at the
Court of his brother-in-law nearly two weeks. His two guides, however,
Martin de la Borda and Miguel de la Torre, were apprehended. It was
probably the news of Caesar’s arrival at Pamplona that caused the
investigation to be instituted, although of course his escape was known
at once. All along his route witnesses were found, and great was the
astonishment when it was learned that the mysterious traveller was a
prisoner of state, for whose apprehension a reward of ten thousand gold
ducats was offered, and the strangest thing of all was the fact that
the corregidor of Santander had actually had his hands on Caesar, had
questioned him, and finally had set him free. He evidently had promptly
reported the circumstances, but when he was informed who the strangers
were the worthy official was dismayed, and he immediately indited the
following frank letter to the Queen:--

  “MOST POWERFUL LADY,--Don Pedro de Mendoza, your corregidor for
  the four towns on the sea-coast, kisses your Majesty’s hand,
  being informed by a royal rescript that she requires me to
  explain how one of the alcaldes in my jurisdiction could have
  apprehended and then set at liberty the Duke of Valentino....
  Your Majesty already knows everything connected with the arrest
  of the said Duke from a previous report of mine, and from
  the investigation conducted by the corregidor of the town of
  Bilboa and county of Biscay, regarding this subject. I send no
  further information, having given all the particulars furnished
  by trustworthy witnesses regarding the persons who conducted
  the Duke to the place of embarkation. Your Majesty may be sure
  that, if at the time I had the Duke in my power, I or any of my
  alcaldes, had known of his escape, even had he untold wealth
  to give us, it would never have entered my head to do anything
  contrary to faithful service to your Majesty, and least of all to
  set the Duke at liberty, knowing or even suspecting that it was
  he whom I had in my hands. At the time I had him in my power,
  I did not know he had escaped--in fine, I did not so much as
  remember that such a person existed.

            “DON PEDRO DE MENDOZA.”




CHAPTER XII

  Caesar arrives at the Court of his brother-in-law, the King of
      Navarre--D’Albret’s danger--The Agramont and Beaumont factions--
      Beaumont holds Viana--War is declared between D’Albret and
      Beaumont--Caesar is appointed commander of the troops of the King
      of Navarre--Viana--The chronicler Moret--Caesar is killed--The
      body is buried in Santa Maria de Viana--His epitaph--Removal
      of the body and destruction of the tomb--The news of Caesar’s
      death reaches Italy--The feeling in the peninsula--Caesar’s
      wife, Charlotte d’Albret, and their descendants--His illegitimate
      children--Death of Caesar’s mother Vannozza de’ Catanei--
      Conclusion.


The last of December, 1506, Caesar’s secretary, Don Federico, arrived
in Italy with letters from his master announcing his escape. Of these
letters, dated December 7, 1506, one was to the Marquis of Mantua,
and another to the Cardinal of Este. The former, owing to political
reasons, had always been friendly to Valentino; moreover, his wife
Isabella was a sister of Alfonso d’Este, Caesar’s brother-in-law. The
seal on the letters has the lilies of France and the Borgia arms, with
the inscription, “Caesar Borgia de France, Duke of Romagna.”

On arriving in Italy Don Federico immediately went to Ferrara, where
he appeared December 28th to impart the good news to Lucretia. Two
weeks after leaving Ferrara, Federico was arrested at Bologna by order
of Julius II., and Lucretia wrote the Marquis of Mantua, who was in
the Pope’s service, and who had just administered a crushing defeat
to Bentivoglio, and annexed his domain to the States of the Church,
telling him that the messenger had merely come to bring her news of her
brother, and not to attempt anything contrary to the Pope’s interests
or wishes.

It was suspected that Federico had been sent to feel the pulse of the
country, and to ascertain whether the Romagnols were still loyal to
Valentino.

If Caesar in prison was a source of uneasiness to the Holy Father, how
much more to be feared was he now, at liberty in Navarre, protected by
the Emperor Maximilian, and likely to appear in Italy any time, rally
his supporters--of whom he still had many--about him, and endeavour
to recover Romagna, where his rule was preferred to that of the Pope!
It was, therefore, the part of wisdom to nip his plans in the bud;
consequently Don Federico was seized.

The Court of Navarre was impoverished and could not be of much help to
Caesar, the larger part of whose fortune consisted of deposits with
the bankers of Genoa; these funds, however, had been attached by his
Holiness. Caesar now remembered that he was a French prince, Duke of
Valentinois, and entitled to the revenues of the duchy, in addition
to those of the county of Diois--not to mention those of the salt
magazines of Issoudun, all assured to him by formal contract at the
time of his marriage to Charlotte d’Albret. Besides, there was the
dowry of 100,000 livres promised by Louis XII. and guaranteed by the
royal treasurers, not a sou of which had he ever received, although it
was to have been paid in November, 1500.

Caesar therefore sent his majordomo Requesenz to France to press his
claim before Louis XII., and ask permission to come and take his place
at Court and serve his Majesty.

In January, 1507, the French King was at Burgos, and there Requesenz
presented himself. Louis not only refused to grant any of Caesar’s
demands, but, February 18th, by letters patent, formally declared the
Duke deprived of the revenues and lordship of Issoudun. From this
document it is clear that Louis wanted to punish Caesar for threatening
Florence, which he regarded as treachery; for his attack on Pisa, which
was under the protection of France; and also for his attempts to expel
the King’s ally, Giovanni Bentivoglio, from Bologna.

Caesar was now thirty-one years of age, and his one desire was to
avenge himself on his enemies, Julius II., who had deprived him of his
estates; on the King of Spain, who had treacherously imprisoned him;
and on Louis XII., who had taken all his privileges from him, and who
had even withheld the marriage portion. Louis had used the Borgia in
securing Milan and Naples, and he had obtained Bretagne thanks to the
dispensation of Caesar’s father permitting his marriage with Anne.

When Caesar found refuge at the Court of Navarre, his brother-in-law
Jean d’Albret was in sore straits. On one side he was threatened by
Ferdinand, the Catholic, who had always regarded Navarre as his
prey, and on the other he was imperilled by the contentions of two
factions, one headed by the Count of Agramont, the other by Luis de
Beaumont, Count of Lerin. Louis XII. was doing all he could to foment
the discord, and at this juncture D’Albret’s brother-in-law, Caesar,
suggested that the King ask aid of the Emperor Maximilian, and offer
him free passage through Navarre to Castile and Aragon. This suggestion
immediately approved itself to Jean d’Albret. Caesar, of course,
expected to be made commander of the forces of Navarre, and he at
once set about putting the castles and strongholds of the kingdom in
condition for defence, and enlisting such forces as Navarre could equip
and maintain.

The first thing for Jean d’Albret to do was to put an end to the
discord among his own subjects. Luis de Beaumont was then in possession
of the castle of Viana, and he refused to surrender it on the King’s
demand. His rebellion was of long standing. Luis had inherited his
father’s affection for Castile, and in 1495 he had entered into an
agreement with Ferdinand, the Catholic, by which he relinquished his
estates in Navarre, and received in exchange for them equivalent
domains in Castile. Thus he became a vassal of the Spanish monarch,
and at the same time the latter secured a foothold in the kingdom of
Navarre. The convention was duly ratified, but owing to the difficulty
which was encountered in adjusting the exchange of estates it was soon
abrogated.

Don Juan de Ribera, Captain-General of the Catholic Monarch, had taken
charge of the domain hitherto in the possession of Beaumont, whose
departure from Navarre had brought peace to the kingdom. Jean d’Albret
of course was incensed by the occupation of a part of his territory by
a representative of the King of Spain. He therefore went to Seville to
endeavour to reach an understanding with Ferdinand; this he succeeded
in doing, and the convention included a pardon for his rebellious
count, to whom was also restored the office of constable and warder
of the castle of Viana, while Don Juan de Ribera, Captain-General of
Castile, returned to him all the estates he had conveyed to their
Catholic Majesties. Luis de Beaumont was, however, a turbulent soul;
his tomb in the monastery of Veruela bears the inscription: _En un
cuerpo tan pequeno nunca se vi tanta fuerza_--Never before in body so
small was there such strength.

Ever since 1505 he had regarded himself as the rightful owner of the
castles, which he was merely holding for his sovereign, and, forgetful
of D’Albret’s generosity, he refused to submit to him, and also
continued to make inroads on his neighbours’ domains and appropriate
their lands. He was endeavouring to build up a power to oppose the
throne of Navarre and had established himself as a conqueror in the
castle of Viana. While Jean d’Albret and Caesar were putting the
strongholds of the country in fighting condition, the King sent an
officer to Beaumont to demand the surrender of the place. Luis had the
envoy seized, whipped, and confined in the castle of Larraga. Incensed
when he was informed of this, and remembering how he had forgiven the
count, the King sent to him three times and commanded him to appear;
on his failure to do so he charged him with _lese-majeste_, declared
all his goods confiscate, his titles, honours, and offices forfeit, and
himself condemned to death.

Supported by Don Alonzo Carilli de Peralta, Count of San Sebastian, who
was also on the side of Castile, Luis prepared to take the field.

War was declared between the King and his rebellious vassal, and
Caesar, having been appointed Captain-General of the royal troops,
set out February 11, 1507, to invest Larraga, whose defence had been
entrusted by Beaumont to Ogier de Verastegui. Caesar attacked with
great determination, but the place resisted bravely. Trusting to his
lieutenants to cut off all means of communication, Valentino decided to
go and attack Beaumont at his camp near Mendavia, adjacent to the small
town of Viana, on the road to Logroño.

At Viana, near the frontier of Castile, D’Albret would be in an
excellent position to receive reinforcements from the Count of
Benavente, the Duke of Najera, and Maximilian’s partisans, who were
anxious to begin a struggle which would open Castile to the son of
Philippe le Beau.

Caesar’s force consisted of a thousand cavalry, more than two
hundred lances, an escort of thirty men-at-arms, and five hundred
foot-soldiers, with some siege guns and a few field-pieces. It was his
intention to invest Viana, and then seek the Count, who had entrusted
the defence of the town to his son Luis, and who had himself taken up a
position near Mendavia.

Viana, being poorly supplied with provisions when the troops of Navarre
appeared under her walls, was in no condition to resist a long siege.
The Count of Lerin, aware of this, determined to re-victual the place;
the undertaking was difficult and would have to be carried out, if at
all, by night, for the Navarrais had entirely surrounded the town. The
plan was favoured by a terrific storm which occurred during the night
of March 11th, when Beaumont set out from Mendavia with two hundred
lances and six hundred foot-soldiers, some of whom were armed with
blunderbusses, to cover the line of his convoy, which consisted of
sixty horses laden with flour. Profiting by the darkness, he advanced
up to the very walls of the castle of Viana with a small force, having
concealed the greater part of his men in a ravine near the town, so
that they might be brought up quickly if needed. Everything was in
his favour--the darkness, the storm, the relaxed vigilance of the
besiegers, and he succeeded in getting his convoy into the stronghold
by a secret gateway. Elated by his good fortune, Beaumont twice
repeated the operation, and with equal success. He might have returned
to his camp without being detected, but he decided to take advantage of
the opportunity and reconnoitre, and, if possible, inflict some loss on
the enemy.

As he was manœuvering his troop they were discovered by a considerable
body of soldiers coming down the road leading to Logroño who, they
thought, were reinforcements sent by the Duke of Najera. At sight of
Beaumont’s men a shout went up. The alarm was given in the besiegers’
quarters surrounding the castle. Instantly all was confusion. Caesar
hastily donned his armour, sprang to his horse, and without waiting to
give any orders dashed out of the gate and down the Solana road.

“When I was a boy,” says the chronicler Moret, “I heard old men eighty
years of age, who had it from contemporaries who saw him, say that just
as he dashed through the gate, cursing and swearing, his horse stumbled
and fell.” Believing that his men were at his heels, the Borgia spurred
straight on toward the rebels, and, coming up to the rearguard, with
his own hand he slew three of the enemy; oblivious of the fact that he
was alone, he spurred on, cursing the rebels the while. Suddenly he was
discovered by Beaumont, who ordered some of his men to advance to meet
him.

Among those who did so were Luis Garcia de Agredo and Pedro de
Allo, who succeeded in drawing him on into a deep ravine, where his
followers, who were far behind, were unable to see him. There, hidden
from the sight of his own people and also from that of Beaumont’s men,
he engaged in a terrible hand-to-hand fight with his adversaries.

Valentino fought for his life, but, wounded in the armpit just as he
was about to deliver a blow, he was unhorsed, and finally, covered with
wounds, was forced to the ground and killed.

His brilliant armour having attracted the attention of his assailants,
they removed it. Entirely unaware who their victim was, they even took
his weapons and his charger and its accoutrements.

Fearing they might be surprised, they hastily departed, leaving the
body naked on the field of battle. When the Count of Lerin saw the
costly armour he was incensed because, instead of taking him alive,
they had killed a man evidently of high rank, and he ordered some of
his followers to fetch the body to his camp at Mendavia. They started
for the ravine, but turned back when they heard the shouts of the men
of Navarre who, in the early dawn, were searching for the body of their
dead chieftain.

Before retreating, however, Beaumont’s men succeeded in capturing an
unfortunate equerry whom they had found in manifest grief wandering
about the scene of the conflict. Taken to Beaumont, he was shown the
brilliant armour and asked to whom it belonged, and “Juanico burst into
tears, exclaiming that he had girded it on his master, Caesar Borgia of
France, Duke of Romagna, that very morning, and that he had followed
him when he dashed through the gate, but had lost him from sight owing
to the swiftness of the Duke’s horse.”

In the meantime the King of Navarre was advancing. After the first
surprise his forces rallied and deployed before the hill upon which
Viana is situated. Beaumont, seeing he was in danger of being cut
off from Mendavia, retired with his men, leaving the unhappy squire,
who immediately hastened back to the ravine, where he was found by
D’Albret and his followers standing over the bleeding body of his
master. The King had the corpse taken to Viana, where it was placed in
a tomb before the great altar in the parochial church of Santa Maria
of Viana, and in the course of the same year--1507--a magnificent
monument was erected to Caesar’s memory, and upon it was chiselled the
following epitaph:--

 “Aqui yace en poca tierra
  Al que toda le temia;
  En que la paz y la guerra
  En la su mano tenia.
  Oh! tu que vas a buscar
  Cosas dignas de loar!
  Si tu loas lo mas digno,
  Aqui pare tu camino;
  No cures de mas andar.”

Early in the eighteenth century Father Aleson, then in Viana, found
nothing left of the monument but two stones which had been inserted in
the base of the main altar. In the “Antequedades de Navarra” Yanguez
Miranda says the destruction of the sepulchre was, according to oral
tradition, which he gathered from some of the inhabitants of Viana,
due to the order of a fanatical bishop who felt that the church was
desecrated by the presence of Caesar’s ashes.

The Church of Santa Maria de Viana underwent extensive repairs about
the end of the seventeenth century, and probably it was at that time
that the tomb was removed. Its destruction may have been connected with
an incident which occurred long before. In 1498 Pedro de Aranda, Bishop
of Calahorra and Superior of the diocese of Viana, was examined by
Alexander VI. on the charge of heresy and was condemned and imprisoned
in the Castle of St. Angelo, where he was held a long time. As a result
of his confinement the bishop died. It is highly probable that the
prelates of the diocese of Viana, which had been dishonoured in the
person of its bishop by the Borgia, continued to feel resentment toward
the family and that one of Pedro de Aranda’s successors revenged them
by removing Caesar’s remains from the church. What could have been
more natural than for the officiating priest to have desired to have
removed from his sight all reminders of the recalcitrant cardinal, the
degenerate son of Alexander VI. whose memory was already blasted by
history? This much is certain--a bishop did destroy the tomb.

Following Paul Jovius and Tomaso Tomasi, later historians have placed
Caesar’s burial at Pamplona; but Father Aleson, who continued Moret’s
“Annals of Navarre,” and who lived in Viana, says: “_Asi lo llevaron a
Viana, no a Pamplona, como algunos quisieron decir; y lo depositaron
en la yglesia parocchia de Santa Maria_”--Thus they took the body to
Viana, not to Pamplona as some say, and placed it in the parochial
church at Santa Maria. Then follows a description of the tomb and the
epitaph and the fact of the removal of the monument. In 1523, only
sixteen years after Valentino’s death, Antonio de Guevara, the Bishop
of Mondoñedo, described the tomb and copied the epitaph in his “Lettres
Morales.”

Tradition indicated that the final resting-place of Caesar’s remains
was just in front of the steps in the _Calle de la Rua_, leading to the
terrace upon which the Church of Santa Maria de Viana stands, and M.
Charles Yriarte induced the alcalde of the town, Don Victor Cereceda,
to make an excavation at the place. The investigation brought to light
a perfectly preserved skeleton--were these the mortal remains of the
son of Alexander VI.?

There was nothing to prove that they were; the bishop may have wished
to consign them to everlasting oblivion and so placed no mark upon the
tomb. With the skeleton were other bones, which may have been removed
from the church at the same time, when it was being restored.

Reports of Caesar’s death reached his sister--who in January, 1505,
had become Duchess of Ferrara--by way of Naples promptly, and she
dispatched one of her servants, a certain Tullio, to Navarre to
ascertain whether the rumour was true. As he progressed on his journey
he became convinced of the truth of the report, and therefore returned
to Ferrara without going to Navarre. The last doubt was dispelled when
Juanico Grasica, who had been present at Caesar’s funeral and who
had been sent by King Jean d’Albret to inform Lucretia of his death,
appeared in Ferrara. Alfonso was absent from his domain, and his
brother, Cardinal Ippolito d’Este was the first to receive the news,
which he immediately directed Jeronimo Magnanini, the Duke’s secretary,
to communicate to his master. This he did in a long letter giving full
particulars of Caesar’s death taken down from the lips of his faithful
squire Grasica. The details were confirmed by Costabili, who had just
come from Rome. Accounts of Valentino’s death are given by Zurita,
Moret, Esteban de Garribay, and Avalos de la Piscina, and all closely
agree with that of Grasica.

Lucretia’s grief was profound and apparently sincere, and many were
the prayers she directed to be said for the repose of Caesar’s soul.
Shortly afterwards her Court poet, Ercole Strozzi, dedicated his
“Epicedium,” a funeral oration in verse, in honour of Valentino, to
her, but Jacopo Sannazzaro, the mortal enemy of the Borgia, invited
his friends and all Italy to join him in making merry over “this happy
event.”

Caesar, deprived of the support of the Vatican, was merely a bold
condottiere, a soldier of fortune, and with these Italy teemed in his
day. He was ready to sell his services to the highest bidder, provided
he could advance his own projects. Although he was no longer in a
position to harm his enemies, all Italy breathed a sigh of relief when
the news of his death was confirmed; even Julius II., who was more than
a match for Caesar, felt easier, and henceforth he was able peaceably
to carry on the work of reconstructing the domain of the Church. Had
Valentino survived and entered the employ of Venice in her conflict
with the Pope for the possession of Romagna, or if he had taken the
side of France when his Holiness withdrew from the League of Cambray,
he might have recovered his former influence and power.

But all Italy now laughed at the adventurer who had inscribed on his
sword the words, _Aut Caesar, aut nihil_. Still, there were a few
individuals who remained faithful to his memory, and a number of poets
published panegyrics and bewailed the loss of the hero. Hieronimus
Portius, the Strozzi, Francesco Justolo, and Uberti saw fit to lament
him in more or less polished verse. One of the most famous of the
epitaphs was written by Jeronimo Casio of Bologna, who had known
Caesar:--

 “Cesar Borgia che ere della gente
  Per armi et per virtù tenuto un sole;
  Mancar dovendo, andó dove andar sole
  Phebo, verso la sera, a l’occidente.”

Leaving France immediately after his marriage with Charlotte d’Albret,
Caesar had never seen his wife again, and there is nothing to show that
he regretted her. She was merely a pawn in the political game, and she
had been sacrificed by her father for his own gain and to further the
plans of Louis XII., on whose marriage to Anne of Bretagne she had
retired to Berri to be as near as possible to Jeanne of France, his
repudiated Queen. It was not long, however, before she took up her
final residence at Motte-Feuilly, where she occupied herself with the
education of her daughter Louise, whom the father, Caesar, had never
seen. The Duchess of Valentinois died March 11, 1514, leaving, as her
sole heir, her daughter, who two years later, when she was seventeen
years of age, married Louis II. de La Trémoille, Viscount of Thouars
and Prince of Talmont, the Chevalier Bayard, the knight _sans peur et
sans reproche_, who was slain at the battle of Pavia in 1525. Five
years later she again married, her second husband being Philippe de
Bourbon, Lord of Busset, eldest son of Pierre de Bourbon.

Caesar also left an illegitimate son, Girolamo, whose mother is
unknown, and who probably died young, as we find no trace of him after
his removal to Naples about the time of Caesar’s release by Julius II.
He likewise had a natural daughter, whom he named Lucretia in honour of
his sister, and who subsequently became abbess of San Bernardino and
died at Ferrara in 1573.

Caesar’s mother, Vannozza de’ Catanei, survived him eleven years. Up
to the time of her death she had maintained close relations with her
numerous children. She lived in Rome and enjoyed a certain competency,
provided for her by Alexander VI.; she engaged actively in charitable
work. The day of her death, according to the Roman custom, the
announcement was made by the public crier:--

“Messer Paolo gives notice of the demise of Madonna Vannozza, mother
of the Duke of Gandia. The deceased belonged to the fraternity of the
Gonfalon.”

She left her entire fortune to S. Giovanni in Lateran. She was interred
in Santa Maria del Popolo, her parish church, and on her tomb her
executor inscribed the following epitaph:--

“To Vannozza Catanea, ennobled by her children, the Dukes, Caesar of
Valentinois, and Juan of Gandia, the Prince Giuffre of Squillace, and
the Duchess Lucretia of Ferrara. To the woman rendered illustrious
by her integrity, her piety, her wisdom, and to whom the Hospital of
the Lateran is so greatly indebted, Geronimo Pico, her testamentary
executor, has erected this monument. She lived seventy-seven years,
four months, and thirteen days, and died November 26, 1518.”

For two centuries the friars of Santa Maria del Popolo prayed for the
repose of her soul, but a sense of decency or shame finally asserted
itself, and the monument was removed.

Lucretia Borgia, Duchess of Ferrara, survived her brother Caesar twelve
years, dying in 1519, greatly beloved by her people. By her husband
Alfonso d’Este she had five children: Ercole II, who married Renée
of France; Ippolito, who passed away in 1572; Eleonora, who became
a nun and lived until 1575; Francesco, who survived until 1576; and
Alexander, who died in infancy. Ercole II., by his wife Renée, daughter
of Louis XII., had five children: Alfonso II. Cardinal Ludovico d’Este,
Donna Anna, Duchess of Guise, Lucretia, Duchess of Urbino, and Leonora,
who never married.

The Spanish chroniclers contemporary with Caesar Borgia discovered
the hand of God in his death, which occurred March 12, 1507, on the
anniversary of his premature elevation to the Bishopric of Pamplona and
in his own diocese, where he had never before set foot!


THE END.




FOOTNOTES


[1] Loria, “Economic Bases of Society,” London, n.d., p. 37.

[2] Lanzol, Llançol, Llanzol, &c.

[3] Gebhart, E., “Les Origins de la Renaissance en Italie,” Paris, 1879.

[4] Gebhart.

[5] The Roman day of twenty-four hours ended at sunset--about eight in
the evening in June.

[6] Infessura, “Diario,” Rome, 1890, p. 155.

[7] Medin, “Il Duca Valentino nella Mente di Machiavelli,” Florence,
1883.

[8] “Pii Secundi Comentarii,” Rome, 1583, Lib. 2.

[9] Burckhardt, “Renaissance in Italy,” London, 1892.

[10] Tomaso Tomasi, “Vita del Duca Valentino,” ed. by G. Leti,
Montechiaro, 1670.

[11] Yriarte, “César Borgia, sa Vie, sa Captivité, sa Mort,” Paris,
1889.

[12] Burchard, “Diarium,” ed. by Thuasne, vol. ii., p. 84.

[13] Villari, “Savonarola,” English translation, London, p. 742.

[14] Fumi, “Alessandro VI. e il Valentino in Orvieto,” Siena, 1874.

[15] Fumi, Appendix, Document VIII.

[16] Burchard, “Diarium,” ed. by Thuasne, Paris, 1884, vol. iii., p.
387.

[17] Machiavelli, “Opere,” Florence, 1820, vol. iii. “Discorsi,” Lib.
1, Chap. XXVII.

[18] Gaspare Torrella, “Tractatus Contra Pudendagra,” Rome, 1497.

[19] Pierre de Bourdeille, “Œuvres,” Paris, 1838, vol. i., p. 156,
“Caesar Borgia.”

[20] Yriarte, “César Borgia,” Paris, 1889.

[21] Jean d’Auton, “Chroniques,” Paris, 1834.

[22] Varsari, “Vite de’ più, Eccellenti Pittori, Scultori et
Architetti,” Bologna, 1647. “Vita di Pietro di Cosimo.”

[23] Auton, Jean d’, “Chroniques,” Paris, 1834, Pt. III., vii.

[24] Alvisi, “Cesare Borgia,” Document 40.

[25] Gregorovius, “Storia della Città di Roma,” Venice, 1875, Bk. 13,
Chap. V., sec. 4.

[26] Burchard’s statement is incorrect: the last named was spared, but
was assassinated August 28, 1504.

[27] Guillaume Brissonet of Tours, Bishop of San Malo, Cardinal of
Santa Prudenziana; Luigi d’Aragona, Cardinal-Deacon of the title of
Santa Maria in Cosmedin.




INDEX


  Æneas Sylvius, _see_ Pius II.

  Agapito, _see_ Gerardino, Agapito

  Agramont, Count of, 300

  Agrigentum, Bishop of, 101

  Alain, Cardinal of Santa Prassede, 31

  Albret, Alain d’, 131

  Albret, Charlotte d’, 71, 131;
    marries Caesar Borgia, 132, 137;
    her death, 310

  Albret, Jean d’, 131, 284, 291, 300, 301, 305

  Aleson, Padre, 306

  Alexander VI., Pope, 38;
    nepotism of, 47, 48;
    election of, 51;
    his dissolute life, 51;
    a temporal prince, 53, 64, 69, 70, 72, 78, 83, 86;
    meets Alfonso of Naples, 88;
    removes to Castle St. Angelo, 93;
    treaty with Charles VIII., 93, 94;
    avoids the King, 96;
    goes to Perugia, 97;
    his letter to the people of Orvieto, 98;
    the Romagnol barons, 100;
    creation of cardinals, 101;
    declares the Orsini rebels, 101;
    receives Giuffre and Sancia, 104;
    grief for murder of Gandia, 109;
    reform of the Church, 114;
    goes to Ostia, 118;
    alliance with Louis XII., 123, 124, 133, 149;
    confiscates estates of the Riario, 151;
    appoints Caesar gonfalonier, 151;
    confers the Golden Rose on him, 153, 160;
    Faenza banned, 163;
    creates twelve cardinals, 164, 171;
    threatens Bologna, 172, 177;
    receives French officers, 179, 182;
    places the ban on the Colonna and the Savelli, 186;
    his son Giovanni, 187;
    relations with Ferrara, 188, 189, 190;
    his opinion of Caesar, 191;
    goes to Piombino, 192;
    to Elba, 193, 196;
    seizes the Orsini, 221, 222, 229;
    threatens Caesar, 230;
    seizes the towns of the Savelli, 232;
    watches Naples, 234;
    stricken by the plague, 235;
    death and rumours of poison, 236, 238;
    obsequies, 248, 261

  Alexius, Attilius, 41

  Alfonso of Naples, Duke of Bisceglia, 73, 121;
    murder of, 157–9, 161

  Allegre, Yves d’, 92, 138, 144, 146, 147;
    in Rome, 179

  Alviano, Bartolomeo d’, declared a rebel, 101;
    active about Rome, 103, 202, 257, 260

  Alvisi, E., 232

  Amananti, Jacopo, Cardinal of Pavia, 39

  Amboise, Georges d’, Cardinal of Rouen, 123, 129, 245, 246;
    in Rome, 247, 249;
    defends Caesar, 261, 274

  Anastasius, Pope, 28

  Angelo, Michael, his “Cupid,” 201

  Appiano, Giacomo d’, 176

  Aquilano, Sebastiano, 119

  Aragona, Luigi d’, comes to Rome, 247, 249

  Aranda, Pedro de, Bishop of Calahorra, 124, 306, 307

  Arignano, Domenico d’, 74

  Aubigny, Count d’, 137

  Auton, Jean d’, chronicler, 137;
    account of Pope’s reception of French officers, 179–80;
    account of the expedition against Naples, 181;
    the taking of Capua, 182

  Avignon, the Papal See at, 58

  Ayala, Pedro de, 287


  Baglioni, the, join the Pope’s enemies, 103, 257

  Baglioni, Giampaolo, 164, 212;
    attacks Perugia, 242, 274

  Balue, Cardinal, 66

  Barbo, Marco, Cardinal, 41

  Barbo, Piero, 39

  Beaumont, Luis de, 300, 301, 302, 305

  Benavente, Count of, 286–7, 290

  Benedict XIII., Anti-Pope, 32

  Bentivoglio, the, 205

  Bentivoglio, Annibale, 258

  Bentivoglio, Ercole, 147

  Bentivoglio, Giovanni, 164, 171, 172, 173;
    his agreement with the Pope, 214, 276

  Bessarion, Cardinal of Nicæa, 31, 32, 41

  Bisceglia, Alfonso, Duke of, _see_ Alfonso of Naples

  Boccaccio, Gianandrea, 75;
    account of Caesar Borgia, 82

  Bologna, relations with the Pope, 205

  Bona of Savoy, regent in Milan, 62, 88

  Boniface VIII., Pope, 28, 58

  Books, dedication of, 67

  Borgia or Borja family, the, 31;
    their character, 52, 68, 70;
    family solidarity, 72;
    their enemies, 242

  Borgia, Alonzo, Cardinal (_see_ Calixtus III., Pope), 31, 68

  Borgia, Angela, 139

  Borgia, Catalina, 69, 77

  Borgia, Caesar, 38, 44, 53, 64, 67, 71, 73;
    his birth, 75–6;
    plans in central Italy, 76, 77;
    student in Pisa, 78;
    his letter to the Counsellors of Pamplona, 79;
    in Spoleto, 81, 82, 83;
    made cardinal, 85, 88, 93;
    hostage of Charles VIII., 93, 94, 95, 96, 97;
    Governor of Orvieto, 98, 99, 100;
    meets the Duke of Gandia, 102–4;
    legate to Naples, 105;
    suspected of the murder of Gandia, 110–12;
    crowns the King of Naples, 117;
    returns to Rome, 118;
    book dedicated to, 119;
    to resign ecclesiastical offices, 123;
    goes to France, 124–5;
    meets Louis XII., 126, 129;
    Duke of Valentinois, 130, 131;
    marries Charlotte d’Albret, 132;
    given Order of St. Michael, 135;
    his daughter Louise, 137;
    first campaign in Romagna, 139;
    takes Forli, 144;
    Vicar of Imola and Forli, 145;
    in Rome, 147–9;
    Vicar of Romagna, 150;
    Governor of Imola, 151;
    Gonfalonier of the Church, 151;
    his oath, 152;
    the Golden Rose, 153;
    a bull-fighter, 154;
    and the artists, 155;
    murders Alfonso of Naples, 158, 159;
    second campaign in Romagna, 164;
    relations with the Gonzaga, 166;
    enters Pesaro, 167;
    his habits, 168;
    returns to Rome, 173;
    Florence, 175;
    and Machiavelli, 175, 176;
    in Rome, 179;
    expedition against Naples, 182;
    Capua, 185;
    affairs in the north, 186, 189, 190, 191;
    goes to Piombino, 192;
    Elba, 193;
    third campaign in Romagna, 194;
    has Manfredi killed, 195, 196;
    goes to Spoleto, 197, 199;
    Duke of Urbino, 201;
    his letter to Lucretia, 203;
    goes to Milan, 204;
    estranged from his captains, 205;
    the conspiracy, 206–7;
    and Machiavelli, 208–10, 211, 212;
    his captains return to him, 215;
    receives delegation from Ancona, 217;
    goes to Sinigaglia 218;
    the trap at Sinigaglia, 219;
    has Oliverotto and Vitelli killed, 220;
    seizes Città di Castello, 223;
    has Paolo and Francesco Orsini strangled, 224, 226;
    his letter to the _Balia_ of Siena, 226–7, 228, 229, 230;
    a power in Central Italy, 230, 231;
    plots with Spain, 223, 234;
    ill of the plague, 235, 237;
    he recovers, 240;
    seizes the Pope’s personal property, 241;
    his domain crumbles, 242;
    and the Sacred College, 243, 244, 245;
    leaves Rome with troops, 246, 248, 251;
    favoured by Pius III., 252;
    deserted by Moncada and Romolino, 253;
    brings his men to Rome, 255, 256;
    his fortunes improve, 257;
    again deserted, 258;
    he escapes but returns to Rome, 259, 260, 261, 265;
    lodged in the Vatican, 267;
    relations with Julius II., 269;
    leaves Rome, 270;
    arrested, 272, 273, 274;
    confined in the Borgia tower, 275;
    goes to Ostia, 276–7;
    goes to Naples, 278, 279;
    arrested by Gonsalvo de Cordova, 280;
    sent to Spain, 284;
    attempts to kill his gaoler, 285, 286, 287;
    escapes from prison, 289;
    the investigation, 291–3;
    informs friends of his escape, 294, 298, 299;
    Captain-General of Navarre, 302;
    is slain, 304;
    his body taken to Viana, 305;
    entombed in Santa Maria, 306;
    news of his death reaches Italy, 308, 309;
    his epitaph, 310, 312

  Borgia, Francesco, Cardinal of Cosenza, 101, 146;
    flees from Rome, 275

  Borgia, Francina, 68

  Borgia, Giovanni, Cardinal of Monreale, dies of the plague, 235

  Borgia, Giovanni, Cardinal of Santa Susanna, his death, 145

  Borgia, Giovanni, _see_ Gandia, Duke of

  Borgia, Giovanni, Lord of Camerino, 38, 73, 187

  Borgia, Girolama, 73, 86

  Borgia, Girolamo, son of Caesar, 311

  Borgia, Giuffre, Prince of Squillace, 73, 83, 85;
    marries Sancia of Naples, 87;
    enters Rome, 104, 120, 248;
    arrested and released, 281

  Borgia, Gonzales Gil, 68

  Borgia, Isabella, daughter of Rodrigo Borgia and wife of Pietro
          Giovanni Matuzzi, 73

  Borgia, Isabella de, sister of Calixtus III., 70

  Borgia, Juan Domingo, 68

  Borgia, Juana de, wife of P. Guillem Lanzol, 71

  Borgia, Laura, daughter of Alexander VI., betrothed to Niccolò
          della Rovere, 282

  Borgia, Louise de, daughter of Caesar, 137, 310, 311

  Borgia, Lucretia, daughter of Alexander VI., 71, 73;
    her birth, 75;
    under care of Adriana Mila, 77;
    betrothed to Giovanni Sforza, 83;
    married, 84, 104;
    divorced, 120;
    married to Alfonso, Prince of Bisceglia, 121, 158, 161, 187;
    placed in charge of Vatican, 189;
    married to Alfonso d’Este, 192;
    the final estimate of her, 192, 285, 308;
    her death and her descendants, 312

  Borgia, Lucretia, daughter of Caesar, 311

  Borgia, Ludovico, 145

  Borgia, Pedro Luis, First Duke of Gandia, 72

  Borgia, Pier Luigi, 33, 34;
    made cardinal, 164

  Borgia, Raymon, 68

  Borgia, Ricardo, 68

  Borgia, Rodrigo (_see_ Alexander VI.), 32, 33, 34, 37;
    made cardinal, 41;
    crowns Sixtus IV., 32, 48, 50, 51;
    a student of canon law, 52;
    Bishop of Valencia, 52;
    Vice-Chancellor, 52, 71, 77, 78;
    elected pope, 80

  Borgia, Ximenes Garcia, 68

  Borja, _see_ Borgia

  Borja, Rodrigo Gil de, 70

  Borja, y Doms, Jofre, 70

  Braccio, Alessandro, 114

  Brantôme, describes Caesar’s entry into Chinon, 126

  Bretagne, Anne of, 131

  Brissonet, Guillaume, Cardinal of Santa Prudenziana, comes
          to Rome, 247

  Bugliotto, Odoardo, 246

  Bull-fighting in Rome, 154

  Burchard, Johann, his account of the murder of the Duke of
          Gandia, 107–14;
    on the death of Cardinal Orsini, 226


  Calderon, Pedro, murder of, 119

  Calixtus III., Pope (Alonzo Borgia), 31, 32, 34, 39, 43, 70, 71, 72, 77

  Calmeto, Vincenzo, 223

  Camerino, fall of, 202

  Canale, Carlo, 74

  Capello, Paolo, relation of, 114, 116, 119;
    describes Caesar, 155, 158;
    on Alexander VI., 162, 165

  Capranica, Bartolomeo, 211

  Capranica, Domenico, Cardinal, 31, 33

  Capua, capture of, 183

  Caraffa, Oliviero, Cardinal, 51

  Caranza, Pedro, 81

  Cardenas, Bernardino de, 288–9

  Cardinals, the, their wealth, 64;
    their character, 65

  Carilli, Alonzo, 302

  Carlotta of Aragon, 121, 130

  Carniola, the Bishop of, 239

  Carvajal, Bernardino, Cardinal, 41, 275

  Casio, Jeronimo, his epitaph on Caesar, 310

  Castiglione, Baldessare, 138

  Catanei, Vanozza de’, 72–3;
    her character, 74;
    her house plundered, 93, 248, 275, 311

  Catherine, St., 39

  Cecco d’Ascoli, 27

  Cesarini, Giuliano, 86

  Charles VIII., claims Naples, 83;
    prepares to invade Italy, 88;
    his character, 89, 90;
    enters Tuscany, 92;
    enters Naples, 95;
    returns to Rome, 95, 97;
    returns to France, 98, 103;
    his death, 122, 136

  Chinchilla, Caesar sent to, 284

  Church, States of the, 43

  Churches, murders in, 65

  Cibo, Franceschetto, 48, 49

  Cibo, Giambatista, elected pope, 48;
    his nepotism and avarice, 49

  Cibo, Lorenzo, 50, 51

  Clement VII., Pope, 232

  Collennuccio, Pandolfo, 167;
    on Caesar’s habits and character, 168

  Colonna, feud with the Orsini, 60;
    they hold to the Pope, 103;
    banned by the Pope, 186, 203

  Colonna, Cardinal, 50, 66, 93;
    returns to Rome, 249

  Colonna, Fabrizio, 84, 103, 182;
    captured, 184

  Colonna, Prospero, 182;
    returns to Rome, 242, 244, 246, 247

  Commines, Philippe de, envoy to Venice, 90

  Communes, the Italian, 56–7

  Condottieri, the, 59

  Cordova, Juan de, 211

  Cordova, _see_ Gonsalvo de Cordova

  Corio, Bernardino, 41

  Corneto, Adriano di, Cardinal, the dinner in his garden, 236

  Corrella, Michelotto, 158, 173, 211, 260;
    captured, 274;
    examined for crimes, 281

  Cosimo, Pietro di, 156

  Costabili, Beltrando, 191;
    on death of Alexander VI., 238

  Crime during the Renaissance, 115

  Croce, Giorgio de, 72, 74


  Dante, his “Convito,” 26

  Da Vinci, Leonardo, 137, 155, 193, 205

  Decio, Filippo, 78

  Dijon, the Bailli of, 138, 146

  Dolcino di Novara, 27

  Doms, family arms, 70

  Doms, Sibilla, 70

  Doria, Andrea, 223

  Dracaz, Giacomo, 99


  Empire, the, 56

  Enea, Silvio, _see_ Pius II.

  Enriquez, Maria, 73, 102, 284

  Este family, 58;
    arms, 71

  Este, Alfonso d’, 71, 73;
    marries Lucretia Borgia, 187–8, 192

  Este, Ercole d’, 188, 191

  Este, Fernando d’, 191

  Este, Ippolito d’, 105, 188, 191, 308

  Este, Isabella d’, 188, 221

  Estouteville, Cardinal, 104, 187


  Faenza, invested, 170;
    surrenders, 173

  Farnese, Alessandro, 64, 84;
    made cardinal, 86

  Farnese family, 86

  Farnese, Giulia (La Bella), 38, 64, 73, 77, 81;
    captured by the French, 92

  Federico, Caesar’s secretary, arrested by Julius, 11, 297

  Feo, Giacomo, 140

  Ferdinand II. of Spain, 77, 286;
    goes to Naples, 287, 289, 300–1

  Ferdinand II. of Naples, 98

  Ferdinand of Naples, 83

  Ferrara, 188;
    her orator complains to the pope, 189

  Ferrer, Luis, 289

  Ferrerio, Vincenzo, 32

  Foix, Gaston de, 286

  Foix, Germaine de, 286

  Forli surrenders, 143–4

  Fornovo, battle of, 98

  Florence, 45, 175

  Flores, Antonio, 94

  Flores, Bartolomeo, 83

  Francesco da Pistoja, 27

  France, superiority of armies of, 91

  Frederic II. of Naples, 105, 130;
    declared deprived of Naples, 182;
    goes to France, 185


  Gaetani, the, robbed by Alexander VI., 164, 167

  Gandia, Giovanni Borgia, Duke of, 73;
    made Captain-General, 102;
    wounded, 103;
    the murder of, 107–14

  Gasparino da Verona, 37

  Gerardino, Agapito, 124, 154, 208, 213, 224;
    deserts Caesar, 272

  Ghibellines, the, 57

  Giovanni, Don, Infans Romanus, _see_ Borgia, Giovanni, Lord of Camerino

  Giovio, Paolo, 184

  Giulia Bella, _see_ Farnese, Giulia

  Giustinian, Antonio, Venetian ambassador, 214, 225, 236, 247, 252,
          253, 255, 260;
    his opinion of Julius II., 266, 269, 270, 273, 275, 277, 278, 280

  Gonsalvo de Cordova, defeats the French, 233, 258, 275;
    victory at the Garigliano, 276, 279, 280, 285;
    sends Caesar to Spain, 282, 287, 288

  Gonzaga family, 58

  Gonzaga, Francesco, Cardinal, 41, 74, 97, 165

  Got, Bertrand, made pope, 58

  Grammont, French ambassador, 245

  Grasica, Juanico, Caesar’s equerry, 305;
    goes to Ferrara, 308

  Gregorovius, Ferdinand, opinion of Caterina Sforza, 140;
    on Letter to Silvio Savelli, 190, 283

  Guelphs, 57

  Guevara, Antonio de, 307

  Guicciardini, Francesco, his opinion of Alexander VI., 52, 184;
    account of Alexander’s death, 238

  Guilds, 55

  Gurk, Cardinal (Raymond Perrault), 93

  Guzman, Gabriel, 284


  Illegitimacy during the Renaissance, 42, 54–5

  Infessura, Stefano, his opinion of Sixtus IV., 45;
    his opinion of Innocent VIII., 50, 84

  Innocent VIII., Pope (Giambatista Cibo), 48, 49;
    death of, 50, 78

  Investiture, Wars of, 56

  Isabella of Aragon, daughter of Alfonso of Naples, 89

  Isabella of Spain, 285

  Italy, corruption in, 48


  Jeanne la Folle, 285, 288, 292

  Jubilee of 1300, 58

  Julius II., Pope (Giuliano della Rovere), 115, 266;
    statement to Giustinian, 267;
    attitude towards Caesar, 269, 270, 272;
    arrests Caesar, 273, 275, 277, 280, 281, 283, 289


  La Trémoille, Louis de, 154

  La Trémoille, Louis II. de, 310

  League of the Conservation, 95

  League against France, 95

  Lenzol, the, family arms, 70, 71

  Lenzol, Jofre, 69

  Lenzol, Pedro Luis, 69

  Lenzol, Rodrigo, 69, 71

  Lenzol y Borja, Jofre, 71

  Lenzol y Moncada, 71

  Ligny, Louis de, 137

  Lopez, Juan, 81, 97

  Lorca, Remiro de, 124, 193;
    put to death, 216

  Louis XII., King of France, 122;
    alliance with Alexander VI., 123, 124, 131;
    his claim to Milan, 136, 137, 171, 176, 177, 178;
    league with Pope against Naples, 182;
    thanks Caesar for his services, 185, 186, 200;
    receives Caesar at Milan, 204, 212, 229;
    restores Pandolfo Petrucci to Siena, 232–3;
    sends troops to the Regno, 234;
    his Prime Minister, 246, 258, 286, 289;
    deprives Caesar of his French fiefs, 299, 300, 310

  Luna, Pietro de, 103


  Machiavelli, 76;
    on Giampaolo Baglioni, 115, 175;
    sent to Caesar, 199;
    his opinion of Caesar, 200, 208–10, 216, 219, 232, 261, 271, 272

  Maillard, Benoit, his description of a banquet given to Caesar, 125

  Malatesta family, lords of Rimini, 59

  Malatesta, Pandolfo, 164, 169, 257

  Mancini, Jeronimo, 191

  Manfredi family, lords of Faenza, 59

  Manfredi, Astorre, 163, 168, 169;
    his bravery, 172;
    surrenders, 173;
    murder of, 194, 196

  Mantua, Marquis of (Gian Francesco Gonzaga), 248

  Marades, Juan, 81

  Marches, the Lords of the, 101

  Marciano, Rinuccio da, 182;
    wounded and captured, 184

  Mariana, Juan de, historian, 69, 72

  Marsini, Niccolò, 203

  Martin V., Pope, 32

  Martyr, Peter, of Anghiara, 239

  Matarazzo, 186;
    on Caesar, 231

  Matilda, Countess, 56

  Maximilian, his ambassador arrives in Spoleto, 96, 165, 190,
          286, 298, 300

  Medici, the, 45, 58

  Medici, Giovanni de’, made Cardinal, 49, 51, 64

  Medici, Giuliano de’, murder of, 45, 65, 174

  Medici, Lorenzo de’, attempted murder of, 45

  Medici, Maddalena de’, married to Franceschetto Cibo, 48

  Medici, Piero de’, 90, 174

  Medino del Campo, fortress of, 285, 290

  Mendoza, Diego de, 276

  Mendoza, Pedro de, his letter, 295–6

  Mercenaries in Italy, 59

  Michele, _see_ Corrella, Michelotto

  Michelotto, _see_ Corrella, Michelotto

  Michiel, Giovanni, Cardinal, 41, 51

  Middle Ages, 62;
    the Arts during, 63

  Mila, Adriana, 69, 77

  Mila, Juan del, Cardinal, 69

  Mila, Juan, Bishop of Zamora, 32, 69

  Mila, Juan, Luis de, 32

  Mila, Perot del, 69

  Mirandola, Antonio Pico della, suspected of the murder of Gandia, 110

  Moncada, Juan de, 71

  Moncada, Ugo, 211, 253

  Montefeltre, Federico, made Duke of Urbino, 44, 198, 210, 234, 267

  Montefeltre, Giovanna, 44

  Montefeltre, Guido, 215

  Montefeltre, lords of Urbino, 59

  Montpensier, Gilbert de, Vice-Regent in Naples, 98

  Moret, the chronicler, 289, 304

  Moro, Ludovico il, 62, 83, 88, 89, 95, 97, 98, 136, 137, 140, 146;
    returns to Milan, 147;
    defeated by the French, 154

  Mottino, Admiral, 259, 277, 278

  Mugnone, Lucchesina, 42


  Naples, Federico of, 85

  Naples, Ferdinand of, 45

  Naples, league against, 83

  Naples, Sancia of, _see_ Sancia of Naples

  Nepotism, 39, 47, 80

  Nicæa, Cardinal-Bishop of, _see_ Bessarion

  Niccolò da Verona, 26

  Nicholas III., Pope, 28

  Nicholas V., Pope, 31, 68


  Oliverotto da Fermo, 202, 213;
    put to death by Caesar Borgia, 220

  Olivieri, Giovanni, 154

  Ordelaffi family, lords of Forli, 59

  Orsini, the, 50;
    their feuds, 60;
    and Charles VIII., 101, 103;
    strongholds in Rome, 116;
    active about Rome, 228;
    return to Rome, 242, 244, 257;
    protest to the Pope against Caesar, 259, 260, 261

  Orsini, Carlo, declared a rebel, 101;
    captures the Duke of Urbino, 103

  Orsini, Giambattista, Cardinal, 41;
    made camerlengo, 42;
    arrested by Alexander VI., 221;
    his palace plundered, 222;
    death in prison, 225

  Orsini, Gian Giordano, declared a rebel, 101, 230

  Orsini, Giulio, 174, 257

  Orsini, Ludovico, Lord of Bassanello, 69, 77

  Orsini, Niccolò, 229

  Orsini, Paolo, declared a rebel, 101, 164, 174, 211, 213;
    takes Urbino, 215

  Orsini, Virginio, 50, 84, 85;
    declared a rebel, 101;
    made prisoner, 102

  Orvieto, 98

  Oviedo, Pedro de, 198, 274


  Palavicini, Antoniotto Gentile, Cardinal of Sta Anastasia, 96

  Panvinio, 69

  Papacy, the, 28, 42;
    secularisation of, 45–6;
    politics of, 262

  Paul II., Pope, 37, 40, 41;
    his avarice, 45

  Pavia, Cardinal of (Francesco Alidosio), 37

  Pazzi, conspiracy, 45, 47

  Pepoli, the, lords of Bologna, 59

  Perugia, Bishop of, _see_ Romolino, Francesco

  Pesaro, surrenders, 167

  Petrarch, 26, 28

  Petrucci, Pandolfo, 212;
    leaves Siena, 228, 251

  Philippe le Beau, 285, 287;
    his death, 288

  Philippe le Bel, 58

  Piccolomini, the, 51

  Piccolomini, Enea Silvio, _see_ Pius II.

  Piccolomini, Francesco, Cardinal of Siena, elected Pope, 250

  Pigna, Ferrarese ambassador, 113

  Pinturicchio, Bernardo, 71

  Piombino, surrender of, 176, 186

  Pius II., Pope (Enea Silvio Piccolomini), his letter to Rodrigo
          Borgia, 34, 35, 39, 43, 54

  Pius III., Pope (Francesco Piccolomini), compels French troops to
          withdraw from Romagna, 250;
    death and rumours of poison, 251;
    favours Caesar, 252;
    makes Caesar Gonfalonier, 256, 258;
    his death, 260

  Plague of 1503, 235

  Polentani, the, lords of Ravenna, 59

  Politics, Italian, 166;
    papal, 262

  Pompilio, Paolo, dedicates a work to Caesar, 67, 77

  Popes, the character of, 42;
    temporal sovereigns, 46;
    their nephews, 46;
    corruption of, 48


  Rationalism in Italy, 63

  Renaissance, the Italian, 23–8, 38;
    illegitimacy during, 42, 54–5, 62;
    murder during, 65;
    palaces of, 66;
    lack of moral sense in, 67;
    politics and rulers of, 77;
    warfare during, 91

  Requesenz, Caesar’s Majordomo, 285, 299

  Riario, the, deprived of their domain, 151

  Riario, Girolamo, 44, 140

  Riario, Pietro, 41;
    made cardinal, 43

  Riario, Raffaele, Cardinal, 44, 50, 65;
    returns to Rome, 249

  Ribera, Juan de, Captain-General of Spain, 300–1

  Rimini, surrender of, 169

  Rio, Francesco, 277

  Roccamura, Francesco de, 243

  Rodrigo, son of Alfonso of Naples and Lucretia Borgia, 187

  Romagna, feudal families of, 42;
    lords of, 101;
    Caesar’s first campaign in, 139;
    second campaign in, 164;
    third campaign in, 194;
    remains faithful to Caesar, 213;
    lack of order in, 282

  Rome, corruption in, 49;
    plague in, 235;
    threatened by civil war, 242, 249

  Romolino, Francesco, made Cardinal of Perugia, 78, 81, 101;
    deserts Caesar, 253, 272;
    flees from Rome, 275

  Rouen, Cardinal of, _see_ Amboise Georges d’

  Rovere, della, the, 103

  Rovere, Francesco della, 41, 42

  Rovere, Giuliano della (Julius II.), made cardinal, 42, 43;
    a skilful campaign manager, 48, 84, 93, 103, 124, 125, 130;
    abandons the Riario, 139, 215;
    returns from France, 249, 250, 251, 254;
    complains of Caesar’s presence in Rome, 255, 262;
    elected pope, 266, 268

  Rovere, Giovanni della, 44, 45


  Sacred College, treats with Caesar, 243

  Saluzzo, Marquis of, 234

  Sancia of Naples, 85;
    marries Giuffre Borgia, 87;
    enters Rome, 104;
    her character, 105, 160, 177, 247

  San Clemente, Cardinal of, 255

  Sanctuary, right of, 65

  Sangallo, Antonio di, 189, 193

  San Giorgio, Cardinal, complains of Caesar’s presence in Rome, 255

  San Malo, Bishop of, _see_ Brissonet, Guillaume

  San Marco, Cardinal of, 39

  Sannazzaro, Jacopo, 185;
    on Caesar’s death, 309

  San Niccolò in Carcere Tulliano, Cardinal of, _see_ Borgia, Rodrigo

  San Pietro ad Vincola, Cardinal of, _see_ Rovere, Giuliano della

  Sant Angelo, Cardinal, 275

  Santa Croce, Cardinal of, 276;
    releases Caesar, 278

  Santa Prudenziana, Cardinal, _see_ Brissonet, Guillaume

  Santi Quattro Coronati, Cardinal, _see_ Borgia, Alonzo

  Sanudo, 119–20, 145

  Sasseta, Ranieri della, 279

  Savelli, the, support the Pope, 103;
    banned by the Pope, 186;
    their estates seized, 187

  Savelli, Giambattista, Cardinal, 51, 66, 93

  Savelli, Silvio, the letter to, 114, 186, 190;
    joins the Orsini, 228;
    returns to Rome, 242

  Savonarola, Girolamo, 27, 78

  Scalla, the, family, 58

  Scarampo, Ludovico, Cardinal, 33

  Scipione, Baldassare di, 279, 281

  Sclafenati, Gian Giacomo, Cardinal, 51, 74

  Segovia, Bishop of, made cardinal, 101

  Sforza, Ascanio, made cardinal, 44;
    bribed with office of Vice-Chancellor, 50;
    suspected of murder of Gandia, 110, 116, 246;
    comes to Rome, 247, 249

  Sforza, Caterina, 44, 140, 142, 144;
    a prisoner, 147

  Sforza, Francesco, seizes Milan, 61

  Sforza, Galeazzo, 44, 88

  Sforza, Galeazzo Maria, 44, 62

  Sforza, Gian Galeazzo, 62

  Sforza, Gian Galeazzo Maria, 88;
    his death, 90

  Sforza, Giovanni, of Pesaro, 73;
    marries Lucretia Borgia, 84;
    meets Gonsalvo, 103, 167

  Siena, surrenders, 228

  Sinigaglia, 216;
    captured, 217

  Sixtus IV., Pope (Francesco della Rovere), 42, 43;
    his nepotism, 44–5;
    a politician, 45, 46, 47, 48, 52, 76–7

  Soderini, Francesco, sent to Caesar, 199;
    his account of Cardinal Orsini’s funeral, 226

  Spanocchi, Alessandro, 253

  Spanocchi, Ambrogio, 39

  Squillace, Prince of, _see_ Borgia, Giuffre

  Squillace, Princess of, _see_ Sancia of Naples

  Strozzi, Ercole, his _Epicedium_ on Caesar, 309

  Stuart, Berault, comes to Rome with the French Army, 179

  Suere, Marco, 169


  Toledo, Fabrique de, Duke of Alva, 286

  Tomasi, Tomaso, his “Duca Valentino,” 69;
    his opinion of Vanozza and Alexander VI., 74

  Torrella, Gaspare, dedicates a work to Caesar, 119, 124, 203, 240

  Trans, Baron of, _see_ Villeneuve, Louis de

  Trivulzio, Gian Giacopo, 146

  Tyranny and tyrants, the Italian, 55–7, 58–9, 61, 101, 166


  Umbria, the lords of, 101


  Valentino, Valentinois _see_ Borgia, Caesar

  Valentinois, Duchess of, _see_ Albret, Charlotte d’

  Valgulio, Carlo, 102

  Vannozza, _see_ Catanei, Vannozza de’

  Varano, Giulio Cesare, 202

  Varano, lords of Camerino, 59, 202

  Vasari, Giorgio, 155

  Vatican, Orgies in, 84, 186

  Venice, the Patriarch of, 51;
    aids Montefeltre, 211–12

  Vera, Juan, 78, 81

  Verastegui, Ogier, 302

  Vettori, Francesco, 195

  Viana, the Castle of, 300, 301, 302, 303;
    Santa Maria de, 306

  Villeneuve, Louis de, Baron of Trans, 123

  Virago, the, 142

  Visconti, Filippo Maria, last of the, 61

  Visconti, the, lords of Milan, 60

  Visconti, Gian Galeazzo, 60

  Visconti, Valentina, 136

  Vitelli, the, return to Rome, 242

  Vitelli, Vitellozzo, 103, 169, 174, 201, 213, 214;
    put to death, 220


  Warfare during the Renaissance, 91

  Worms, Concordat of, 56


  Yriarte, Charles, his genealogy of the Borgia, 69;
    searches for Caesar’s remains, 307


  Zapata, Martin, 78

  Zeno, Battista, Cardinal, 41, 51


UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, THE GRESHAM PRESS, WOKING AND LONDON.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Punctuation and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in this book; otherwise they were not changed.

Simple typographical errors were corrected; occasional unbalanced
quotation marks retained.

Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines were retained; occurrences of
inconsistent hyphenation have not been changed.

Some illustrations of people had two captions: one in Latin, placed
within the frame of the image, and one in English, printed below the
image. When present and legible, both are shown in printed form in this
eBook. The Latin spellings sometimes differ from the English ones.

Text uses the names “Spanocchi” and “Spannocchi” several times; the
latter is correct, but both spellings have been retained here.

The spellings of proper names were not thoroughly checked.

Footnotes, originally at the bottoms of pages, have been moved to the
end of the book, just before the Index.

Index not checked for proper alphabetization or correct page references.

Page 41: “duplicit” was printed that way.

Illustration facing page 280: The Latin caption is “CONSALVO DI
CORDOVA;” the English caption is “GONSALVO DE CORDOVA”.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAESAR BORGIA***


******* This file should be named 57132-0.txt or 57132-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/7/1/3/57132


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


