?Provenca JofEzra Pound?University of California Berkeley?PROVEN9A?PRO VENCAPOEMSSELECTED FROM PERSONAE, EXULTATIONS, AND CANZONIEREOFEZRA POUNDBOSTONSMALL, MAYNARD AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS?Copyright, 1910, BY EZRA POUNDTHE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.?THE TREECONTENTSPERSONAELA FRAISNE 5 CINO 7 NA AUDIARTVILLONAUD FOR THIS YULE II A VILLONAUD, BALLAD OF THE GIBBET 12 MESMERISM 14 FAMAM LIBROSQUE CANOIN TEMPORE SENECTUTIS 17CAMARADERIEFOR E. McC.BALLAD FOR GLOOM 2O AT THE HEART O? ME 21REVOLT AGAINST THE CREPUSCULAR SPIRIT IN MODERN POETRY 2822 AN IDYL FOR GLAUCUS 22 MARVOIL 26 IN THE OLD AGE OF THE SOUL 28AND THUS IN NINEVEH THE WHITE STAG PICCADILLYEXULTATIONS NIGHT LITANYSESTINA: ALTAFORTEBALLAD OF THE GOODLY FEREPORTRAITTHE EYESNILS LYKKE"FAIR HELENA" BY RACKHAMGREEK EPIGRAMHISTRIONPARACELSUS IN EXCELSIS 46 A SONG OF THE VIRGIN MOTHER9IS1 81930 31 3137 39 41 43 43 44 45 45 4647?EXULTATIONS, continued SONGPLANH FOR THE YOUNG ENGLISH KING ALBA INNOMINATALAUDANTESPLANHCANZONIERE OCTAVESONNET IN TENZONE SONNETCANZON: THE YEARLY SLAIN CANZON: THE SPEAR CANZONCANZON: OF INCENSE CANZONE : OF ANGELS SONNET: CHI E QUESTA? OF GRACECANZON: THE VISIONTO OUR LADY OF VICARIOUS ATONEMENT EPILOGUENOTES?PERSONAE?"Make-strong old dreams lest this our world Lose heart"?TO MARY MOORE?LA FRAISNE1SCENE : The Ash Wood of Malvern.FOR I was a gaunt, grave councillorBeing in all things wise, and very old, But I have put aside this folly and the cold That old age weareth for a cloak.I was quite strong at least they said so The young men at the sword-play;But I have put aside this folly, being gay In another fashion that more suiteth me.I have curled mid the boles of the ash wood, I have hidden my face where the oak Spread his leaves over me, and the yokeOf the old ways of men have I cast aside.By the still pool of Mar-nan-othaHave I found me a brideThat was a dog-wood tree some syne. She hath called me from mine old ways, She hath hushed my rancour of council, Bidding me praiseNaught but the wind that flutters in the leaves.She hath drawn me from mine old ways,Till men say that I am mad;But I have seen the sorrow of men, and am glad, For I know that the wailing and bitterness are a folly. And I ? I have put aside all folly and all grief.1 Prefatorynoteatendofthevolume.?LaFraisnel wrapped my tears in an ellum leaf And left them under a stone,And now men call me mad because I have thrown All folly from me, putting it asideTo leave the old barren ways of men,Because my brideIs a pool of the wood, andThough all men say that I am madIt is only that I am glad,Very glad, for my bride hath toward me a great love Which is sweeter than the love of womenThat plague and burn and drive one away.Aie-e ! 'T is true that I am gay,Quite gay, for I have her alone here And no man troubleth us.Once when I was among the young men ....And they said I was quite strong, among the young men.Once there was a woman ........ but I forget .... she was .... .... I hope she will not come again..... I do not remember ....I think she hurt me once, but .... That was very long ago.I do not like to remember things any more.I like one little band of winds that blow In the ash trees here:For we are quite aloneHere amid the ash trees.6?CINOITALIAN CAMPAGNA 1309, THE OPEN-ROADAH ! I have sung women in three cities,B'And I will sing of the sun.But it is all thesame;Lips, words, and you snare them, Dreams, words, and they are as jewels, Strange spells of old deity,Ravens, nights, allurement:And they are not;Having become the souls of song.Eyes, dreams, lips, and the night goes. Being upon the road once more,They are not.Forgetful in their towers of our tuneingOnce for Wind-runeing They dream us-toward and"Sighing, say,Passionate Cino, of the wrinkling eyes,Gay Cino, of quick laughter,Cino, of the dare, the jibe,Frail Cino, strongest of his tribeThat tramp old ways beneath the sun-light, Would Cino of the Luth were here!"Once, twice, a year Vaguely thus word they:"Cino?" "Oh, eh, Cino Polnesi The singer is 't you mean?" "Ah yes, passed once our way,A saucy fellow, but ....7Would Cino,?Cino(Oh, they are all one, these vagabonds), Peste ! 't is his own songs ?Or some other's that he sings?But you, My Lord, how with your city?But you "My Lord," God's pity!And all I knew were out, My Lord, you Were Lack-land Cino, e'en as I am,Sinistro.1 have sung women in three cities.But it is all one.I will sing of the sun..... eh? .... they mostly had grey eyes, But it is all one, I will sing of the sun."Tollo Phoibee, old tin pan, you Glory to Zeus' aegis-day,Shield o' steel-blue, th' heaven o'er us Hath for boss thy lustre gay !Tollo Phoibee, to our way-fare Make thy laugh our wander-lied; Bid thy 'fulgence bear away care. Cloud and rain-tears pass they fleet ISeeking e'er the new-laid rast-way To the gardens of the sunI have sung women in three cities But it is all one.I will sing of the white birdsIn the blue waters of heaven,The clouds that are spray to its sea.8?NA AUDIART"QUE BE-M VOLS MAL"Any one who has read anything of the troubadours knows well the tale of Bertran of Born and My Lady Maent of Mon- taignac, and knows also the song he made when she would noneher love-lit glance, of Aelis her speech free-running, of the Vicomp- tess of Chales her throat and her two hands, at Roacoart of Anhes her hair golden as Iseult's ; and even in this fashion of Lady Audiart, " although she would that ill come unto him" he soughtand praised the lineaments of the torse. And all this to make ""Una dompna soiseubuda a borrowed lady or, as the Italianstranslated it," Una donna ideale."thou well dost wish me ill," Audiart, Audiart,THOUGHWhere thy bodice laces startAs ivy fingers clutching through Its crevices,Audiart, Audiart, Stately, tall and lovely tenderWho shall render,Audiart, Audiart, Praises meet unto thy fashion?Here a word kiss !Pass I on Unto Lady "Miels-de-Ben,"Having praised thy girdle's scope, How the stays ply back from it; I breathe no hopeThat thou shouldst ....Nay, no whit Bespeak thyself for anything.Just a word in thy praise, girl, Just for the swirl9?Na Thy satins make upon the stair,Audiart >\Cause never a flaw was there Where thy torse and limbs are met: Though thou hate me, read it set1In rose and gold.Or when the minstrel, tale half told, Shall burst to lilting at the phrase"Audiart, Audiart"Bertrans, master of his lays, Bertrans of Aultaforte thy praiseSets forth, and though thou hate me well, Yea, though thou wish me ill,Audiart, Audiart Thy loveliness is here writ till,Audiart,2Oh, till thou come again.And being bent and wrinkled, in a form That hath no perfect limning, when the warm Youth dew is coldUpon thy hands, and thy old soul,Scorning a new, wry'd casement,Churlish at seemed misplacement,Finds the earth as bitterAs now seems it sweet,Being so young and fairAs then only in dreamsBeing then young and wry'd,Broken of ancient pride,Thou shalt then soften,1 7. e. in illumed manuscript. IO2 Reincarnate.?Knowing I know not how NaAudiartThou wert once she,For whose fairness one forgave, Que be-m vols mal.VILLONAUD FOR THIS YULE HTOWARDS the Noel that morte saison-L (Christ make the shepherds' homage dear!) Then when the grey wolves everychone Drink of the winds their chill small-beer And lap o' the snows food's gueredon,Then maketh my heart his yule-tide cheer (Skoal ! with the dregs if the clear be gone !) Wincing the ghosts of yester-year.Ask ye what ghosts I dream upon? (What of the magians' scented gear?)The ghosts of dead loves everyoneThat make the stark winds reek with fearLest love return with the foison sun And slay the memories that me cheer (Such as I drink to mine fashion) Wincing the ghosts of yester-year.Where are the joys my heart had won? (Saturn and Mars to Zeus drawn near!) Where are the lips mine lay upon,11Audiart, Audiart,Audiart, AudiartSignum Nativitatis* II?Vittonaud Aye ! where are the glances feat and clearJ YuieThat bade my heart his valour don?I skoal to the eyes as grey-blown mere (Who knows whose was that paragon?)Wincing the ghosts of yester-year.Prince: ask me not what I have done, Nor what God hath that can me cheer, But ye ask first where the winds are gone Wincing the ghosts of yester-year.A VILLONAUD, BALLAD OF THE GIBBET OR, THE SONG OF THE SIXTH COMPANIONSCENE: "En cest bourdel ou tenoms nostr estat."It being remembered that there were six of us with Master Villon, when that expecting presently to be hanged he writ a ballad whereof ye know :"Frtres humftins qui aprls nous vivez" NK ye a skoal for the gallows tree !me, Who said us, "Till then" for the gallows tree!Fat Pierre with the hook gauche-main,Thomas Larron "Ear-the-less," Tybalde and that armouressWho gave this poignard its premier stain Pinning the Guise that had been fainTo make him a mate of the "Haulte Noblesse" And bade her be out with ill addressAs a fool that mocketh his drue's disdeign.DRI Francois and and thee andMargot Drink we the comrades merrily?Drink we a skoal for the gallows tree ! Francoi-s and Margot and thee and me,A Vi%tton-fjflad of theGibbetT^Drink we to Manenne Ydole,That hell brenn not her o'er cruelly.i.TVT TT-J iDrink we the lusty robbers twain,Black is the pitch o' their wedding dress, Lips shrunk back for the wind's caressAs lips shrink back when we feel the strain Of love that loveth in hell's disdeignAnd sense the teeth through the lips that press 'Gainst our lips for the soul's distressThat striveth to ours across the pain.Drink we skoal to the gallows tree!Francois and Margot and thee and me,For Jehan and Raoul de VallerieWhose frames have the night and its winds in feeMaturin, Guillaume, Jacques d'Allmain, Culdou, lacking a coat to blessOne lean moiety of his nakedness,That plundered St. Hubert back o' the fane: Aie ! the lean bare tree is widowed again For Michault le Borgne that would confess In "faith and troth" to a traitoress,"Which of his brothers had he slain?"But drink we skoal to the gallows tree ! Francois and Margot and thee and me:1 Certain gibbeted corpses used to be coated with tar as a pre- servative ; thus one scarecrow served as warning for considerable time. See Hugo, " L'Homme qui Rit."131?A Villon- These that we loved shall God love lessfadoftfie Gibbet^nc* sm*te alwav at their feebleness?Skoal ! 1 to the Gallows ! and then pray we: God damn his hell out speedilyAnd bring their souls to his High City.MESMERISM"And a cat 's in the water-butt." ROBERT BROWNING.YE, you 're a man that ! ye old mesmerizer !Tyin' your meanin' in seventy swadelin's, One must of needs be a hang'd early riserTo catch you at worm turning. Holy Odd's bodykins !"Cat 's i' the water-butt!" Thought 's in yourverse-barrel,Tell us this thing rather, then we '11 believe you,You, Master Bob Browning, spite your apparel Jump to your sense and give praise as we 'd lief do.You wheeze as a head-cold long-tonsilled Calliope, But,God! whatasightyouha'goto'ourin'ards, Mad as a hatter but surely no Myope,Broad as all ocean and leanin' mankin'ards.Heart that was big as the bowels of Vesuvius, Words that were wing'd as her sparks in eruption^Eagled and thundered as Jupiter Pluvius, Sound in your wind past all signs o' corruption.14?Here 's to you, Old Hippety-hop o' the accents, True to the Truth's sake and crafty dissector,You grabbed at the gold sure; had no need to pack centsInto your versicles.Clear sight's elector !Mesmer- ismFAMAM LIBROSQUE CANO songs?YOUR Oh!The little mothersWill sing them in the twilight, And when the nightShrinketh the kiss of the dawn That loves and kills,What time the swallow fillsHer note, the little rabbit folkThat some call children,Such as are up and wideWill laugh your verses to each other, Pulling on their shoes for the day's business, Serious child business that the world Laughs at, and grows stale;Such is the talePart of it of thy song-life. Mine?A book is known by them that read Thatsame. ThypublicinmyscreedIs listed. Well ! Some score years hence Behold mine audience,As we had seen him yesterday.15?FamamScrawny, be-spectacled, out at heels,Such an one as the wor d feels !A sort of curse against its guzzlingAnd its age-lasting wallow for red greedAnd yet, full speedThough it should run for its own getting, Will turn aside to sneer at'Cause he hathNo coin, no will to snatch the aftermath Of Mammon.Such an one as women draw away from For the tobacco ashes scattered on his coat And sith his throatShow razor's unfamiliarity And three days' beard:Such an one picking a ragged Backless copy from the stall,Too cheap for cataloguing, Loquitur,"Ah-eh! the strange rare name .Ah-eh ! He must be rare if even / have not And lost mid-pageSuch ageAs his pardons the habit,He analyzes form and thought to seeHow I 'scaped immortality.16. .?TEMPORE SENECTUTIS OR we are oldAnd the earth passion dieth;We have watched him die a thousand times, When he wanes an old wind crieth,For we are oldAnd passion hath died for us a thousand timesBut we grew never weary.Memory faileth, as the lotus-loved chimesSink into fluttering of wind, But we grow never weary For we are old.The strange night-wonder of your eyes Dies not, though passion fliethAlong the star fields of Arcturus And is no more unto our hands;My lips are coldAnd yet we twain are never weary,And the strange night-wonder is upon us,The leaves hold our wonder in their flutterings, The wind fills our mouths with strange wordsFor our wonder that grows not old.The moth-hour of our day is upon us Holding the dawn;There is strange Night-wonder in our eyes Because the Moth-Hour leadeth the dawnAs a maiden, holding her fingers,The rosy, slender fingers of the dawn."17?InTem- Hesaith:"Redspearsborethewarriordawn Of old**: Strange! Love, hast thou forgottenThe red spears of the dawn, The pennants of the morning?"She saith: "Nay, I remember, but now Cometh the Dawn, and the Moth-HourTogether with him ; softly For we are old."CAMARADERIE"Etuttogite tofossealacantpagniadimolti,quantaaliavista"I feel thy cheek against my faceSOMETIMES soft as is the South's first breath Close-pressing,That all the subtle earth-things summoneth To spring in wood-land and in meadow space.Yea sometimes in a bustling man-filled place Meseemeth some-wise thy hair wandereth Across mine eyes, as mist that halloweth The air awhile and giveth all things grace.Or on still evenings when the rain falls close There comes a tremor in the drops, and fastMy pulses run, knowing thy thought hath passed That beareth thee as doth the wind a rose.18nectutis. OA,T ,?FOR E. McC.THAT WAS MY COUNTER-BLADE UNDER LEONARDO TERRONE, MASTER OF FENCEi~* ONE while your tastes were keen to you, \J Gone where the grey winds call to you,By that high fencer, even Death,Struck of the blade that no man parrieth;Such is your fence, one saith, One that hath known you.Drew you your sword most gallantly, Made you your pass most valiantly'Gainst that grey fencer, even Death.Gone as a gust of breathFaith ! no man tarrieth,"Se il cor ti manca" but it failed thee not!"Non tifidar" it is the sword that speaks1Thou trusted'st in thyself and met the blade Thout mask or gauntlet, and art laidAs memorable broken blades that beKept as bold trophies of old pageantry.As old Toledos past their days of warAre kept mnemonic of the strokes they bore,So art thou with us, being good to keepIn our heart's sword-rack, though thy sword-armsleep.ENVOIStruck of the blade that no man parrieth,Pierced of the point that toucheth lastly all,'Gainst that grey fencer, even Death,Behold the shield ! He shall not take thee all.1 Sword-rune, " If thy heart fail thee trust not in me." 19"In me."?BALLAD FOR GLOOMGod, our God, is a gallant foe FOTRhat playeth behind the veil.I have loved my God as a child at heart That seeketh deep bosoms for rest,I have loved my God as maid to man, But lo, this thing is best:To love your God as a gallant foethat plays behind the veil,To meet your God as the night winds meet beyond Arcturus' pale.I have played with God for a woman,I have staked with my God for truth,I have lost to my God as a man, clear eyed;His dice be not of ruth.For I am made as a naked blade, But hear ye this thing in sooth :Who loseth to God as man to man Shall win at the turn of the game.I have drawn my blade where the lightnings meet But the ending is the same:Who loseth to God as the sword blades loseShall win at the end of the game.For God, our God, is a gallant foethat playeth behind the veil,Whom God deigns not to overthrowhath need of triple mail.20?AT THE HEART O' ME A.D. 751j ever one fear at the heart o meWITH still sea-coasts Long bycoursed my Grey-Falcon, And the twin delightsof shore and sea were mine, Sapphire and emerald withfine pearls between.Through the pale courses ofthe land-caressing in-streams Glided my barge andthe kindly strange peoples Gave to me laugh for laugh,and wine for my tales of wandering. And the cities gave me welcomeand the fields free passage, With ever one fearjat the heart o me.An thou should'st grow wearyere my returning,An "they" should call to theefrom out the borderland, What should avail mebooty of whale-ways? What should avail megold rings or the chain-mail? What should avail methe many-twined bracelets? What should avail me,O my beloved,21?At the g ^|jHere in this "Middan-gard" what should avail meOut of the booty and gain of my goings?*THE TREEFrom " A Lume Spento."T STOOD still and was a tree amid the wood,A Knowing the truth of things unseen before; Of Daphne and the laurel bowAnd that god-feasting couple oldThat grew elm-oak amid the wold.'T was not until the gods had beenKindly entreated, and been brought within Unto the hearth of their heart's home That they might do this wonder thing; Nathless I have been a tree amid the wood And many a new thing understoodThat was rank folly to my head before.AN IDYL FOR GLAUCUSNel suo aspetto tal dentro mifei Glauco nel gustar del? erbaguahlesilffe"**consorto in mar degli altri dei* PARADISO, i, 67-9. "As Glaucus tasting the grass that madehint sea-fellow with the other gods."IWHITHER he went I may not follow him.His eyes Were strange to-day. They always were,After their fashion, kindred of the sea.i Anglo-Saxon, "Earth." 22?To-dayIfoundhim. ItwasverylongThat I had sought among the nets, and when IaskedThe fishermen, they laughed at me.I sought long days amid the cliffs thinking to find The body-house of him, and thenThere at the blue cave-mouth my joyGrew pain for suddenness, to see him 'live. Whither he went I may not come, it seemsHe is become estranged from all the rest,And all the sea is now his wonder-house.And he may sink unto strange depths, he tells me of, That have no light as we it deem. E'ennowhespeaksstrangewords. Ididnotknow One half the substance of his speech with me. And then when I saw naught he sudden leaped, And shot, a gleam of silver, down, away.And I have spent three days upon this rockAnd yet he comes no more.He did not even seem to knowI watched him gliding through the vitreous deep.nThey chide me that the skein I used to spin Holds not my interest now,They mock me at the route. Well, I have comeagain.Last night I saw three white forms move,Out past the utmost wave that bears the white foamcrest.I somehow knew that he was one of them.23AnIdyl?AnIdyl ^GlaucusOime, Oime! I think each time they come^P *rom t^ie sea ^eart to our rea m"^ f a*1 They are more far-removed from the shore.When first I found him here, he sleptE'en as he might after a long night's taking on thedeep,And when he woke some whit the old kind smileDwelt round his lips and held him near to me. But then strange gleams shot through the grey-deepeyesAs though he saw beyond and saw not me, And when he moved to speak it troubled him. And then he plucked at grass and bade me eat. And then forgot me for the sea its charmAnd leapt him in the wave and so was gone.inI wonder why he mocked me with the grass.I know not any more how long it isSince I have dwelt not in my mother's house.I know they think me mad, for all night longI haunt the sea-marge, thinking I may findSome day the herb he offered unto me. Perhapshedidnotjest; theysaysomesimpleshave More wide-spanned power than old wives drawfrom them.Perhaps, found I this grass, he 'd come again. Perhaps 't is some strange charm to draw him here, 'Thout which he may not leave his new-found crew That ride the two-foot coursers of the deep,And laugh in storms and break the fishers' nets. Oime, Oime!24?SONGVoices in the Wind.We have worn the blue and vair,And all the sea-cavesKnow us of old, and know our new-found mate. There 's many a secret stairThe sea-folk climb . . .Out of the Wind. Oime, Oime !I wonder why the wind, even the wind doth seem To mock me now, all night, all night, andI have strayed among the cliffs here.They say, some day I '11 fallDown through the sea-bit fissures, and no more Know the warm cloak of sun, or batheThe dew across my tired eyes to comfort them. They try to keep me hid within four walls.I will not stay !Oime!And the wind " Oime " saith, !I am quite tired now.I know the grassMust grow somewhere along this Thracian coast, If only he would come some little while and findit me.ENDETH THE LAMENT FOR GLAUCUS 25An Idyl forGlaucus?MARVOIL 1A POOR clerk I, "Arnaut the less" they call me,And because I have small mind to Day long, long day cooped on a stoolA-jumbling o' figures for Maitre Jacques Polin, I ha' taken to rambling the South here.The Vicomte of Beziers 's not such a bad lot.I made rimes to his lady this three year:Vers and canzone, till that damn'd son of Aragon, Alfonso the half-bald, took to hangingHis helmet at Beziers.Then came what might come, to wit: three men andone woman,Beziers off at Mont-Ausier, I and his lady Singing the stars in the turrets of Beziers, And one lean Aragonese cursing the seneschal To the end that you see, friends:Aragon cursing in Aragon, Beziers busy at Beziers Bored to an inch of extinction,Tibors all tongue and temper at Mont-Ausier, Me! in this damn'd inn of Avignon,Stringing long verse for the Burlatz;All for one half-bald, knock-knee'd king of theAragonese,Alfonso, Quatro, poke-nose.And if when I am deadThey take the trouble to tear out this wall here, They '11 know more of Arnaut of Marvoil Than half his canzoni say of him.1See note at end of volume. 26sitt?As for will and testament I leave none,Save this: "Vers and canzone to the Countess ofBeziersIn return for the first kiss she gave me."May her eyes and her cheek be fairTo all men except the King of Aragon,And may I come speedily to BeziersWhither my desire and my dream have precededme.O hole in the wall here ! be thou my jongleur As ne'er had I other, and when the wind blows,Sing thou the grace of the Lady of Beziers,For even as thou art hollow before I fill thee withthis parchment,So is my heart hollow when she filleth not mine eyes, And so were my mind hollow, did she not fill utterlymy thought.Wherefore, O hole in the wall here,When the wind blows sigh thou for my sorrow That I have not the Countess of Beziers Close in my arms here.Even as thou shalt soon have this parchment.O hole in the wall here, be thou my jongleur, And though thou sighest my sorrow in the wind,Keep yet my secret in thy breast here; Even as I keep her image in my heart here.Mihi pergamena deest. 27Marvoil?IN THE OLD AGE OF THE SOULDO not choose to dream; there cometh on me i Some strange old lust for deeds.As to the nerveless hand of some old warrior The sword-hilt or the war-worn wonted helmetBrings momentary life and long-fled cunning, So to my soul grown oldGrown old with many a jousting, many a foray, Grown old with many a hither-coming and hence-goingTill now they send him dreams and no more deed ; So doth he flame again with might for action, Forgetful of the council of the elders,Forgetful that who rules doth no more battle, Forgetful that such might no more cleaves to him; So doth he flame again toward valiant doing.REVOLTAGAINST THE CREPUSCULAR SPIRIT IN MODERN POETRYWOULD shake off the lethargy of this our time, I and giveFor shadows shapes of power, For dreams men."It is better to dream than do?"Aye! and, No!28?Aye ! if we dream great deeds, strong men, Revolt Hearts hot, thoughts mighty.No ! if we dream pale flowers,Slow-moving pageantry of hours that languidly Drop as o'er-ripened fruit from sallow trees.If so we live and die not life but dreams,Great God, grant life in dreams, Not dalliance, but life !Let us be men that dream,Not cowards, dabblers, waitersFor dead Time to reawaken and grant balm For ills unnamed.Great God, if we be damn'd to be not men but onlydreams,Then tet us be such dreams the world shall trembleatAnd know we be its rulers though but dreams ! Then let us be such shadows as the world shalltremble atAnd know we be its masters though but shadow !High God, if men are grown but pale sickphantomsThat must live only in these mists and temperedlightsAnd tremble for dim hours that knock o'er loudOr tread too violent in passing them; 29?Revolt Great God, if these thy sons are grown such thinephemera,I bid thee grapple chaos and begetSome new titanic spawn to pile the hills and stir This earth again.AND THUS IN NINEVEHYE! I am a poet and upon my tomb Shall maidens scatter rose leavesAnd men myrtles, ere the night Slays day with her dark sword."Lo! this thing is not mineNor thine to hinder,For the custom is full old,And here in Nineveh have I beheldMany a singer pass and take his placeIn those dim halls where no man troublethHis sleep or song.And many a one hath sung his songsMore craftily, more subtle-souled than I;And many a one now doth surpassMy wave-worn beauty with his wind of flowers, Yet am I poet, and upon my tombShall all men scatter rose leaves ere the night Slay light with her blue sword."It is not, Raana, that my song rings highest Or more sweet in tone than any, but that I Am here a Poet, that doth drink of lifeAs lesser men drink wine."30?THE WHITE STAGHA* seen them mid the clouds on the heather. i Lo! they pause not for love nor for sorrow,Yet their eyes are as the eyes of a maid to her lover, When the white hart breaks his coverAnd the white wind breaks the morn."Bid the world's hounds come to horn!"'T is the white stag, Fame, we 're a-hunting,PICCADILLYtragical faces, BEAYUeTIthFatUwLe,re whole, and are so sunken;And, O ye vile, ye that might have been loved, That are so sodden and drunken,Who hath forgotten you? O wistful, fragile faces, few out of many!The gross, the coarse, the brazen,God knows I cannot pity them, perhaps, as I shoulddo,But, oh, ye delicate, wistful faces,Who hath forgotten you??EXULTATIONS?/ am an eternal spirit and the things I make arebut ephemera, yet I endure:Yea, and the little earth crumbles beneath our feetand we endure.?TO CARLOS TRACY CHESTER?NIGHT LITANYoDIEU, purifiez nos coeurs! Purifiez nos coeurs!Yea, the lines hast thou laid unto mein pleasant places, And the beauty of this thy Venicehast thou shown unto me Until is its loveliness become unto mea thing of tears.O God, what great kindnesshave we done in times pastand forgotten it,That thou givest this wonder unto us,O God of waters?O God of the night,What great sorrowCometh unto us,That thou thus repayest usBefore the time of its coming?O God of silence,Purifiez nos coeurs,Purifiez nos coeurs, For we have seenThe glory of the shadow of the likeness of thine handmaid,Yea, the glory of the shadow of thy Beauty hath walked37?Night Upon the shadow of the watersLitanyIn this thy Venice.And before the holinessOf the shadow of thy handmaid Have I hidden mine eyes, O God of waters.O God of silence,Purifiez nos coeurs,Purifiez nos coeurs,O God of waters,make clean our hearts within usAnd our lips to show forth thy praise, For I have seen theShadow of this thy VeniceFloating upon the waters, And thy starsHave seen this thing, out of their far courses Have they seen this thing,O God of waters, Even as are thy starsSilent unto us in their far-coursing, Even so is mine heartbecome silent within me.Purifiez nos cosurs, O God of the silence,Purifiez nos coeurs, O God of waters.?SESTINA: ALTAFORTELOQUITUR : En Bertrans de Born.Dante Alighieri put this man in hell for that he was a stirrer-up of strife.Eccovi !Judge ye !Have I dug him up again ?The scene is at his castle, Altaforte.The " Leopard," the device of Richard (Coeur de Lion).DAYMouN it all ! all this our South stinks peace.whoreson come dog, Papiols,music!I have no life save when the swords clash. Butah! whenIseethestandardsgold,vair,purple,opposingAnd the broad fields beneath them turn crimson, Then howl I my heart nigh mad with rejoicing.In hot summer have I great rejoicingWhen the tempests kill the earth's foul peace, And the lightnings from black heav'n flash crimson, And the fierce thunders roar me their musicAnd the winds shriek through the clouds mad, op-posing,And through all the riven skies God's swords clash.mHell grant soon we hear again the swords clash ! And the shrill neighs of destriers in battle rejoicing, Spiked breast to spiked breast opposing/39""Papiols is his jongleur.!Let's to?Sestina: AltaforteBetter one hour's stour than a year's peace with fat boards, bawds, wine and frail music! Bah ! there 's no wine like the blood's crimson !IVAnd I love to see the sun rise blood-crimson. And I watch his spears through the dark clash And it fills all my heart with rejoicingAnd pries wide my mouth with fast music When I see him so scorn and defy peace,His lone might 'gainst all darkness opposing.The man who fears war and squats opposingMy words for stour, hath no blood of crimson, But is fit only to rot in womanish peaceFar from where worth 's won and the swords clash For the death of such sluts I go rejoicing;Yea, I fill all the air with my music.VIPapiols, Papiols, to the music !There 's no sound like to swords swords opposing, No cry like the battle's rejoicingWhen our elbows and swords drip the crimson And our charges 'gainst "The Leopard's" rushclash.May God damn for ever all who cry "Peace!"vnAnd let the music of the swords make them crimson ! Hell grant soon we hear again the swords clash ! Hell blot black for alway the thought "Peace!"40?BALLAD OF THE GOODLY FERE1SIMON ZELOTES SPEAKETH IT SOMEWHILE AFTER THE CRUCIFIXIONFA' we lost the goodliest fere o' allL For the priests and the gallows tree? Aye lover he was of brawny men,O' ships and the open sea.When they came wi' a host to take Our Man His smile was good to see,"First let these go!" quo' our Goodly Fere, "Or I '11 see ye damned," says he.Aye he sent us out through the crossed high spears And the scorn of his laugh rang free,"Why took ye not me when I walked about Alone in the town?" says he.Oh we drank his "Hale" in the good red wine When we last made company,No capon priest was the Goodly Fere, But a man o' men was he.I ha* seen him drive a hundred men jWi' a bundle o cords swung free,That they took the high and holy house For their pawn and treasury.They '11 no' get him a' in a book, I think,Though they write it cunningly;No mouse of the scrolls was the Goodly Fere, But aye loved the open sea.1Fere=s Mate, Companion. 41?Ballad of If think theyha' snared our Fere^^"I '11 go to the feast," quo' our Goodly Fere,"Though I go to the gallows tree.""Ye ha' seen me heal the lame and blind,And wake the dead," says he,"Ye shall see one thing to master all:'T is how a brave man dies on the tree."A son of God was the Goodly Fere That bade us his brothers be.I ha' seen him cow a thousand men. I have seen him upon the tree.He cried no cry when they drave the nails And the blood gushed hot and free,The hounds of the crimson sky gave tongue But never a cry cried he.I ha' seen him cow a thousand menOn the hills o' Galilee,They whined as he walked out calm between, Wi' his eyes like the grey o' the sea.Like the sea that brooks no voyaging With the winds unleashed and free, Like the sea that he cowed at Genseret Wi' twey words spoke' suddently.42they the Goodly They are {QQ]B tQGoodly degree?A master of men was the Goodly Fere,A mate of the wind and sea,If they think they ha' slain our Goodly Fere They are fools eternally.I ha' seen him eat o' the honey-comb Sin' they nailed him to the tree.PORTRAIT"From LaM&reInconnue."NOW would I weave her portrait out of all dimsplendour.Of Provence and far halls of memory,Lo, there come echoes, faint diversityOf blended bells at even's end, orAs the distant seas should send herThe tribute of their trembling, ceaselessly Resonant. Outofalldreamsthatbe,Say, shall I bid the deepest dreams attend her?Nay ! For I have seen the purplest shadows stand Alway with reverent chere that looked on her, Silence himself is grown her worshipperAnd ever doth attend her in that landWherein she reigneth, wherefore let there stir Naught but the softest voices, praising her.THE EYESMaster, for we be a-weary, weary, RESATn,d would feel the fingers of the windUpon these lids that lie over us Sodden and lead-heavy.43Ballad of fere?The EyesRest, brother, for lo ! the dawn is without !The yellow flame paleth And the wax runs low.Free us, for without be goodly colours, Green of the wood-moss and flower-colours, And coolness beneath the trees.Free us, for we perishIn this ever-flowing monotony Of ugly print marks, black Upon white parchment.Free us, for there is one Whose smile more availethThan all the age-old knowledge of thy books: And we would look thereon.NILS LYKKEBEATUhTatIFarUeL, at a-pluckinginfinite memoriesmy heart, Why will you be ever calling and a-calling,And a-murmuring in the dark there?And a-reaching out your long hands Between me and my beloved?"And why will you be ever a-casting The black shadow of your beauty On the white face of my belovedAnd a-glinting in the pools of her eyes?" 44?"FAIR HELENA" BY RACKHAM "What I love best in all the world?"WHEToNthe purple twilight is unbound,watch her tallslow, graceand its wistful And to know her faceloveliness,is in the shadow there, Just by two stars beneath that cloudThe soft, dim cloud of her hair, And to think my voicecan reach to herAs but the rumour of some tree-bound stream,Heard just beyond the forest's edge, Until she all forgets I am,And knows of meNaught but my dream's felicity.GREEK EPIGRAMand night are never weary, DAYNor yet is God of creatingFor day and night their torch-bearers, The aube and the crepuscule.So, when I weary of praising the dawn and the sun-set,Let me be no more counted among the immortals; But number me amid the wearying ones,Let me be a man as the herd,And as the slave that is given in barter.45?HISTRIONri N:greatAt times pass through us,And we are melted into them, and are not Save reflexions of their souls.Thus am I Dante for a space and am One Francois Villon, ballad-lord and thief Or am such holy ones I may not write, Lest blasphemy be writ against my name; This for an instant and the flame is gone.'T is as in midmost us there glows a sphere Translucent, molten gold, that is the "I" And into this some form projects itself:Christus, or John, or eke the Florentine; And as the clear space is not if a form 'sImposed thereon,So cease we from all being for the time,And these, the Masters of the Soul, live on.PARACELSUS IN EXCELSIS" "DEING no longer human, why should I -D Pretend humanity or don the frail attire?Men have I known and men, but never one Was grown so free an essence, or become So simply element as what I am.The mist goes from the mirror and I see ! Behold ! the world of forms is swept beneath46O man hath dared to write this thing as yet,And I how that the souls of all men yet know,?Turmoil grown visible beneath our peace,And we that are grown formless rise above, Fluids intangible that have been men,We seem as statues round whose high risen base Some overflowing river is run mad;In us alone the element of calm !A SONG OF THE VIRGIN MOTHER In "Los Pastores de Belen."From the Spanish of Lope de Vega.Paracel- s s if.fkAsS ye go through these palm-trees,OSith sleepeth my child here Still ye the branches.O Bethlehem palm-trees That move to the angerOf winds in their fury,Tempestuous voices, Make ye no clamour,Run ye less swiftly,Sith sleepeth the child here Still ye your branches.He the divine child Is here a-weariedOf weeping the earth-pain, Here for his rest would heCease from his mourning, 47holy angels;?A Song o/Only a little while,**f V,ir8in Sith sleepeth this child hereStay ye the branches.Cold be the fierce winds, Treacherous round him. Ye see that I have not Wherewith to guard him, O angels, divine ones That pass us a-flying,Sith sleepeth my child here Stay ye the branches.Ya veis que no tengo Con que guardarlo,O angeles santosQue vais volandoFor que duerme mi nino Tened los ramos!SONGthou thy dreamscorning, Love thou the windAnd here take warningThat dreams alone can truly be, For 't is in dream I come to thee.48LOVEl base love Al?PLANH FOR THE YOUNG ENGLISH KING THAT IS, PRINCE HENRY PLANTAGENET, ELDERall the grief and woe and bitterness, IFAll dolour, ill and every evil chanceThat ever came upon this grieving world Were set together, they would seem but lightAgainst the death of the young English King. Worth lieth riven and Youth dolorous,The world o'ershadowed, soiled and overcast, Void of all joy and full of ire and sadness.Grieving and sad and full of bitternessAre left in teen the liegemen courteous,The joglars supple and the troubadours.O'er much hath ta'en Sir Death, that deadly warrior, In taking from them the young English King, Who made the freest hand seem covetous.'Las ! Never was nor will be in this worldThe balance for this loss in ire and sadness !O skilful Death and full of bitterness,Well mayst thou boast that thou the best chevalier That any folk e'er had, hast from us taken;Sith nothing is that unto worth pertainethBut had its life in the young English King,And better were it, should God grant his pleasure That he should live than many a living dastard That doth but wound the good with ire and sadness.49BROTHER TO RICHARD "CCEUR DE LIONFrom the Provengal of Bertrans de Born, elk marrimen"""Si tuitli dolelhplor?Planh for From this faint world, now full of bitterness EnJlisT* Love takes his wa^ and holds his J oy deceitful>KingSith no thing is but turneth unto anguishAnd each to-day Vails less than yestere'en,Let each man visage this young English King That was most valiant mid all worthiest men ! Gone is his body fine and amorous,Whence have we grief, discord and deepest sadness.Him, whom it pleased for our great bitterness To come to earth to draw us from misventure, Who drank of death for our salvacioun,Him do we pray as to a Lord most righteous And humble eke, that the young English King He please to pardon, as true pardon is,And bid go in with honoured companionsThere where there is no grief, nor shall be sadness.ALBA INNOMINATA From the Provencal.FN a garden where the whitethorn spreads her r leavesMy lady hath her love lain close beside her,Till the warder cries the dawn Ah dawn thatgrieves !Ah God ! Ah God ! That dawn should come sosoon!50?" Please God that night, dear night, should never Alba In- nominatacease,Nor that my love should parted be from me,Nor watch cry 'Dawn' Ah dawn that slayethpeace!Ah God ! Ah God ! That dawn should come sosoon!"Fair friend and sweet, thy lips ! Our lips again Lo, in the meadow there the birds give song !Ours be the love and Jealousy's the pain !Ah God! Ah God! That dawn should come sosoon!"Sweet friend and fair, take we our joy again Down in the garden, where the birds are loud, Till the warder's reed astrainCry God! Ah God! That dawn should come sosoon!" Of that sweet wind that comes from Far-Away Have I drunk deep of my Beloved's breath,Yea ! of my Love's that is so dear and gay.Ah God ! Ah God ! That dawn should come sosoon!"EnvoiFair is this damsel and right courteous,And many watch her beauty's gracious ways.Her heart toward love is no wise traitorous.Ah God! Ah God! That dawn should come sosoon!?LAUDANTESwHEN your beauty is grown old in all men'sAnd my poor words are lost amid that throng,Then you will know the truth of my poor words,And mayhap dreaming of the wistful throngThat hopeless sigh your praises in their songs, You will think kindly then of these mad words.I am torn, torn with thy beauty,O Rose of the sharpest thorn !O Rose of the crimson beauty,Why hast thou awakened the sleeper?Why hast thou awakened the heart within me, O Rose of the crimson thorn?The unappeasable lovelinessis calling to me out of the wind,And because your nameis written upon the ivory doors,The wave in my heart is as a green wave, unconfined, Tossing the white foam toward you;And the lotus that poursHer fragrance into the purple cupIs more to be gained with the foam Than are you with these words of mine.52?IVHe speaks to the moonlight concerning the Beloved.Pale hair that the moon has shaken Down over the dark breast of the sea,magic her beauty has shakenAbout the heart of me;Out of you have I woven a dreamThat shall walk in the lonely valeBetwixt the high hill and the low hill, Until the pale streamOf the souls of men quench and grow still.vVoices speaking to the sun.Red leaf that art blown upward and out and over The green sheaf of the world,And through the dim forest and underThe shadowed arches and the aisles,We, who are older than thou art,Met and remembered when his eyes beheld her In the garden of the peach-trees,In the day of the blossoming.VI1 stood on the hill of Yrmawhen the winds were a-hurrying,With the grasses a-bendingI followed them,Through the brown grasses of Ahva unto the green of Asedon.53Laudantes?Laudantes I have rested with the voicesin the gardens of Ahthor, I have lain beneath the peach-treesin the hour of the purple:Because I had awaited inthe garden of the peach-trees, Because I had feared notin the forest of my mind, Mine eyes beheld the vision of the blossomThere in the peach-gardens past Asedon.winds of Yrma, let her again come unto me, Whose hair ye held unbound in the gardens ofAhthor!vnBecause of the beautiful white shoulders and the rounded breasts1 can in no wise forget my beloved of the peach-trees,And the little winds that speak when the dawn isunfurledAnd the rose-colour in the grey oak-leaf's foldWhen it first comes, and the glamour that rests On the little streams in the evening; all of these Call me to her, and all the loveliness in the world Binds me to my beloved with strong chains of gold.vmIf the rose-petals which have fallen upon my eyes And if the perfect faces which I see at times54?When my eyes are closedFaces fragile, pale, yet flushed a little, like petals of roses :If these things have confused my memories of her So that I could not draw her faceEven if I had skill and the colours,Yet because her face is so like these thingsThey but draw me nearer unto her in my thoughtAnd thoughts of her come upon my mind gently, As dew upon the petals of roses.DCHe speaks to the rain.O pearls that hang on your little silver chains, The innumerable voices that are whisperingAmong you as you are drawn aside by the wind, Have brought to my mind the soft and eager speech Of one who hath great loveliness,Which is subtle as the beauty of the rains That hang low in the moonshine and bringThe May softly among us, and unbindThe streams and the crimson and white flowers andreachDeep down into the secret places.xThe glamour of the soul hath come upon me,And as the twilight comes upon the roses, 55Laudantei?Laudantes Walking silently among them,So have the thoughts of my heartGone out slowly in the twilight Toward my beloved,Toward the crimson rose, the fairest.PLANHIt is of the white thoughts that he saw in the Forest.WHIOTE Poppy, heavy with dreams,White Poppy, who art wiser than love,Though I am hungry for their lips When I see them a-hidingAnd a-passing out and in through the shadows There in the pine wood it is,And they are white, White Poppy,They are white like the clouds in the forest of theskyEre the stars arise to their hunting.White Poppy, who art wiser than love, 1 am come for peace, yea from the hunting Am I come to thee for peace.Out of a new sorrow it is,That my hunting hath brought me.White Poppy, heavy with dreams, Though I am hungry for their lipsWhen I see them a-hidingAnd a-passing out and in through the shadowsAnd it is white they are 56?But if one should look at me with the old hunger in Plankher eyes,How will I be answering her eyes?For I have followed the white folk of the forest.Aye ! It 's a long huntingAnd it 's a deep hunger I have when I see thema-glidingAnd a-flickering there, where the trees stand apart.But oh, it is sorrow and sorrow When love dies-down in the heart.57?CANZONIERESTUDIES IN FORM i?" Ma qui la morta poesi risurga."?TO OLIVIA AND DOROTHY SHAKESPEAR?OCTAVEsongs, fair songs, these golden usuries FINHeEr beauty earns as but just increment,And they do speak with a most ill intentWho say they give when they pay debtor's fees.I call him bankrupt in the courts of song Who hath her gold to eye and pays her not, Defaulter do I call the knave who hath got Her silver in his heart and doth her wrong.SONNET IN TENZONE LA MENTETHOU mocked heart that cowerest by the doorAnd durst not honour hope with welcoming, How shall one bid thee for her honour sing,When song would but show forth thy sorrow'sstore?What things are gold and ivory unto thee?Go forth, thou pauper fool ! Are these for naught? Isheaveninlotusleaves? Whathastthouwrought, Or brought, or sought wherewith to pay the fee?"IL CUORERonsard me celebroit! behold I giveThe age-old, age-old fare to fairer fairAnd I fare forth into more bitter air;Though mocked I go, yet shall her beauty live Till rimes unrime and Truth shall truth unlearn."63"If naught I give, naught do I take return. *'?: SONNETon the tally-board of wasted daysIF write me for They dailyproud idleness, Let high Hell summons me, and I confess,No overt act the preferred charge allays.To-day I thought what boots it what I thought? Poppies and gold ! Why should I blurt it out? Or hawk the magic of her name aboutDeaf doors and dungeons where no truth is brought ?Who calls me idle? I have thought of her. Who calls me idle? By God's truth I 've seen The arrowy sunlight in her golden snares.Let him among you all stand summonserWho hath done better things ! Let whoso hath been With worthier works concerned, display his wares !CANZON: THE YEARLY SLAIN (Written in reply to Manning's "Kor^k") .^9^-<-j ^-*? Ethuiusmodistantiaeususestfereinomnibuscantionibussuis"A rnaldus Danielis et nos eum. secut, sumus. DANTE, De Vulgari Eloquio, II. 10.)red-leafed time hath driven out the rose AH!And crimson dew is fallen on the leafEre ever yet the cold white wheat be sown That hideth all earth's green and sere and red ;64?The Moon-flower 's fallen and the branch is bare, Canzon:Holding no honey for the starry bees;The Maiden turns to her dark lord's demesne.Fairer than Enna's field when Ceres sowsThe stars of hyacinth and puts off grief,Fairer than petals on May morning blown Through apple-orchards where the sun hath shedHis brighter petals down to make them fair; Fairer than these the Poppy-crowned One flees, And Joy goes weeping in her scarlet train.mThe faint damp wind that, ere the even, blowsPiling the west with many a tawny sheaf,Then when the last glad wavering hours are mown Sigheth and dies because the day is sped;This wind is like her and the listless air Wherewith she goeth by beneath the trees,The trees that mock her with their scarlet stain.IVLove that is born of Time and comes and goes ! Love that doth hold all noble hearts in fief!As red leaves follow where the wind hath flown, So all men follow Love when Love is dead.O Fate of Wind ! O Wind that cannot spare, But drivest out the Maid, and pourest leesOf all thy crimson on the wold again,65Fear/y slain?Kore my heart is, let it stand sans gloze ! Love's pain is long, and lo, love's joy is brief ! My heart erst alway sweet is bitter grown; As crimson ruleth in the good green's stead, So grief hath taken all mine old joy's share And driven forth my solace and all ease Where pleasure bows to all-usurping pain.VICrimson the hearth where one last ember glows ! My heart's new winter hath no such relief,Nor thought of Spring whose blossom he hathknownHath turned him back where Spring is banished. Barren the heart and dead the fires there,Blow! O ye ashes, where the winds shall please, But cry, "Love also is the Yearly Slain."vnBe sped, my Canzon, through the bitter air ! To him who speaketh words as fair as these, Say that I also know the "Yearly Slain."KOREFrom the " Poems of Frederic Manning,'* published by John Murray, with whose permission we here reprint it.Yea, she hath passed hereby and blessed the sheaves And the great garths and stacks and quiet farms, And all the tawny and the crimson leaves,Yea, she hath passed with poppies in her arms Under the star of dusk through stealing mist_ And blest the earth and gone while no man wist.66?With slow reluctant feet and weary eyes Kore And eyelids heavy with the coming sleep,With small breasts lifted up in stress of sighs,She passed as shadows pass amid the sheepWhile the earth dreamed and only I was ware Of that faint fragrance blown from her soft hair.The land lay steeped in peace of silent dreams, There was no sound amid the sacred boughs Nor any mournful music in her streams,Only I saw the shadow on her brows,Only I knew her for the Yearly SlainAnd wept, and weep until she come again.CANZON: THE SPEAR[This fashion of stanza is used by Jaufre Rudel in the song "D'un amordelonh." Themeasureistobesungratherthanspoken.]IS the clear light of love I praiseThat steadfast gloweth o'er deep waters,A clarity that gleams always.Though man's soul pass through troubled waters, Strange ways tp him are opened.To shore the beaten ship is spedIf only love of light give aid.iiThat fair far spear of light now lays Its long gold shaft upon the waters. Ah ! might I pass upon its raysTo where it gleams beyond the waters, 67?Canzon: SpearOr might my troubled heart be fed UpOn the frail clear light there shed>Then were my pain at last allay'd.niAlthough the clouded storm dismays Many a heart upon these waters, The thought of that far golden blaze Giveth me heart upon the waters, Thinking thereof my bark is ledTo port wherein no storm I dread; No tempest maketh me afraid.IVYet when within my heart I gazeUpon my fair beyond the waters, Meseems my soul within me praysTo pass straightway beyond the waters. Though I be alway banishedFrom ways and woods that she doth tread, One thing there is that doth not fade,Deep in my heart that spear-print stays, That wound I gat beyond the waters,Deeper with passage of the daysThat pass as swift and bitter waters, While a dull fire within my head Moveth itself if word be saidWhich hath concern with that far maid.68?VIMy love is lovelier than the spraysOf eglantine above clear waters,Or whitest lilies that upraiseTheir heads in midst of moated waters.No poppy in the May-glad mead Would match her quivering lips' red If 'gainst her lips it should be laid.VIIThe light within her eyes, which slays Base thoughts and stilleth troubled waters,Is like the gold where sunlight plays Upon the still overshadowed waters.When anger is there mingledThere comes a keener gleam instead,Like flame that burns beneath thin jade.vniKnow by the words here mingledWhat love hath made my heart his stead, Glowing like flame beneath thin jade.CANZONTO BE SUNG BENEATH A WINDOWIHEART mine, art mine, whose embraces Clasp but wind that past thee bloweth?E'en this air so subtly gloweth, Guerdoned by thy sun-gold tracesCanzon: spear?Canzon That my heart is half afraidFor the fragrance on him laid; Even so love's might amazes !Man's love follows many faces,My love only one face knoweth;Towards thee only my love floweth,And outstrips the swift stream's paces. Were this love well here displayed,As flame flameth 'neath thin jadeLove should glow through these my phrases.HIThough I Ve roamed through many places, None there is that my heart trowethFair as that wherein fair growethOne whose land here interlacesTuneful words, that I Ve essayed. Let this tune be gently played Which my voice herward upraises.IVIf my praise her grace effaces,Then 't is not my heart that showeth, But the skilless tongue that soweth Words unworthy of her graces. Tongue, that hath me so betrayed, Were my heart but here displayed, Then were sung her fitting praises.NOTE. The form and measure are those of Piere Vidal's " Ab ValentirvasmeVaire" Thesongisfitonlytobesung,and is not to be spoken.70?CANZON: OF INCENSE[To this form sings Arnault Daniel, with seven stanzas instead of five.]gracious ways,O Lady of my heart, have O'er all my thought their golden glamour cast;As amber torch-flames, where strange men-at-arms Tread softly 'neath the damask shield of night,Rise from the flowing steel in part reflected, So on my mailed thought that with thee goeth,Though dark the way, a golden glamour falleth.HThe censer swaysAnd glowing coals some art have To free what frankincense before held fastTill all the summer of the eastern farmsDoth dim the sense, and dream up through the light, As memory, by new-born love correctedWith savour such as only new love knoweth Through swift dim ways the hidden pasts recalleth.raOn barren days,At hours when I, apart, haveBent low in thought of the great charm thou hast, Behold with music's many stringed charmsThe silence groweth thou. O rare delight !The melody upon clear strings inflectedWere dull when o'er taut sense thy presence floweth, With quivering notes' accord that never palleth.THY?Canzon:OfIn-r ..cense The glowing raysIVThat from the low sun dart, have Turned gold each tower and every towering mast;The saffron flame, that flaming nothing harms Hides Khadeeth's pearl and all the sapphire might Of burnished waves, before her gates collected: The cloak of graciousness, that round thee gloweth, Doth hide the thing thou art, as here befalleth.vAll things worth praiseThat unto Khadeeth's mart haveFrom far been brought through perils over-passed, All santal, myrrh, and spikenard that disarms The pard's swift anger; these would weigh but light 'Gainst thy delights, my Khadeeth! WhenceprotectedBy naught save her great grace that in him showeth, My song goes forth and on her mercy calleth.VIO censer of the thought that golden gloweth, Be bright before her when the evening falleth.vnFragrant be thou as a new field one moweth, O song of mine that "Hers" her mercy calleth.72?CANZONE: OF ANGELSHEthat is Lord of all the realms of lightHath unto me from HisGranted such vision as hath wrought my joy.Moving my spirit past the last defenceThat shieldeth mortal things from mightier sight, Where freedom of the soul knows no alloy,I saw what forms the lordly powers employ; Three splendours, saw I, of high holiness, From clarity to clarity ascendingThrough all the roofless, tacit courts extending In aether which such subtle light doth blessAs ne'er the candles of the stars hath wooed; Know ye herefrom of their similitude.IIWithdrawn within the cavern of his wings,Grave with the joy of thoughts beneficent,And finely wrought and durable and clearIf so his eyes showed forth the mind's content, So sate the first to whom remembrance clings, Tissued like bat's wings did his wings appear, Not of that shadowy colouring and drear,But as thin shells, pale saffron, luminous;Alone, unlonely, whose calm glances shed Friend's love to strangers though no word weresaid,Pensive his godly state he keepeth thus.Not with his surfaces his power endeth,But is as flame that from the gem extendeth.73magnificence?Canzone: HI Of AngelsMy second marvel stood not in such ease,But he, the cloudy pinioned, winged him on Then from my sight as now from memory,The courier aquiline, so swiftly gone !The third most glorious of these majestiesGive aid, O sapphires of th' eternal see, And by your light illume pure verity.That azure feldspar hight the microcline, Or, on its wing, the Menelaus wearethSuch subtlety of shimmering as beareth This marvel onward through the crystalline, A splendid calyx that about her gloweth, Smiting the sunlight on whose ray she goeth.IVThe diver at Sorrento from beneathThe vitreous indigo, who swiftly riseth,By will and not by action as it seemeth,Moves not more smoothly, and no thought sur-misethHow she takes motion from the lustrous sheathWhich, as the trace behind the swimmer, gleameth Yet presseth back the aether where it streameth. To her whom it adorns this sheath impartethThe living motion from the light surrounding; And thus my nobler parts, to grief's confounding, Impart into my heart a peace which startethFrom one round whom a graciousness is cast Which clingeth in the air where she hath past.74?V. TORNATACanzon, to her whose spirit seems in soothAkin unto the feldspar, since it isSo clear and subtle and azure, I send thee, saying: That since I looked upon such potenciesAnd glories as are here inscribed in truth,New boldness hath o'erthrown my long delaying, And that thy words my new-born powers obeying Voices at last to voice my heart's long moodAre come to greet her in their amplitude.Canzone: Of AngelsNOTE. This form is not Provengal, but that of Dante's "matchless Voi che intendendo z/ terzo ciel movete." ILItalian.SONNET: CHI E QUESTA?WHOis she coming, that the roses bendTheir shameless heads to do her honour ?passingWho is she coming with a light upon herNot born of suns that with the day's end end ?Say, is it Love who hath chosen the nobler part? Say, is it Love, that was divinity,Who hath left his godhead that his home might be The shameless rose of her unclouded heart?If this be Love, where hath he won such grace? If this be Love, how is the evil wrought,That all men write against his darkened name?75?Sonnet: If this be Love, if thisO mind give place !What holy mystery e'er was noosed in thought? Own that thou scan'st her not, nor count it shame !OF GRACE(BALLATA, FRAGMENT) iiFPULL well thou knowest, song, what grace I mean,E'en as thou know'st the sunlight I have lost.Thou knowest the way of it and know'st the sheen About her brows where the rays are bound andcrossed,E'en as thou knowest joy and know'st joy's bittercost.Thou know'st her grace in moving, Thou dost her skill in loving,Thou know'st what truth she proveth, Thou knowest the heart she moveth, O song where grief assoneth !CANZON: THE VISIONThe form is that of Arnault Daniel's "Sols suique sailo sobra- fan quern sortz."WHENfirst I saw thee 'neath the silver mist,Ruling thy bark of painted sandal-wood, Didanyknowthee? Bythegoldensails76?That clasped the ribbands of that azure sea,Did any know thee save my heart alone?O ivory woman with thy bands of gold,Answer the song my luth and I have brought thee !nDream over golden dream that secret cist,Thy heart, O heart of me, doth hold, and moodOn mood of silver, when the day's light fails,Say who hath touched the secret heart of thee,Or who hath known what my heart hath notknown !O slender pilot whom the mists enfold,Answer the song my luth and I have wrought thee !mWhen new love plucks the falcon from his wrist, And cuts the gyve and casts the scarlet hood, Where is the heron heart whom flight avails? O quick to prize me Love, how suddenly From out the tumult truth hath ta'en his own, And in this vision is our past unrolled.Lo ! With a hawk of light thy love hath caught me.IVAnd I shall get no peace from eucharist,Nor doling out strange prayers before the rood, To match the peace that thine hands' touch entails;77?Canzon : Nor doth God's light match light shed over me The rltfflftwjgga thy caught sunlight is about me thrown,Oh, for the very ruth thine eyes have told, Answer the rune this love of thee hath taught me.After an age of longing had we missedOur meeting and the dream, what were the good Ofweavingclothofwords? Werejeweledtales An opiate meet to quell the malady Oflifeunlived? InuntriedmonotoneWere not the earth as vain, and dry, and old, For thee, O Perfect Light, had I not sought thee?VICalais, in song where word and tone keep tryst Behold my heart, and hear mine hardihood ! Calais, the wind is come and heaven pales And trembles for the love of day to be.Calais, the words break and the dawn is shown.Ah, but the stars set when thou wast first bold,Turn! lest they say a lesser light distraught thee.VTIO ivory thou, the golden scythe hath mown Night'sstubbleandmyjoy. Ah,royalsouled, Favour the quest ! Lo, Truth and I have soughtthee !78?TO OUR LADY OF VICARIOUS ATONEMENT (BALLATA)iWHOare you that the whole world's songIs shaken out beneath feet yourLeaving you comfortless, Who, that, as wheatIs garnered, gather in The blades of man's sin And bear that sheaf?Lady of wrong and grief, Blameless !All souls beneath the gloom That pass with little flames, All these till time be run Pass one by oneAs Christs to save, and die ;What wrong one sowed, Behold, another reaps! Where lips awake our joy The sad heart sleeps Within.No man doth bear his sin,But many sinsAre gathered as a cloud about man's way.79?EPILOGUETO GUIDO CAVALCANTIand I are come to learn of thee,DANOTEcrossedO who hast thou,thee,sung+; U none at defeat songessire master of usMLove, who hath set his hand upon us three,Bidding us twain upon thy glory call.Harsh light hath rent from us the golden pallOf that frail sleep, His first light seigniory,And we are come through all the modes that fall Unto their lot who meet him constantly. Wherefore, by right, in this lord's name we greetthee,Seeing we labour at his labour daily.Thou, who dost know what way swift words areGuido,all,Grant ! by thy might and hers of San Michele, Thy risen voice send flames this pentecost.NOTE. Thispoemforerunsatranslationof"TheSonnetsand"Ballate of Guidonow in preparation E. p.80?NOTES?NOTESNOTE PRECEDENT TO "LA FRAISNE"" When the soul is exhausted of fire, then doth the spirit return unto its primal nature and there is upon it a peace great and of thewoodland"magna pax et silvestrts."Then becometh it kin to the faun and the dryad, a woodland- dweller amid the rocks and streams" consociisfaunts dryadisque inter saxa sylvarum" Janus of Basel.Also has Mr. Yeats in his "Celtic Twilight" treated of such, and I because in such a mood, feeling myself divided between my-" woodland," eternal because simple in elements "Aetemus quia simplex naturae.""Being freed of the weight of a souldamnation," a grievous striving thing that after much straining was mercifully taken from me ; as had one passed saying as one in the Book of the Dead,"I, lo I, am the assembler of souls," and had taken it with him, leaving me thus simplex naturae, even so at peace and trans- sentient as a wood pool I made it."Miraut de Garzelas, after the pains he bore a-loving Riels of Calidorn and that to none avail, ran mad in theforest." Yea even as Peire Vidal ran as a wolf for her of Penautierthough some say that twas folly or as Garulf Bisclavret so ran truly, till the King brought him respite (See 'Lais' Marie de France), so was he ever by the Ash Tree."Hear ye his speaking: (low, slowly he speaketh it, as one drawn apart, reflecting) (egare").1 Referendumforcontrast. "Daemonalitas"oftheRev.Fatherself corporal and a self aetheriala dweller by streams and inThe Legend thus :" A treatise wherein is shown that there are in existence on earth rational creatures besides man, endowed like him with a body and soul, that are born and die like him, redeemed by our Lord Jesus Christ, and capable of receiving salvation or damnation." Latin and English text, pub. Liseux,Sinistrari of Ameno( 1600 circ.).Paris, 1879.83capable of salvation or1?MARVOIL NotesThe Personae arc :Arnaut of Marvoil, a troubadour, date 1170-1200.The Countess (in her own right) of Burlatz, and of Beziers, be-ing the wife ofThe Vicomte of Beziers.Alfonso IV of Aragon.Tibors of Mont-Ausier. For fuller mention of her see the"razos" on Bertran of Born. She is contemporary with the other persons, but I have no strict warrant for dragging her name into this particular affair.?_)>'}\.>6