Considerations on France
by Joseph de Maistre
CHAPTER I. ON REVOLUTIONS
We are all bound to the throne of the Supreme Being by a flexible chain which restrains without enslaving us. The most wonderful aspect of the universal scheme of things is the action of free beings under divine guidance. Freely slaves, they act at once of their own will and under necessity: they actually do what they wish without being able to disrupt general plans. Each of them stands at the center of a sphere of activity whose diameter varies according to the decision of the eternal geometry, which can extend, restrict, check, or direct the will without altering its nature.
In the works of man, everything is as poor as its author; vision is confined, means are limited, scope is restricted, movements are labored, and results are humdrum. In divine works, boundless riches reveal themselves even in the smallest component; its power operates effortlessly: in its hands everything is pliant, nothing can resist it; everything is a means, nothing an obstacle: and the irregularities produced by the work of free agents come to fall into place in the general order.

If one imagines a watch all of whose springs continually vary in power, weight, dimension, form, and position, and which nevertheless invariably shows the right time, one can get some idea of the action of free beings in relation to the plans of the Creator.

In the political and moral world, as in the physical, there is a usual order and there are exceptions to this order. Normally, we see a series of effects following the same causes; but in certain ages we see usual effects suspended, causes paralyzed and new consequences emerging.

A miracle is an effect produced by a divine or superhuman cause which suspends or is inconsistent with an ordinary cause. If in the middle of winter a man, before a thousand witnesses, orders a tree to cover itself suddenly with leaves and fruit, and if the tree obeys, everyone will proclaim a miracle and prostrate themselves before the thaumaturge. But the French Revolution, as well as everything that is happening in Europe at this time, is just as miraculous in its way as the instant fructification of a tree in January; yet men ignore it or talk nonsense about it, instead of admiring. In the physical order, into which man does not intrude as a cause, he is quite ready to admire what he does not understand; but in the sphere of his own activity, where he feels he acts freely as a cause, his pride easily leads him to see disorder wherever his own power is suspended or upset. Certain actions within the power of man regularly produce certain effects in the ordinary course of events; if he misses his mark, he knows, or thinks he knows, why; he recognizes the difficulties, he appreciates them, and nothing astonishes him. But in revolutionary times, the chain that binds man is shortened abruptly, his field of action is cut down, and his means deceive him. Carried along by an unknown force, he rails against it, and instead of kissing the hand that clasps him, he ignores or insults it.

I don't understand anything is the popular catchphrase. The phrase is very sensible if it leads us to the root cause of the great sight now presented to men; it is stupid if it expresses only spleen or sterile despondency. The cry is raised on all sides, "How then can the guiltiest men in the world triumph over the world? A hideous regicide has all the success for which its perpetrators could have hoped. Monarchy is dormant all over Europe. Its enemies find allies even on thrones themselves. The wicked are successful in everything. They carry through the most immense projects without difficulty, while the righteous are unfortunate and ridiculous in everything they undertake. Opinion runs against faith throughout Europe. The foremost statesmen continually fall into error. The greatest generals are humiliated. And so on."

Doubtless, because its primary condition lays it down, there are no means of preventing a revolution, and no success can attend those who wish to impede it. But never is purpose more apparent, never is Providence more palpable, than when divine replaces human action and works alone. That is what we see at this moment.

The most striking aspect of the French Revolution is this overwhelming force which turns aside all obstacles. Its current carries away like a straw everything human power has opposed to it. No one has run counter to it unpunished. Purity of motive has been able to make resistance honorable, but that is all; and this jealous force, moving inexorably to its objective, rejects equally Charette, Dumouriez, and Drouet.

It has been said with good reason that the French Revolution leads men more than men lead it. This observation is completely justified; and, although it can be applied more or less to all great revolutions, yet it has never been more strikingly illustrated than at the present time. The very villains who appear to guide the Revolution take part in it only as simple instruments; and as soon as they aspire to dominate it, they fall ingloriously. Those who established the Republic did so without wishing it and without realizing what they were creating; they have been led by events: no plan has achieved its intended end.

Never did Robespierre, Collot, or Barere think of establishing the revolutionary government or the Reign of Terror; they were led imperceptibly by circumstances, and such a sight will never be seen again. Extremely mediocre men are exercising over a culpable nation the most heavy despotism history has seen, and, of everyone in the kingdom, they are certainly the most astonished at their power.

But at the very moment when these tyrants have committed every crime necessary to this phase of the Revolution, a breath of wind topples them. This gigantic power, before which France and Europe trembled, could not stand before the first gust; and because there could be no possible trace of greatness or dignity in such an entirely criminal revolution, Providence decreed that the first blow should be struck by the Septembrists, so that justice itself might be degraded.

It is often astonishing that the most mediocre men have judged the French Revolution better than the most talented, that they have believed in it strongly while skilled men of affairs were still unbelievers. This conviction was one of the foremost elements of the Revolution, which could succeed only because of the extent and vigor of the revolutionary spirit or, if one can so express it, because of the revolutionary faith. So untalented and ignorant men have ably driven what they call the revolutionary chariot; they have all ventured without fear of counter-revolution; they have always driven on without looking behind them; and everything has fallen into their lap because they were only the instruments of a force more farsighted than themselves. They have taken no false steps in their revolutionary career, for the same reason that the flutist of Vaucanson never played a false note.

The revolutionary current has taken successively different courses; and the most prominent revolutionary leaders have acquired the kind of power and renown appropriate to them only by following the demands of the moment. Once they attempted to oppose it or even to turn it from its predestined course, by isolating themselves and following their own bent, they disappeared from the scene....

In short, the more one examines the apparently more active personalities of the Revolution, the more one finds something passive and mechanical about them. It cannot be too often repeated that men do not at all guide the Revolution; it is the Revolution that uses men. It is well said that it has its own impetus. This phrase shows that never has the Divinity revealed itself so clearly in any human event. If it employs the most vile instruments, it is to regenerate by punishment.

CHAPTER II. THOUGHTS ON THE WAYS OF PROVIDENCE IN THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
Every nation, like every individual, has a mission which it must fulfill. It would be futile to deny that France exercises a dominant influence over Europe, an influence she has abused most culpably. Above all, she was at the head of the religious system, and it was not without reason that her king was called most Christian: Bossuet has not over-stressed this point. However, as she has used her influence to pervert her vocation and to demoralize Europe, it is not surprising that terrible means must be used to set her on her true course again.
It is long since such an appalling punishment has been seen, visited on so many sinners. No doubt there are innocent people among the unfortunates, but they are far fewer than is commonly imagined.

All those who have worked to separate the people from their religious beliefs; all those who have opposed metaphysical sophistries to the laws of property; all those who have said, "Attack anything, so long as we gain by it"; all those who have meddled with the fundamental laws of the state; all those who have recommended, approved, favored the violent methods used against the king; even our restricted vision can perceive that all these have willed the Revolution, and all who willed it have most appropriately been its victims.

It is frightening to see distinguished intellectuals fall under Robespierre's ax. From a humane standpoint they can never be too much mourned, but divine justice is no respecter of mathematicians or scientists. Too many French intellectuals were instrumental in bringing about the Revolution; too many approved and encouraged it so long as, like Tarquin's wand, it cut off only the ruling heads. Like so many others, they said, A great revolution cannot come about without some distress. But when a thinker justifies such means by the end in view; when he says in his heart, A hundred thousand murders are as nothing, provided we are free; then, if Providence replies, I accept your recommendation, but you shall be one of the victims, where is the injustice? Would we judge otherwise in our own courts?

The details would be odious; but, among those who are called innocent victims of the Revolution, it is not much of a Frenchman whose conscience would not remind him:

Now you see the sad fruits that your faults have produced,
You can feel the blows that you yourselves have induced.
Our ideas on good and evil, on innocence and guilt, are too often affected by our prejudices. We frown on men who fight with daggers, but a duel with swords is considered honorable. We brand a man who steals a halfpenny from a friend, but think it nothing if he steals his wife. We pardon even if we do not make a virtue of all those flashy offenses involving great or likable qualities, above all those rewarded by success: whereas, the brilliant qualities which surround the guilty man blacken him in the eyes of true justice, for whom his greatest crime is the abuse of his gifts.
Every man has certain duties to perform, and the extent of these duties depends on his position in society and the extent of his means. The same action is by no means equally culpable when committed by two different men. Not to stray from our subject, the same act which results only from a mistake or a foolish characteristic in an obscure person, thrust suddenly into unlimited power, could be a foul crime in a bishop or a duke or a peer.

Indeed, some actions, which are excusable and even praiseworthy from an ordinary point of view, are fundamentally infinitely criminal. For example, if someone says, I have espoused the cause of the French Revolution in good faith, through a pure love of liberty and my country; I have believed in my soul and conscience that it would lead to the reform of abuses and to the general good, we have nothing to say in reply. But the eye of him who sees into every heart discerns the stain of sin; he discovers in a ridiculous misunderstanding, in a small puncturing of pride, in a base or criminal passion, the prime moving force behind those ambitions we wish to present to the world as noble: and for him the crime is compounded by grafting the falsehood of hypocrisy onto treason. But let us look at the nation in general.

One of the greatest possible crimes is undoubtedly an attack upon sovereignty, no other having such terrible consequences. If sovereignty resides in one man and this man falls victim to an outrage, the crime of lese-majesty augments the atrocity. But if this sovereign has not deserved his fate through any fault of his own, if his very virtues have strengthened the guilty against him, the crime is beyond description. This is the case in the death of Louis XVI; but what is important to note is that never has such a great crime had more accomplices. The death of Charles I had far fewer, even though it was possible to bring charges against him that Louis XVI did not merit. Yet many proofs were given of the most tender and courageous concern for him; even the executioner, who was obliged to obey, did not dare to make himself known. But in France, Louis XVI marched to his death in the middle of 60,000 armed men who did not have a single shot for their king, not a voice was raised for the unfortunate monarch, and the provinces were as silent as the capital. We would expose ourselves, it was said. Frenchmen - if you find this a good reason, talk no more of your courage or admit that you misuse it!

The indifference of the army was no less remarkable. It served the executioners of the king much better than it had served the king himself since it had betrayed him. It never showed the slightest sign of discontent. In sum, never have so many taken part in such a great crime (although no doubt in varying degrees).

It is necessary to add one important remark: it is that every offense committed against sovereignty, in the name of the nation, is always to a greater or lesser degree a national crime, since it is always to some degree the fault of the nation if any faction whatever is put in a position to commit the crime in its name. Thus, although no doubt not all Frenchmen have willed the death of Louis XVI, the immense majority of the people have for more than two years willed all the follies, injustices and offenses leading up to the catastrophe of January 21st.

Now, every national crime against sovereignty is punished swiftly and terribly; that is a law without exception. Not many days after the death of Louis XVI, someone wrote in the Mercure universel, "Perhaps it was not necessary go to so far; but since our legislators have taken this act on their shoulders, let us rally round them: let us smother all hatreds and question it no longer." Good - it was not perhaps necessary to assassinate the king, but since the deed is done, let us talk of it no more and let us all be good friends. What madness! Shakespeare showed more understanding when he said:

"The single and peculiar life is bound,
With all the strength and armour of the mind,
To keep itself from noyance; but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest
The lives of many. The cease of majesty
Dies not alone; but, like a gulf, doth draw
What's near it with it."
[Hamlet, Act III, Scene iii.] Each drop of Louis XVI's blood will cost France torrents; perhaps four million Frenchmen will pay with their lives for the great national crime of an antireligious and antisocial insurrection, crowned by a regicide.
Where are the first national guards, the first soldiers, the first generals who swore an oath to the nation? Where are the leaders, the idols of that first guilty Assembly, for whom the epithet constituent will stand as a perpetual epigraph? Where is Mirabeau, where is Bailly with his "beautiful day"? Where is Thouret who invented the term "to expropriate"? Where is Osselin who reported to the Assembly on the first law proscribing the emigres? The names of revolutionary activists who have died a violent death would be numbered in the thousands.

Yet it is here that we can appreciate order in disorder; because it is evident, however little one reflects on it, that the great criminals of the Revolution can fall only under the blows of their accomplices. If force alone were to bring about what is called the counter-revolution and replace the king on the throne, there would be no means of doing justice. For a sensitive man, the greatest misfortune would be to judge the murderer of his father, relatives, and friends or even the usurper of his property. However, this is precisely what would happen in the case of a counter-revolution, as the word is understood, because the higher judges, by the very nature of things, would belong to the injured class, and justice, even when it was aimed only at punishment, would have the air of vengeance. Moreover, legitimate authority always retains some moderation in the punishment of crimes in which large numbers have been involved. When it executes five or six criminals for the same crime, this becomes a massacre; if it goes beyond certain limits, it becomes detestable. In short, great crimes unfortunately demand great punishments; and in this way it is easy to pass the limits when it is a question of crimes of lese-majesty and flattery becomes the executioner. Would the sacred sword of justice have fallen as relentlessly as Robespierre's guillotine? Would all the executioners of the kingdom and every artillery horse have been summoned to Paris in order to quarter men? Would lead and tar have been melted in vast boilers to sprinkle on limbs torn by red-hot tongs? Moreover, how could different crimes be characterized? How could punishments be graduated? And above all how could punishments be imposed without laws? It might be said that some of the most guilty would have to be chosen and all the rest would have to be pardoned. This is precisely what Providence would not wish. Since it is omnipotent, it is ignorant of pardons produced by inability to punish. The great purification must be accomplished and eyes must be opened; the French metal, cleared of its sour and impure dross, must become cleaner and more malleable to a future king. Doubtless in times past Providence had no need to punish in order to justify its courses; but in this age, it puts itself within our range of understanding and punishes like a human tribunal.

There have been nations literally condemned to death like guilty individuals, and we can understand the reasons for this. If it was part of God's designs to reveal to us his intentions with regard to the French Revolution, we should read the chastisement of the French as if it were a legal decree. But what should we understand beyond this? Is not this chastisement apparent? Have we not seen France dishonored by a hundred thousand murders? The whole territory of this fair kingdom covered with scaffolds? And this unhappy land drenched with the blood of its children through judicial massacres, while inhuman tyrants squandered it abroad in a cruel war, sustained in their own private interests? Never has the bloodiest despot gambled with men's lives with so much insolence, and never has an apathetic people presented itself for butchering more willingly. Sword and fire, frost and famine, privations and sufferings of every kind, none of these disgust it with its punishment: everything that is laid down must accomplish its destiny: there will be no disobedience until the judgment is fulfilled.

Yet, in this cruel and disastrous war, there are points of interest, and admiration follows grief turn by turn. Let us take the most terrible epoch of the Revolution; let us suppose that, under the government of the diabolical Committee of Public Safety, the army by a startling change became suddenly royalist; let us suppose that it rallied the primary assemblies to its side and freely named the worthiest and most enlightened men to guide it in this difficult position; let us suppose, finally, that one of these representatives of the army rose and said:

"Brave and loyal soldiers, there are occasions when all human wisdom is reduced to choosing between different evils. It is no doubt hard to fight for the Committee of Public Safety, but it would be yet more disastrous to turn our arms against it. The moment the army meddles in politics, the state will be dissolved and the enemies of France, profiting from this period of disorder, will invade and divide it. We must act, not for the moment, but for the future: above all, the integrity of France must be maintained, and this we can do only by fighting for the government, whatever it may be; because by these means France, in spite of her internal dissensions, will preserve her military power and international influence. To press the point home, it is not for the government that we fight, but for France and for the future king, who will be indebted to us for an empire much greater perhaps than that found by the Revolution. It is therefore our duty to overcome the repugnance which makes us hesitate. Perhaps our contemporaries will calumniate our conduct, but posterity will do us justice."

This man would have spoken very wisely. In fact, the army has appreciated this hypothetical argument without knowing it; and the terror on the one hand and immorality and extravagance on the other, have done precisely what a consummate and almost prophetic wisdom would have dictated to the army. Fundamentally, it can be seen that, the revolutionary movement once having taken root, France and the monarchy could be saved only by Jacobinism.

The king has never had an ally; although he was never imprudent enough to state the fact, it is quite evident that the coalition had no love for French territorial integrity. However, how was the coalition to be resisted? By what supernatural means could the European conspiracy be broken? Only the evil genius of Robespierre could achieve this miracle. The revolutionary government hardened the French spirit, by drenching it in blood: it heightened soldiers' morale and doubled their power by a ferocious despair and contempt for life which derived from fury. The horror of the gallows, pushing the citizen to the frontiers, built up military strength in proportion as it destroyed the least internal resistance. Every life, all wealth, every power was in the hands of the revolutionary government; and this Leviathan, drunk with blood and success, the most appalling phenomenon ever seen and doubtless that ever will be seen, was both a frightful punishment of the French and the only means of saving France.

What were the royalists asking for when they demanded a counter-revolution such as they envisaged, that is to say, brought about suddenly and by force? They were asking for the conquest of France, and therefore for its division, the destruction of its influence and the abasement of its king, that is to say, perhaps three centuries of massacre, the inevitable result of such a breakdown of equilibrium. But our descendants, who will not bother themselves much with our sufferings and will dance on our graves, will laugh at our present ignorance; they will easily console themselves for the excesses that we have seen, and which have conserved the integrity "of the most beautiful kingdom after that of Heaven."[Grotius, Rights of War and Peace, Dedication to Louis XIII.]

It seems that all the monsters spawned by the Revolution have worked only for the monarchy. Through them, the luster of victories has won the world's admiration and has surrounded the name of France with a glory not entirely dimmed by the crimes of the Revolution; through them, the king will return to the throne with all his brilliance and power, perhaps even with an increase in power. And who knows if, instead of miserably sacrificing some of his provinces to obtain the right of ruling over the others, he will not be restored with the pride of power which gives what it can withhold? Certainly, less probable things have been seen to happen.

This same idea that everything works for the advantage of the French monarchy leads me to believe that any royalist revolution is impossible before the war ends; for the restoration of the Crown would weaken suddenly the whole machinery of the state. The black magic operating at this moment would vanish like a mist before the sun. Kindness, clemency, justice, all the gentle and peaceful virtues would suddenly reappear and bring back with them a certain general gentleness of character, a certain cheerfulness entirely opposed to the somber rigor of the revolutionary regime. No more requisitions, no more legal thefts, no more violence. Would the generals, preceded by the white flag, call revolutionary the inhabitants of the invaded areas who legitimately defended themselves? And would they enjoin them not to move on pain of being shot as rebels? These horrors, very useful to the future king, could not, however, be employed by him; he would then have only human means at his disposal. He would be on a level with his enemies; and what would happen at that moment of suspension which necessarily accompanies the transition from one government to another? I do not know. I am well aware that the great conquests of the French seem to put the integrity of the kingdom beyond dispute. (I even intend to touch here on the reason for these conquests.) However it still appears more advantageous to France and the monarchy that peace, and a glorious peace for the French, should be achieved by the Republic, and that, when the king returns to the throne, a stable peace should remove him from every kind of danger.

On the other hand, it is clear that a violent revolution, far from curing the people, would confirm them in their errors and they would never pardon the power that snatched their dreams from them. Since it was the people, properly speaking, or the masses, that the rebels needed to overturn France, it is evident that in general they have had to spare the people and that the heaviest burdens have had to fall first of all on the wealthy class. Thus the usurping power needs to weigh for some time on the people in order to disgust them with it. They have only seen the Revolution; they must feel it and enjoy, so to speak, its bitter consequences. Perhaps, at the moment when I write, this is not yet sufficiently the case....

Let us now glance at the outrageous persecution stirred up against the national religion and its ministers: it is one of the most interesting facets of the Revolution.

It cannot be denied that the French clergy was in need of reform; and, though I am very far from taking up the vulgar attacks on the clergy, nonetheless it appears to me incontestable that wealth, luxury, and a general tendency toward laxity had lowered this great body of men; that it was often possible to find under the surplice a man of the world rather than an apostle; and finally that, in the years immediately before the Revolution, the clergy had fallen, almost as much as the army, from the place it had occupied in public esteem.

The first blow aimed at the Church was the appropriation of its estates; the second was the constitutional oath; and these two tyrannical measures started the reformation. The oath screened the priests, if it can be so expressed. All who took it, save a few exceptions whom we can ignore, saw themselves led by stages into the abyss of crime and disgrace; opinion has only one view of these apostates.

The faithful priests, recommended to this same opinion by an initial act of firmness, won even more renown by the bravery with which they have been able to bear sufferings and even death in defense of their faith. The massacre of Carmes is comparable in its beauty to anything of this sort that ecclesiastical history can offer.

No more revolting tyranny can be imagined than that which expelled them from their country by thousands, against all justice and decency; but on this point, as in all the others, the crimes of the French tyrants became the weapons of Providence. It was probably necessary for French priests to be shown to foreign nations; they have lived among Protestant peoples, and this closeness has greatly diminished hatreds and prejudices. The considerable migration of the clergy, and particularly of the French bishops, to England especially seems to me a remarkable event. Surely words of peace will have been spoken and schemes of rapprochement formed during this remarkable reunion. Even if only common hopes were created, this would still be a great deal. If ever Christians draw together, as everyone asks them to, it seems that the impulse must come from the Church of England. Presbyterianism was a French, and consequently an exaggerated, creation. We stand too far away from the adherents of this insubstantial religion; there are no means of communication between us. But the Anglican Church, which touches us with one hand, touches with the other those whom we cannot approach; and although, from a certain point of view, it is exposed to attacks from the two sides, and although it presents the slightly ridiculous sight of a rebel who preaches obedience, it is nevertheless very valuable from another standpoint and can be seen as a catalyst, capable of combining elements incompatible of themselves.

The property of the clergy having been dissipated, no despicable motive can for a long time to come attract new members to it: so that everything combines to revive the clergy. There is reason to believe, moreover, that the contemplation of the work with which it is charged will give to it a degree of exaltation which raises men above themselves and makes them capable of great things.

Add to these circumstances the ferment of ideas in certain European countries, the inspiring opinions of several great men, and that kind of disquiet which is affecting religious people, especially in Protestant countries, and is pushing them along unwonted paths.

Notice at the same time the storm rumbling over Italy, Rome menaced as well as Geneva by the power that wants the destruction of all sects, and the national supremacy of religion abolished in Holland by a decree of the National Convention. If Providence deletes, it is no doubt in order to rewrite. I notice that when great systems of belief have established themselves in the world, they have been favored by great conquests in the formation of great sovereignties, and the reason can clearly be seen.

How indeed have these remarkable schemes which have baffled all human foresight come about in one day? In truth, there is a temptation to believe that political revolution is only a secondary object of the great plan which is developing before our eyes with such terrible majesty.

I talked, at the beginning, of the leadership that France exercises over the rest of Europe. Providence, which always fits means to ends and gives to nations, as to individuals, the instruments necessary to accomplish their destiny, has in this way given to the French nation two weapons and, so to speak, two hands with which to mold the world, its language and the spirit of proselytism that forms the core of its character; so that it has always the ability and the wish to influence other men.

The power, I almost said the royalty, of the French language is apparent; this cannot be seriously disputed. As for the spirit of proselytism, it is as obvious as the sun; from the dress designer to the philosopher, it is the foremost trait of the national character.

This proselytism is commonly ridiculed, and really it often merits it, particularly in the forms it takes, but fundamentally it has a function.

It is a constant law of the moral world that every function produces a duty. The Gallican Church was the cornerstone of the Catholic system or, more properly, since there is in truth only one system, the Christian system. Although perhaps they doubt it, the Churches opposing the universal Church exist only by virtue of it, being like those parasitic plants, those sterile mistletoes which draw their nurture from and weaken the tree that supports them.

From the fact that the action and reaction of opposing powers is always equal, the greatest efforts of the goddess of Reason against Christianity were made in France; the enemy attacked the citadel.

The French clergy should not therefore fall asleep; it has a thousand reasons for believing that it is called to a high destiny; and the same arguments that show it why it is suffering allow it also to believe itself fated for a crucial task.

In a word, if a moral revolution does not occur in Europe, if religious feeling is not strengthened in this part of the world, the social bond will be destroyed. Nothing can be predicted, and anything may be expected. But if any change for the better does come, either analogies, induction, and conjectural skills are useless or else it is France that is called to produce the change.

This is above all what leads me to believe that the French Revolution is a watershed in history and that its consequences of every kind will be felt far beyond the time of its outburst and the limits of its birthplace.

Political considerations confirm this view. How many European powers have deceived themselves over France! How many have dreamed up vain endeavorsl You who think yourselves free because you have no judges on this earth, never say: This suits me; DISCITE JUSTITIAM MONITE! What hand, at once severe and paternal, scourged France with every imaginable plague, and held sway with supernatural means by turning every effort of its enemies against themselves? Let no one come to speak to us of assignats and the power of numbers, for the possibility of assignats and of the power of numbers is itself the work of the supernatural. Moreover it is neither through paper money nor through numerical advantage that the winds guided the French ships and thrust back those of their enemies; that winter gave the French bridges of ice just when they needed them; that kings who impede them die conveniently; that they invade Italy without artillery, and that the most reputedly brave armies of the world, although equal in number, throw down their arms and allow themselves to be taken captives....

In fact, the punishment of the French breaks all the ordinary rules, as does also the protection accorded to France: but these two miracles combined serve to reinforce one another, and present one of the most astonishing sights of human history.

As events unfold, other and more wonderful reasons and relationships will show themselves. Moreover, I see only a fraction of those which a more perceptive insight could have discovered at this time.

The horrible effusion of human blood caused by this great upheaval is a terrible means, yet it is a means as much as a punishment, and can give rise to some interesting reflections.

CHAPTER III. OF THE VIOLENT DESTRUCTION OF HUMANITY
Unhappily, that king of Dahomey, in the interior of Africa, was not so very wrong when he said a short time ago to an Englishman; God made the world for war; all kingdoms, both great and small, have indulged in it at all times, although on different principles.[Archibald Dalzel, "The History of Dahomey," Bibliotheque Britannique, May, 1796, Vol. II, No. x, p. 87.]
History proves unfortunately that war is in a sense the habitual condition of mankind, that is to say that human blood must constantly flow somewhere or other on earth; and that for every nation peace is no more than a respite.

The closing of the temple of Janus under Augustus can be cited, as also can the one year in the stormy reign of Charlemagne (the year 790) when there was no war. There can be quoted a short period after the Peace of Ryswick in 1697, and another equally short after the Peace of Carlowitz in 1699, in which there was peace, not only throughout Europe but even in the whole of the known world. But these periods are only isolated exceptions. And who can know what is happening over the whole globe at a given time?

The century which is ending started for France with a bloody war which ended only in 1714 with the Treaty of Rastadt. In 1719, France declared war on Spain; the Treaty of Paris put an end to it in 1727. The election to the Polish throne rekindled war in 1733; peace came in 1736. Four years later, the terrible war of the Austrian Succession broke out and lasted without break until 1748. Eight years of peace started to heal the wounds of eight years of war, when English ambition forced France to take up arms. The Seven Years' War is only too well known. After fifteen years' respite, the American Revolution dragged France once more into a war whose consequences no human wisdom could have foreseen. Peace was signed in 1782; seven years later, the Revolution started; it has lasted to this day and has so far cost France three million men.

Thus, looking at France alone, here are forty years of war out of ninety-six. If some nations have been more fortunate, others have been much less so.

But it is not enough to consider one point in time and one place on earth; a quick glance should be thrown on that long sequence of massacres which has soiled every page of history. War has raged ceaselessly like a persistent fever marked by terrifying crises....

If one goes back to the childhood of nations or if one comes down to our own day, if one looks at societies in every possible stage of development from barbarism to the most advanced civilization, war will always be found. Through this primary cause and all the others connected with it, the spilling of human blood has never ceased on earth. At one time it flows thinly over a wide area, at another it flows fast in a restricted area, so that it remains about constant. But occasionally unusual events come about which augment the flow prodigiously, like the Punic Wars, the Triumvirates, the victories of Caesar, the barbarian invasions, the Crusades, the wars of religion, the Spanish Succession, the French Revolution, and so on. If tables of massacre were available like meteorological tables, who knows if some law might not be discovered after centuries of observation? Buffon has very clearly shown that a great number of animals are destined for a violent death. He could apparently have extended this argument to man; but the facts speak for themselves.

There is, moreover, good reason for doubting if this violent destruction is in general as great an evil as is believed; at least, it is one of those evils that play a part in an order of things in which everything is violent and against nature and which has its compensations. First, when the human spirit has lost its resilience through indolence, incredulity, and the gangrenous vices that follow an excess of civilization, it can be retempered only in blood. It is far from easy to explain why war produces different effects in different circumstances. What is sufficiently clear is that humanity can be considered as a tree that an invisible hand is continually pruning, often to its benefit. In fact, if its trunk is hacked or if it is pruned badly, a tree can die, but who knows the limits for the human tree? What we do know is that a great deal of bloodshed is often connected with a high population, as has been seen particularly in the ancient Greek republics and in Spain under Arab domination. The platitudes on war mean nothing: no great intelligence is needed to know that the more men killed, the fewer at that moment remain, just as the more branches are cut, the fewer remain on the tree. It is the results of the operation that must be considered. However, to stick to the comparison, the skilled gardener prunes less to ensure growth as such than to ensure the fructification of the tree; he requires fruit, and not wood or leaves from the plant. Now the true fruits of human nature - the arts, sciences, great enterprises, noble ideas, manly virtues - spring above all from the state of war. It is well known that nations reach the apex of the greatness of which they are capable only after long and bloody wars. Thus the most glorious hour of the Greeks was the terrible era of the Peloponnesian War; the Age of Augustus followed immediately the civil war and proscriptions; the French genius was roughhewn by the League and polished by the Fronde; all the great men of the age of Queen Anne were born amidst political upheavals. In a word, it could be said that blood is the manure of that plant we call genius.

I am not sure if those who claim that the arts are the friends of peace know what they are saying. At the least, this proposition would have to be explained and limited; because I see nothing in the least peaceful in the ages of Alexander and Pericles, of Augustus, of Leo X and Francis I, of Louis XIV and Queen Anne.

Is it possible that the spilling of human blood has not had a great cause and great effects? Let us reflect on it; history and myth, the discoveries of modern psychology and ancient traditions, unite to provide materials for these reflections. We should not be more ashamed to proceed cautiously on this point than on a thousand others less relevant to man. Let us still thunder against war and try to turn sovereigns from it, but let us not share the imaginings of Condorcet, the philosopher so dear to the Revolution, who spent his life preparing the misfortune of the "perfection" we now possess, benignly leaving the future to our ancestors. There is only one way of restraining the scourge of war, and that is by restraining the disorders that lead to this terrible purification....

I know very well that, in all these discussions, we are assailed continually with the wearisome picture of the innocents who perish with the guilty. But, without penetrating far into this extremely profound question, it can be considered solely in its relation to the universally held dogma, as old as the world itself, that the innocent suffer for the benefit of the guilty.

It seems to me that it was from this dogma that the ancients derived the custom of sacrifices that they practiced throughout the world and that they judged useful not only to the living but still more to the dead, a typical custom that habit has made us regard without astonishment, but whose roots are nonetheless difficult to trace.

The self-sacrifices, so famous in antiquity, spring again from the same dogma. Decius believed that the sacrifice of his life would be accepted by the Divinity and that he could redress the balance for all the evils that threatened his country.

Christianity consecrated this dogma, which is completely natural to men, although it appears difficult to arrive at by reasoning.

Thus, there could have been in the heart of Louis XVI, in that of the saintly Elizabeth, such an impulse, an acceptance, capable of saving France.

It is sometimes asked what the purpose is of those harsh austerities practiced by certain religious orders, which are also self-sacrifices; it might as well be asked what the purpose of Christianity is, since it is wholly an extension of the same doctrine of innocence paying for crime.

The authority approving these orders chooses certain men and isolates them to make them into guides.

There is nothing but violence in the world; but we are tainted by modern philosophy which has taught us that all is good, whereas evil has polluted everything and in a very real sense all is evil, since nothing is in its proper place. The keynote of the system of our creation being lowered, the whole melody is lowered in proportion, following the rules of harmony. The whole of creation bemoans its fate[Romans 8: 22.] and strives, with effort and grief, for a new order of things.

Observers of great human tragedies must be led to these sad conclusions, but let us not lose our courage; there is no punishment which does not purify, no disorder which the ETERNAL LOVE does not turn against the principle of evil. It is refreshing amid general upheaval to get a glimpse of the plans of Divinity. Never shall we see the whole scheme of things in our voyage through life, and we shall often mislead ourselves, but in every possible science, except the exact sciences, are we not reduced to conjecture? And if our conjectures are plausible, if we can find an analogy for them, if they rest on universally accepted ideas, above all if they console us and make us better men, what do they lack? If they are not true, they are good; or more accurately, since they are good, are they not true?

Having looked at the French Revolution from a purely moral point of view, I shall turn my attention to politics, without, however, forgetting the primary aim of my work.

CHAPTER IV. CAN THE FRENCH REPUBLIC LAST?
It would be better to put a different question: Can the Republic exist? This is assumed much too quickly, and the preliminary question seems justified, for nature and history agree that a great and indivisible republic is an impossibility. A small number of republicans contained within the wails of a town can no doubt rule over millions of subjects, as was the case with Rome, but there cannot exist a great free nation under a republican form of government. This is so clear in itself that theory can dispense with experience; but experience, which decides every question in politics as in science, is here in perfect accord with theory.
What arguments have been put to Frenchmen to persuade them that a republic of twenty-four million people is possible? Only two: (1) There is nothing to prevent something being created that has never been known before; (2) the discovery of the representative system allows us to do things which our predecessors could not do. Let us examine the force of these two arguments.

If it was said to us that a dice, thrown a hundred million times, always showed only the five numbers l, 2, 3, 4, and 5, could we believe that there was a 6 on one of its faces? The answer is undoubtedly no; and it would be as obvious to us as if we had actually seen it that one of the six faces was blank or that one of the numbers had been duplicated.

Very well, if we look at history, we shall see what is called Fortune throwing dice endlessly for four thousand years: has it ever brought a GREAT REPUBLIC? No. Therefore this number was not on the dice.

If the world had witnessed the successive growth of new forms of government, we would have no right to claim that such and such a form is impossible just because it has never been known; but the contrary is the case. Monarchies have always been known, and republics have sometimes been known. If one wishes to enter into subdivisions, one can call democracy the government in which the masses exercise sovereignty and aristocracy that in which sovereignty belongs to a more or less restricted number of privileged families.

That is the end of the matter.

The comparison with the dice is therefore perfectly exact: the same numbers having always been thrown from the dice box of fortune, we are allowed by the theory of probabilities to maintain that there are no others.

Let us not confuse the essences of things with their modifications; the first are unalterable and always recur; the second change and alter the picture a little, at least for the multitude; for every practiced eye easily sees through the changing garb in which eternal nature dresses according to time and place....

Thus, there is nothing new, and a great republic is impossible, since there has never been a great republic.

As for the representative system, by which it is believed the problem can be resolved, ! feel tempted to digress, if the reader will pardon me.

Let us begin by pointing out that this system is by no means a modern discovery, but a product, or more properly a part, of feudal government, when it reached that point of maturity and balance which made it, on the whole, the most perfect in the world.

Having formed the local communities, the royal authority called them to the national assemblies; they could appear there only through deputies, and from this arose the representative system....

One would have to have very little insight into what Bacon called interiora rerum to believe that men could have achieved such institutions by an anterior process of reasoning and that such institutions could be the product of deliberation.

Moreover, national representation is by no means peculiar to England: it is found in every European monarchy, but it is living in Great Britain, whereas elsewhere it is dead or dying. It is no part of the plan of this small work to consider if its suspension works to the harm of humanity and if it would be advisable to draw nearer to the old forms. It is sufficient to point out from history: (1) that in England, where national representation has gained and retained more power than anywhere else, there is no mention of it before the middle of the thirteenth century; (2) that it was not an invention, or the product of deliberation, or the result of the action of the people making use of its ancient rights; but that in reality an ambitious soldier, to satisfy his own designs, created the balance of the three powers after the Battle of Lewes, without knowing what he was doing, as always happens; (3) that not only was the calling of the commons to the national council a concession of the monarch, but that in the beginning the king named the representatives of the counties, cities, and boroughs; (4) that, even after the local communities had assumed the right of naming their representatives in Parliament during Edward I's journey in Palestine, they had there only a consultative voice; that they presented their grievances, like the Estates-General in France; and that concessions by the Crown following from their petitions were always Granted by the king and his spiritual and temporal lords, on the humble prayers of the Commons; (5) finally that the co-legislative power attributed to the House of Commons is still very new since it goes back at the most to the mid-fifteenth century.

If therefore the term "national representation" is taken to mean a certain number of representatives sent by certain men, taken from certain towns or boroughs, by virtue of an old concession by the sovereign, there is no dispute, for such a government exists - it is England.

But if it is intended that all the people should be represented, that they can be represented only by virtue of a mandate,* and that every citizen is capable of giving or receiving these mandates, with a few physically and morally inevitable exceptions; and if it is still more intended to add to such a system the abolition of all hereditary distinctions and offices, this representation is a thing that has never been seen and that will never be successful.

[* Through bad faith or inattention, it is fairly often assumed that a proxy alone can be representative. This is an error. Every day in the courts, children, the insane, and absentees are represented by men who derive their mandate solely from the law. Now the people unite to a high degree the three qualities, for it is always a child, always foolish, always absent. Why then can its guardians not dispense with its mandates?]
America is often cited to us: I know nothing so provoking as the praise showered on this babe-in-arms: let it grow.
But to bring as much light as possible into this discussion, it should be pointed out that the supporters of the French Republic are obliged to prove, not only that perfected representation (as they put it ) is possible and desirable, but also that the people can by these means retain its sovereignty (as they also put it) and form as a whole a republic. This is the crux of the matter, for if the Republic is in the capital and the rest of France is subject to the Republic, it is not accountable to the sovereign people.

The committee that was last charged with devising a method for revising the third estate put the French population at thirty millions. Let us accept this number and assume that France retains its conquests. By the terms of the constitution, every year two hundred and fifty people leave the legislature and should be replaced by two hundred and fifty others. It follows that, if the fifteen million men (implied by this total population) were immortal, capable of being representatives, and nominated in strict rotation, each Frenchman would come to exercise in time the national sovereignty every sixty thousand years.

Since, however, it must be admitted that men will die from time to time in such a period, that moreover some men will be reelected and that a good number of individuals by nature and good sense will always be incapable of representing the nation, the imagination boggles at the enormous number of sovereigns condemned to die without having reigned.

Rousseau held that the national will cannot be delegated; one is free to agree or disagree, and to wrangle for a thousand years on these academic questions. But what is certain is that the representative system is completely incompatible with the exercise of sovereignty, above all under the French system in which popular rights are limited to electing electors, in which not only can the people not impose specific mandates on their representatives but also the law takes care to break any relationship between representatives and their respective constituencies by warning them that they are by no means representatives of those who have elected them, but of the nation, a splendid and extremely convenient word since one can make of it whatever one wishes. In short, it is impossible to conceive a constitutional code better calculated to destroy the rights of the people. Thus that vile Jacobin conspirator was nevertheless quite right when he asserted roundly during a judicial inquiry: "I believe the present government to be a usurper of authority, a violator of all the rights of the people, whom it has reduced to the most deplorable slavery. It is a dreadful system aimed at the happiness of a small number and founded on the oppression of the masses. The people are so muzzled, so bound in chains by this aristocratic government, that it is becoming more difficult than ever for them to break them."[See the interrogation of Babeuf, June, 1796.]

What does this empty benefit of representation mean for the nation when it is involved so indirectly and when millions of individuals will never participate? Are sovereignty and government any less alien to them?

But, it has been said in reply, what does it matter to the nation that representation is a vain honor, if this system establishes public liberty?

This is irrelevant, for the question is not whether the French people can be free under the constitution that has been given to it, but whether it can be sovereign. The question is changed to avoid the argument. Let us begin by leaving out the exercise of sovereignty and insist on the fundamental point that the sovereign will always be in Paris, that the whole fuss about representation means nothing, that the people remain quite alien to government, that they are subject to government more than in a monarchy, and that a great republic is as self-contradictory as a squared circle. For both can be demonstrated with mathematical precision.

So the question is reduced to deciding if it is in the interest of the French people to be subject to an executive directory and two councils instituted according to the 1795 constitution rather than to a king ruling according to ancient forms.

It is very much less difficult to resolve a problem than to pose it.

It is necessary to dismiss this word republic and to talk only of the government. I shall not discuss whether it is capable of acting for the general happiness; the French can judge this well enough! Let us see only if, such as it is and whatever name is given to it, it can last.

Let us first of all raise ourselves to the height that befits intelligent beings and, from this elevated viewpoint, consider the origin of this government.

Evil has nothing in common with life; it cannot create, since its power is purely negative. Evil is a fissure in being; it has no reality.

What distinguishes the French Revolution and what makes it an event unique in history is that it is radically evil; no element of good relieves the picture it presents; it reaches the highest point of corruption ever known; it is pure impurity.

In what scene of history can be found so many vices acting at once on the same stage, such an appalling combination of baseness and cruelty, such profound immorality, such a disdain for ali decency?

The age in which liberty grows has such striking characteristics that it is impossible to mistake it. In such a period, love of country is a religion and respect for laws a superstition; individuality is outstanding, general habits of life are austere, every virtue flourishes at once, parties work for the good of the country since they fight only for the honor of serving it; everything, even crime, carries the imprint of grandeur.

If this picture is compared to that offered by France, how can one believe in the continuance of a liberty which grows from a canker? Or more exactly, how can one believe that this liberty can be born (for it still does not exist) and that from the heart of the most loathsome corruption can emerge that form of government that requires virtues more than any other. Listening to these so-called republicans talk of liberty and virtue is like seeing a faded courtesan playing the virgin with blushes of rouge....

No doubt the French Revolution has gone through a number of different phases, yet its general character has never varied, and even at birth it showed everything it was destined to become. There was a certain inexplicable delirium, a blind impetuosity, a shameful contempt for all human decency, an immorality of a new kind that jested about its crimes, above all an insolent prostitution of reasoning and of all those words designed to express ideas of justice and virtue....

Can there then emerge from this bloodstained mire a durable government? It is not a valid objection that ferocious and licentious barbarian peoples have nevertheless become civilized, for no doubt ignorant barbarism has been the seedbed for a number of political systems, but clever barbarism, systematic atrocity, calculated corruption, and above all irreligion have never produced anything. Greenness leads to maturity; decay leads to nothing.

Has there ever been seen, moreover, a government, and more particularly a free constitution, started in spite of its members and dispensing with their consent? Yet this is the sight that would be presented to us by this meteor called the French Republic if it could last. This government is thought to be strong because it is violent, but strength differs from violence as much as from weakness, and this government's astonishing method of operation at this time furnishes of itself sufficient proof that it cannot endure for long. The French nation does not want this government, it suffers it, and remains submissive either because it cannot shake it off or because it fears something worse. The Republic rests only on these two unsure foundations; it can be said that it relies entirely on two negatives. It is also very remarkable that the apologists of the Republic are not at all keen to show the benefits this government brings, feeling rightly that this is the weak spot in their armor. They say only, as boldly as they can, that it is possible; and, passing as lightly over this argument as if it were hot coals, they want solely to show the French that they will expose themselves to the gravest dangers if they return to their old government. It is on this topic they become eloquent; they never stop talking of the evils of revolution. If pressed, they are the kind of people to admit that those who created the present government committed a crime provided it is conceded that it is unnecessary to start a new revolution. They throw themselves at the feet of the French nation; they beg it to guard the Republic. Everything they say about the stability of the government seems to be the result not of reasoned convictions but of fanciful hopes.

Let us move to the great anathema that weighs on the Republic.

CHAPTER V. ON THE FRENCH REVOLUTION CONSIDERED IN ITS ANTIRELIGIOUS CHARACTER - DIGRESSION ON CHRISTIANITY
There is a satanic element in the French Revolution which distinguishes it from any other revolution known or perhaps that will be known. Remember the great occasions - Robespierre's speech against the priesthood, the solemn apostasy of the priests, the desecration of objects of worship, the inauguration of the goddess of Reason, and the many outrageous acts by which the provinces tried to surpass Paris: these all leave the ordinary sphere of crimes and seem to belong to a different world.
Now that the Revolution has lost its force, the grossest abuses have disappeared, yet the principles still remain. Have not the legislators (to make use of their term) made the historically unique claim that the nation will not pay for any form of worship? Some men of this age seem to me to raise themselves at certain moments to a hatred for the Divinity, but this frightful act is not needed to make useless the most strenuous creative efforts: the neglect of, let alone scorn for, the great Being brings an irrevocable curse on the human works stained by it. Every conceivable institution either rests on a religious idea or is ephemeral. Institutions are strong and durable to the degree that they partake of the Divinity. Not only is human reason, or what is ignorantly called philosophy, unable to replace those foundations ignorantly called superstitions, but philosophy is, on the contrary, an essentially destructive force.

In short, man can mirror his Creator only by putting himself in harmony with him. How senseless to believe that, to make a mirror reflect the sun, we should turn it toward the earth!

These reflections apply to everyone, to the believer as well as the skeptic, for I am advancing a fact and not an argument. It does not matter whether these ideas are laughed at or respected; true or false, they no less form the only base for every stable institution.

Rousseau, perhaps the most mistaken of men, has nevertheless hit on this truth, without wanting to draw the full consequences from it.

The Judaic law, he says, which is still in existence, and that of the child of Ishmael, which for ten centuries ruled half the world, still proclaim the great men who laid them down .... Pride-ridden philosophy or the blind spirit of faction sees in them no more than lucky impostors.[Social Contract, Book ii, Chap. vii.]

He ought to have drawn the conclusion, instead of talking about the great and powerful genius which watches over durable institutions, as if this high-flown language explained anything.

When one reflects on the facts attested by the whole of history, when one grasps that the whole range of human institutions from those that have shaped world history to the smallest social organization, from empires to monasteries, have a divine basis, and that human power, whenever it stands alone, can create only faulty and ephemeral works, what are we to think of the new French system and the power that has produced it? For my own part, I will never believe in the fecundity of a vacuum.

It would be interesting to go thoroughly through our European institutions and to show how they are all christianized, how religion, touching on everything, animates and sustains everything. Human passions can well pollute or even pervert primitive institutions, but if the principle is divine, this is enough to ensure them a long life....

This is a divine law as certain and as palpable as the laws of gravitation.

Every time a man puts himself, according to his ability, in harmony with the Creator and produces any institution whatever in the name of God, he participates in some way in the omnipotence of which he has made himself the instrument, however great his individual weakness, his ignorance and poverty, the obscurity of his birth, in a word his absolute lack of any ordinary means of influence; he produces works whose power and durability confound reason.

I beg every attentive reader to look closely round him, for he will see these great truths demonstrated even in the smallest of objects. It is not necessary to go back to the son of Ishmael, to Lycurgus, to Numa, to Moses, whose laws were completely religious; a popular festival, a rustic dance is sufficient for the observant. They will see in some Protestant countries gatherings and popular rejoicings that no longer have any apparent purpose and spring from Catholic usages which have been completely forgotten. There is nothing moral or worthy of respect in these festivals in themselves, but it makes no difference, for they derive, however tenuously, from religious ideas, and this is enough to perpetuate them. Three centuries cannot bury their memory.

But just let the masters of the world - princes, kings, emperors, powerful majesties, invincible conquerors - let them only try to make the people dance on a certain day each year in a set place. This is not much to ask, but I dare swear that they will not succeed, whereas, if the humblest missionary comes to such a spot, he will make himself obeyed two thousand years after his death. Every year the people meet together around a rustic church in the name of St. John, St. Martin, St. Benedict, and so on; they come filled with boisterous yet innocent cheerfulness; religion sanctifies this joy and the joy embellishes religion: they forget their sorrows; at night, they think of the pleasure to come on the same day next year, and this date is stamped on their memory.

By the side of this picture put that of the French leaders who have been vested with every power by a shameful Revolution and yet cannot organize a simple fete. They pour out gold and call all the arts to their aid, yet the citizen remains at home, listening to the appeal only to laugh at the organizers....

How great is human folly and weakness! Legislators, reflect on this example, for it shows you what you are and what you can do. Do you need anything further to enable you to judge the French system? If its sterility is not clear, nothing is certain in the world.

I am so convinced of the truths I am defending that, when I consider the general decline of moral principles, the anarchy of opinions, the weakness of sovereignties lacking any foundations, the immensity of our needs and the poverty of our means, it seems to me that every true philosophy must choose between two assumptions, either that it is going to fashion a new religion or that Christianity will be revived in some miraculous way. One of these suppositions must be chosen, according to the view that is held about the truth of Christianity.

This conjecture will not be rejected disdainfully except by the shortsighted who believe that nothing is possible except what they see before their eyes. Who in the ancient world could have foreseen Christianity? And who outside this religion could, in its beginnings, have foreseen its future success? How do we know that a great moral revolution is not in progress? Pliny showed in his famous letter that he had not the slightest idea how enormous was to grow the infant he saw.

But a host of ideas crowd in on me at this point and push me to the widest of considerations.

The present generation is witnessing one of the most dramatic sights humanity has ever seen; it is the fight to the death between Christianity and the cult of philosophy. The lists are open, the two enemies have come to grips, and the world looks on.

As in Homer, the father of gods and men is holding the scales in which these two great forces are being weighed; soon one of the scales must tilt.

To the biased man, whose heart is master of his head, events prove nothing; having chosen sides irrevocably either for or against, observation and reasoning are equally useless. But for all men of goodwill, who deny or doubt perhaps, let the great history of Christianity settle their doubts. For eighteen centuries, it has ruled over a great part of the globe, and particularly the most enlightened part. This religion does not go back just to this age; going back to before its founder came to earth, it links up with another order of things, a prophetic religion that preceded it. The one cannot be true without the other being so: the one prides itself on promising what the other prides itself on having; so that this religion, by a visible sequence, goes back to the origin of the world.

It was born on the day that days were born.

There is no other example of such durability; and, to confine one-self just to Christianity, no institution in the world can be compared to it. Any comparison with other religions can only be misleading, for several striking characteristics exclude it. It is not the place here to detail them; one word only must suffice. Can anyone show me another religion founded on miraculous facts and revealing incomprehensible dogmas, yet believed for eighteen centuries by a good part of humanity and defended in every age by the best men of the time, from Origen to Pascal, in spite of every effort of a rival sect which, from Celsus to Condorcet, has ceaselessly fulminated against it?

It is a wonderful thing that, when one reflects on this great institution, the most natural hypothesis, that which all the probabilities point to, is that of a divine creation. If it were a human artifact, there would no longer be any means of explaining its success; by excluding the idea of a miracle, an explanation can be given.

Every nation, it is said, has mistaken copper for gold. Very well, but has this copper been thrown into the European crucible and tested for eighteen centuries by chemical observation? Or, if submitted to this test, has it emerged from it with honor? Newton believed in the Incarnation, but Plato, I think, had very little belief in the miraculous birth of Bacchus.

Christianity has been preached by the ignorant and believed by the learned, and in this it resembles no other known thing.

Moreover, it passes every test. It is said that persecution is a wind that keeps alive and spreads the flame of fanaticism. Very well: Diocletian favored Christianity, but, on this assumption, Constantine should have stifled it, and this did not happen. It has withstood everything, peace and war, scaffolds and victories, daggers and temptations, pride and humiliation, poverty and affluence, the night of the Middle Ages and the broad daylight of the periods of Leo X and Louis XIV. An all-powerful emperor and master of much of the known world once exhausted every resource of his genius against it; he tried everything to revive ancient beliefs; he cleverly linked them with the Platonic ideas that were then in fashion. Hiding the anger which animated him beneath a mask of purely external tolerance, he used against the rival religion the weapons before which every human work had been powerless; he let loose ridicule on it: he impoverished the priesthood to bring it into contempt; he deprived it of every support that men can bring to the aid of their works: slanders, intrigues, injustice, oppression, ridicule, violence, and cunning, all were useless; the Galilean prevailed over Julian the philosopher.

Today, finally, the experiment is being repeated in still more favorable circumstances, since they all conspire to make it decisive. All those who have not learned thoroughly the lessons of history pay particular attention. You have said that the Crown propped up the Papacy; well, the Crown no longer plays any part on the world's stage; it has been smashed and the pieces thrown into the mud. You suspected that the influence of a rich and powerful priest could enforce the dogmas he preached. I do not think that there is any power that can make men believe, but let that pass. There are no longer any priests; they have been exiled, slaughtered, and degraded; they have been deprived of everything, and those who have escaped the guillotine, the stake, daggers, fusillades, drowning, and deportation receive the alms that formerly they themselves gave. You feared the force of custom, the ascendancy of authority, the illusions of imagination: there is no longer any of that, no longer custom and no longer masters; each man's mind is his own. Philosophy having corroded the cement binding man to man, there are no longer any moral ties. The civil authority, promoting with all its resources the overthrow of the old system, gives to the enemies of Christianity all the aid which it formerly gave to Christianity itself: the human mind uses every imaginable means to combat the old national religion. These efforts are applauded and paid for, while anything against them is a crime. You have no longer anything to fear from visual delights, always the most deceiving; displays of pomp and vain ceremonies no longer impress the people before whom everything has been mocked for seven years. The churches are closed, or are opened only for the noisy discussions and drunken revels of a frenzied people. The altars are overthrown; filthy animals have been led through the streets in bishops' vestments; chalices have been used in disgraceful orgies; and around the altar that the old faith surrounded with dazzling cherubims, nude prostitutes have been painted. The cult of philosophy has therefore no longer any room for complaint; fortune is completely in its favor; everything is working for it and against its rival. If it is victorious, it will not say like Caesar, I came, I saw, and I conquered, but in the end it will have won: it can applaud and sit proudly on an overturned cross. But if Christianity emerges from this terrible test purer and more virile; if the Christian Hercules, strong in his own vigor, lifts the son of the earth and crushes him in his arms patuit Deus. - Frenchmen, give place to the Christian King, place him yourselves on his old throne; raise once more his oriflamme, and let his coinage, traveling again from one pole to the other, carry to every part of the world the triumphant device:

CHRIST COMMANDS, HE REIGNS,
HE IS THE VICTOR.
CHAPTER VI. OF THE DIVINE INFLUENCE IN POLITICAL CONSTITUTIONS
Man can modify everything in the sphere of his activity, but he creates nothing: such is the law binding him in the physical as in the moral world.
No doubt a man can plant a seed, raise a tree, perfect it by grafting, and prune it in a hundred ways, but never has he imagined that he can make a tree.

How has he thought that he has the power to make a constitution? Was it through experience? See what it can teach us.

All free constitutions known to the world took form in one of two ways. Sometimes they germinated, as it were, in an imperceptible way by the combination of a host of circumstances that we call fortuitous, and sometimes they have a single author who appears like a freak of nature and enforces obedience.

In these two assumptions can be seen the signs by which God warns us of our weakness and of the right he has reserved to himself in the formation of governments.

1. No government results from a deliberation; popular rights are never written, or at least constitutive acts or written fundamental laws are always only declaratory statements of anterior rights, of which nothing can be said other than that they exist because they exist.

2. God, not having judged it proper to employ supernatural means in this field, has limited himself to human means of action, so that in the formation of constitutions circumstances are all and men are only part of the circumstances. Fairly often, even, in pursuing one object they achieve another, as we have seen in the English constitution.

3. The rights of the people, properly speaking, start fairly often from a concession by sovereigns, and in this case they can be established historically; but the rights of the sovereign and of the aristocracy, at least their essential rights, those that are constitutive and basic, have neither date nor author.

4. Even the concessions of the sovereign have always been preceded by a state of affairs that made them necessary and that did not depend on him.

5. Although written laws are always only declarations of anterior rights, yet it is very far from true that everything that can be written is written; there is even in every constitution always something that cannot be written, and that must be left behind a dark and impenetrable cloud on pain of overturning the state.

6. The more that is written, the weaker is the institution, the reason being clear. Laws are only declarations of rights, and rights are not declared except when they are attacked, so that the multiplicity of written constitutional laws shows only the multiplicity of conflicts and the danger of destruction.

This is why the most vigorous political system in the ancient world was that of Sparta, in which nothing was written.

7. No nation can give itself liberty if it has not it already. Its laws are made when it begins to reflect on itself. Human influence does not extend beyond the development of rights already in existence but disregarded or disputed. If imprudent men step beyond these limits by foolhardy reforms, the nation loses what it had without gaining what it hopes for. In consequence, it is necessary to innovate only rarely and always moderately and cautiously.

8. When Providence has decreed the more rapid formation of a political constitution, a man appears invested with indefinable powers: he speaks and exacts obedience: but these heroes belong perhaps only to the ancient world and the youth of nations. However that may be, the distinctive characteristic of these legislators is that they are kings or high nobles; there is and can be no exception to this....

9. Even these legislators with their exceptional powers simply bring together preexisting elements in the customs and character of a people; but this gathering together and rapid formation which seem to be creative are carried out only in the name of the Divinity. Politics and religion start together: it is difficult to separate the legislator from the priest, and his public institutions consist principally in ceremonies and religious holidays.

10. In one sense, liberty has always been a gift of kings, since all free nations have been constituted by kings. This is the general rule, under which the apparent exceptions that could be pointed out will fall if they were argued out.

11. No free nation has existed which has not had in its natural constitution germs of liberty as old as itself, and no nation has ever succeeded in developing by written constitutional laws rights other than those present in its natural constitution.

12. No assembly of men whatever can create a nation; all the Bedlams in the world could not produce anything more absurd or extravagant than such an enterprise.

To prove this proposition in detail, after what I have said, would, it seems to me, be disrespectful to the wise and over-respectful to the foolish.

13. I have spoken of the basic characteristic of true legislators; another very striking feature, on which it would be easy to write a whole book, is that they are never what are called intellectuals; they do not write; they act on instinct and impulse more than on reasoning, and they have no means of acting other than a certain moral force that bends men's wills as the wind bends a field of corn.

In showing that this observation is only the corollary of a general truth of the greatest importance, I could say some interesting things, but I am afraid of digressing too much: I want rather to omit the intermediary arguments and simply to state conclusions.

There is the same difference between political theory and constitutional laws as there is between poetics and poetry. The famous Montesquieu is to Lycurgus in the intellectual hierarchy what Batteux is to Homer or Racine.

Moreover, these two talents positively exclude each other, as is shown by the example of Locke, who floundered hopelessly when he took it into his head to give laws to the Americans.

I have heard an ardent supporter of the Republic seriously lamenting that the French had not seen in the works of Hume a piece entitled Plan for a Perfect Republic - O coecas hominum mentes! You cannot be sure that an ordinary man of good sense has not the making of a legislator, even if he has never shown in any way any external sign of superiority. There is no reason for a firm opinion either way; but as far as men like Bacon, Locke, and Montesquieu are concerned, you can be perfectly sure without hesitation that they have no such ability, for it is excluded by the talent they do possess.

The application to the French constitution of the principles I have just set out is perfectly clear, but it is useful to look more closely at it from a particular viewpoint.

The greatest enemies of the French Revolution must freely admit that the commission of eleven which produced the last constitution has apparently more intelligence than its work and that perhaps it has done all it could do. It worked on incalcitrant materials, which did not allow it to act on principle; although these "powers" are divided only by a wall, the division of powers is of itself still a splendid victory over the prejudices of the moment.

But it is not only a matter of the intrinsic merits of the constitution. It is no part of my purpose to seek out the particular faults which show us that it cannot last; moreover, everything has been said on this point. I shall point out only the error of the theory on which this constitution is based and which has misled the French from the beginning of their Revolution.

The 1795 constitution, like its predecessors, was made for man. But there is no such thing as man in the world. During my life, I have seen Frenchmen, Italians, Russians, and so on; thanks to Montesquieu, I even know that one can be Persian; but I must say, as for man, I have never come across him anywhere; if he exists, he is completely unknown to me.

Is there a single country in the world in which there is a council of five hundred, a council of elders, and five leaders? Such a constitution may be offered to every human association from China to Geneva. But a constitution that is made for all nations is made for none: it is a pure abstraction, an academic exercise of the mind, according to some hypothetical ideal, that should be addressed to man, in whatever imaginary realm he inhabits.

Is not a constitution a solution to the following problem: Given the population, customs, religion, geographical situation, political relations, wealth, good and bad qualities of a particular nation, to find the laws which suit it? Yet this problem is not even approached in the 1795 constitution, which was aimed solely at man. Thus every imaginable reason combines to show that this enterprise has not the divine blessing. It is no more than a schoolboy's exercise.

Already at this moment, how many signs of decay does it reveal!

CHAPTER VII. SIGNS OF NULLITY IN THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT
The legislator is like the Creator; he does not always labor, he gives birth and then rests. Every true legislator has his Sabbath, and intermittency is his distinctive characteristic; so that Ovid spoke a truth of the first order when he said:
Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est. If perfection was an attribute of human nature, each legislator would speak only once: but, although all our works are imperfect and the sovereign is obliged to support political institutions with new laws to the degree that they become tainted, yet human legislation draws closer to its model by that intermittency of which I was just now speaking. Its repose honors it as much as its original action; the more it acts, the more human, that is to say fragile, are its achievements.

What a prodigious number of laws has resulted from the labors of three French National Assemblies!

From July 1st to October, 1791, the National Assembly passed       2,557
The Legislative Assembly passed, in eleven and a half months       1,712
The National Convention, from the first day of the Republic until
   4 Brumaire year IV [October 26, 1795], passed in 57 months     11,210

                                                  TOTAL           15,479
I doubt if the three houses of the Kings of France have spawned a collection of such magnitude. Reflecting on this infinite number, two very different emotions are felt successively. The first is that of admiration or at least of astonishment; one is amazed, with Mr. Burke, that this nation, whose frivolity is a byword, has produced such obstinate workers. This structure of law is so huge that it takes the breath away. But astonishment must quickly change to pity when the futility of these laws is recalled, and then one sees only children killing each other to raise a house of cards.
Why are there so many laws? Because there is no legislator.

What have these so-called legislators done for six years? Nothing - for to destroy is not to do.

One cannot tire of the incredible sight of a nation giving itself three constitutions in five years. No legislator has groped his way cautiously: he says fiat, as is his method, and the engine starts. In spite of the different efforts made in this field by the three assemblies, everything has gone from bad to worse, since the assent of the nation to the work of the legislators has been increasingly lacking....

Modern philosophy is at one and the same time too materialistic and too presumptuous to see the real springs of action in politics. One of its follies is to believe that an assembly can constitute a nation, that a constitution, that is to say, the totality of fundamental laws which suit a nation and should give it a certain form of government, is an artifact like any other, requiring only intelligence, knowledge, and practice, that the job of constitution-making can be learned, and that, the moment they think about it, men can say to other men, Make us a government, as a workman is told, Make us a fire engine or a loom.

Yet it is a truth as certain in its way as a mathematical proposition that no great institution results from deliberation and that human works are fragile in proportion to the number of men concerned in them and the degree to which science and reasoning have been used a priori.

A written constitution such as that which today governs the French is no more than an automaton possessing only the external forms of life. Man, by his own powers, is at the most a Vaucanson; to be a Prometheus he must climb to heaven; for the legislator cannot gain obedience either by force or by reasoning.[Rousseau, Social Contract Book ii, Chap. vii.]

It could be said that, at this time, the experiment has been tried; for it would be unobservant to say that the French constitution is working, since this would be to mistake the constitution for the government. This last, which is a highly advanced despotism, works only too well, but the constitution does not exist except on paper. It is observed or broken according to the interests of the rulers; the people counts for nothing, and the outrages its masters commit on it under the forms of respect should be quite enough to cure it of its errors.

The life of a government is as real as the life of a man; it can be felt or, rather, it can be seen, and no one can deceive himself on this point. I beg every Frenchman with a conscience to ask himself if he does not do violence to himself to give his representatives the title of legislators, if this title of etiquette and courtesy does not strain him slightly, a little as he felt when, under the ancien regime, he was pleased to call the son of the king's secretary count or marquis.

Every honor springs from God said Homer of old; he literally speaks the language of St. Paul yet without plagiarizing him. What is certain is that man cannot bestow that indefinable quality that is called dignity. To the sovereign alone belongs honor above all; from him, as from an inexhaustible fountain, it flows in varying degrees on to classes and individuals.

I noticed that, when a member of the legislature talked of his RANK in print, the newspapers made fun of him, because in fact there is no rank in France, but only power which depends only on force. The people see nothing in a deputy except the seven hundred and fiftieth part of a power of doing great harm. The respected deputy is not respected because he is a deputy, but because he is worthy of respect....

It may perhaps be an illusion on my part, but this wage that a conceited neologism terms indemnity seems to me to be a count against French representation. Free by law and independent by fortune, the Englishman who comes to London to represent the nation at his own expense has something impressive about him. But these French legislators who extract large salaries from the nation in order to make laws for it; these decree sellers, who exercise the national sovereignty for a sack of wheat a day and live off their legislative power; such men, in truth, are not very impressive; and when it is asked what they are worth, one cannot but value them in wheat.

In England, the two magic letters M.P., bracketed with the least-known name, immediately exalt it and give it the right to a distinguished marriage. In France, anyone who sought a position as a deputy in order to clinch a marriage above his station would probably be making a sad miscalculation.

This is because no representative, no instrument whatever of a false sovereignty, can excite anything other than curiosity or terror....

What merits close attention is the conquests of the French which have given rise to delusions about the durability of their government; the brilliance of their military successes dazzles even the best minds who do not at first perceive to what degree these successes are irrelevant to the stability of the Republic.

Nations have conquered under every possible form of government, and revolutions even lead to victories by exalting morale. The French always succeed in war under a firm government with the ability to despise them while praising them, to throw them like bullets against the enemy while promising them epitaphs in the newspapers.

Even now, it is still Robespierre who wins battles; it is his iron despotism that leads Frenchmen to slaughter and victory. It is by squandering money and blood, by straining every muscle, that the rulers of France have gained the victories we are witnessing. A supremely brave nation, exalted by any fanaticism whatever and led by able generals, will always conquer, but will pay dearly for its conquests. Was the durability of the 1793 constitution assured by its three years of victory? Why should it be otherwise with the 1795 constitution, and why should victory give to it a character which it could not give to the other?...

No one feels more strongly than myself that the present circumstances are out of the ordinary and that what has always been the case is now no indication of what is the case, but this question does not touch the main purpose of this book. It is sufficient for me to indicate the logical flaw in the statement: The Republic is victorious, therefore it will last. If it were absolutely necessary to prophesy, I would rather want to say: War is keeping it alive, therefore peace will kill it.

The author of some scientific theory would doubtless congratulate himself if he found all the facts of nature agreed with it, as I am able to quote in support of my conclusions all the facts of history. Looking scrupulously at the patterns of change which it presents to us, I see nothing that favors this chimerical system of deliberation and political engineering through previous reasoning. In the last resort, America could be quoted, but I answered this in advance by saying that it is not yet the time to quote it. I will, however, add a few remarks.

1. English America had a king, but did not see him; it was a stranger to the splendor of monarchy and to it the sovereign was a kind of supernatural power that did not impinge on the senses.

2. It possessed the democratic element that was present in the constitution of the mother country.

3. It possessed, besides, elements carried to it by many of the first colonists who were born amid political and religious troubles and were almost all republican-minded.

4. With these materials and on the plan of the balance of three powers that they drew from their ancestors, the Americans have built, and not started from a tabula rasa as did the French.

But everything that is really novel in their constitution, everything that is the result of common deliberation, is fragile in the extreme; weakness and decay could not be better combined.

Not only do I doubt the stability of American government, but the particular institutions of English America inspire no confidence in me. For example, the towns, inspired by a rather unworthy jealousy, were not able to agree on a place where the Congress should sit; none of them was willing to surrender this honor to another. Consequently, it has been decided to build a new town as the seat of government. The site was chosen on the banks of a great river; it was decided that the town should be called Washington; the situation of all the public buildings was marked out; the work has been set in hand and the plan of the capital city is already circulating throughout Europe. In essentials, there is nothing in this beyond human powers; a town can very easily be built: nevertheless, there is too much deliberation, too much of mankind, in all this, and it is a thousand to one that the town will not be built, or that it will not be called Washington, or that Congress will not sit there.

CHAPTER VIII. ON THE OLD FRENCH CONSTITUTION - DIGRESSION ON THE KING AND THE DECLARATION TO THE FRENCH OF JULY, 1795
Three different theories have been held on the old French constitution: some have claimed that the nation had no constitution; others held the opposite; and finally others again have taken up a middle position, as happens in every important matter of dispute, holding that the French had in fact a constitution but that it was not observed.
The first view is unsustainable, while the other two do not really contradict each other.

The error of those who claimed that France had no constitution sprang from the great error over the nature of human power, previous deliberation and written laws.

If a man of goodwill, relying only on good sense and rectitude, asks what the old French constitution was, the straightforward reply can be given: "It is what you felt when you were in France: it is the mixture of liberty and authority, law and opinion, that made the foreign traveler in France believe that he was living under a government different from his own."

But to go deeper into the question, in the corpus of French public law will be found features and provisions that raise France above all the known monarchies.

A particular feature of this monarchy is that it has a certain theocratic element peculiar to it that has given it a life of fourteen centuries and that is particularly French in its nature. The bishops, in this respect successors to the Druids, only perfected it.

I do not believe that any other European monarchy has used, for the good of the state, a greater number of pontiffs in civil government....

But, while the priesthood was in France one of the three columns upholding the throne and played in the councils of the nation, in its courts, its great offices of state, its embassies, so outstanding a role, it had no or very little influence in civil administration, and even when a priest was prime minister, there was not in France a government of priests.

Every interest was very well balanced and everyone was in his place. From this point of view England most closely resembled France. If ever it banishes the words Church and state from its political vocabulary, its government will perish like that of its rival.

It was the fashion in France (for in this country fashion is all) to say that they were slaves; but why then was the word citoyen found in the French language (even before the Revolution had taken it up in order to debase it), a word that cannot be translated into other European languages? The younger Racine addressed this beautiful verse to the King of France in the name of his city of Paris:

Under a citizen King, all citizens are Kings.
To praise the patriotism of a Frenchman, it was said, C'est un grand citoyen. It is hopeless to try to translate this expression into our other languages; gross burger in German, gran cittadino in Italian, and so on, do not answer the case....
Everything leads to the conclusion that the French wanted to surpass human power, that these ill-considered attempts are leading them to slavery, that they needed only what they already possessed, and that, if they were made for a greater degree of liberty than they enjoyed seven years ago (which is not at all certain), they have in their own hands, in all their historical and legislative authorities, everything necessary to make them the honor and envy of Europe....

CHAPTER IX. HOW WILL THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION COME ABOUT IF IT HAPPENS?
When men form theories about counter-revolution, they too often make the mistake of arguing as if this counter-revolution should and could be only the result of some popular deliberation. The people are afraid, it is said; the people want, the people will never consent, it is not agreeable to the people, and so on. It is a pity, but the people count for nothing in revolutions, or at least they play a part only as a passive instrument. Perhaps four or five people will give France a king.... If the monarchy is restored, the people will no more decree its restoration than they decreed its downfall or the establishment of the revolutionary government.
I beg men to dwell on these thoughts, and I recommend them particularly to those who believe revolution to be impossible because there are too many Frenchmen attached to the Republic and because a change would cause suffering to too many men.... It can certainly be contested that the Republic has the support of the majority, but, whether or not this is the case, it does not matter in the least. Enthusiasm and fanaticism are not durable states. The human palate soon tires of this heady wine; so that, even supposing that a people, and particularly the French people, can will something continually, it is at least certain that they cannot will it ardently. On the contrary, once the fever has abated, despondency, apathy, and indifference always follow great bursts of enthusiasm. This is the case with France, which no longer desires anything strongly except tranquillity. Therefore even if it is assumed that there is a republican majority in France (which is indubitably false), what does it matter? When the king presents himself, certainly heads will not be counted and no one will object, first, because even those who prefer the Republic to monarchy still prefer tranquillity to the Republic, and then because those opposing royalty will not be able to join forces.

In politics as in mechanics, theory goes astray if it does not take into account the different qualities of the materials that make up machines. At first sight, for example, it seems true that the previous consent of the French is necessary to the restoration of the monarchy. Yet nothing could be more false....

God has warned us that he has reserved the formation of sovereignties to himself by never entrusting the choice of their masters to the masses. Never do they get what they want; they always accept, they never choose. If the phrase is excused, it could even be called an affectation of Providence that the very attempts of a nation to attain its objects are the Providential means of frustrating it. Thus the Roman people gave itself masters whilst thinking it was struggling against the aristocracy following Caesar. This is the epitome of all popular insurrections. In the French Revolution, the people have continually been enslaved, insulted, exploited, mutilated by every faction, and these factions in their turn, playthings all of them, have continually drifted with the stream, in spite of all their efforts, to break up finally against the reefs awaiting them.

But if one wants to predict the probable result of time, it is enough to examine what unites all the factions. All of them have aimed at the degradation, even the destruction, of the universal Church and of monarchy, from which it follows that all their efforts will end in the glorification of Christianity and the monarchy.

Everyone who has written on or thought about history has admired the secret force that makes game of human plans.... But it is especially in the establishment and the overthrow of sovereignties that the working of Providence shows itself in the most striking manner. Not only do peoples as a whole participate in historical movements only like wood and rope used by a workman, but even their leaders are leaders only to inexperienced eyes: in fact, they are ruled just as they rule the people. These men who, taken together, seem the tyrants of the multitudes are themselves tyrannized by two or three men, who are tyrannized by one. And if this single individual could and would tell his secret, it would be seen that he himself does not know how he has seized power, that his influence is a greater mystery to him than to others, and that circumstances he was unable either to foresee or bring about have done everything for him and without him....

No nation can give itself a government; only, when such and such a right exists in its constitution and this right is unrecognized or suppressed, some men, aided by circumstances, can brush aside obstacles and get the rights of the people recognized. Human power extends no further....

CHAPTER X. OF THE PRETENDED DANGERS OF A COUNTER-REVOLUTION
Part 1 General Considerations
Nowadays it is a very common fallacy to insist on the dangers of a counter-revolution in order to buttress the view that we should not return to a monarchy.
A great number of works intended to persuade Frenchmen to be content with the Republic are only developments of this idea. Their authors rest their argument on the evils inseparable from revolutions; then, pointing out that the monarchy cannot be restored in France without a new revolution, they conclude that it is necessary to maintain the Republic. This gross fallacy, whether it arises from fear or from the desire to mislead, deserves to be carefully discussed....

To carry through the French Revolution it was necessary to overthrow religion, insult morality, violate every propriety, and commit every crime; to do this diabolic work, such a number of vicious men had to be used that perhaps never before had so many vices acted in concert to perform any evil whatever. In contrast, to restore order, the king will call together all the virtues; no doubt, he will wish this, but he will also be forced to it in the very nature of things. His most pressing interest will be to unite justice and mercy; worthy men will come of their own accord to take up positions in the posts where they can be of use; and religion, lending its authority to politics, will give it a power which it can draw only from its august sister.

I have no doubt many men will ask to be shown the basis for these splendid hopes; but can it be believed that the political world progresses haphazardly and that it is not organized, directed, and moved by the same wisdom that reveals itself in the physical world? The guilty hands that overthrow a state necessarily inflict the most grievous wounds; for no free agent can run against the plans of the Creator without bringing down, in the sphere of his activity, evils proportionate to the extent of the crime; and this law springs from the kindness rather than from the justice of the Supreme Being.

But when man works to restore order, he associates himself with the author of order; he is favored by nature, that is to say, by the combined working of secondary forces, which are the agents of the Divinity. His action has something divine in it; it is both gentle and authoritative; it forces nothing yet nothing resists it; in carrying out its plans, it restores to health; as it acts, so is calmed that disquiet and painful agitation which are the effect and the symptom of disorder; just as men know that a skillful doctor has put back a dislocated joint by the cessation of pain....

What culpable blindness makes you Frenchmen persist in fighting painfully against the power that renders all your efforts void in order to warn you of its presence? You are powerless only because you have dared to separate yourselves from it and even to work against it. Once you act in harmony with it, you will participate in some manner in its nature, all obstacles will disappear before you, and you will laugh at the private fears which now agitate you. All the parts of the political machine have a natural tendency to move toward the place assigned to them, and this divine tendency will favor all the efforts of the king; and order being the natural element of man, you will find in it the happiness you vainly seek in disorder. The Revolution has caused you suffering because it was the work of all the vices and because the vices are man's tortures. For the opposite reason, the return to monarchy, far from producing the evils you fear for the future, will put a stop to those which are today destroying you. All your efforts will have positive results; you will destroy only destruction.

Rid yourself for once of those distressing doctrines which have dishonored an age and caused the fall of France. You have already learned to know the preachers of these fatal dogmas, but the impression they have made on your mind has not been wiped out. In all your plans of creation and restoration, you forget nothing but God; they have driven a rift between you and Him: it is by no more than an effort of reasoning that you raise your thoughts to the unfailing source of all existence. You want to see only man, his actions so weak, so dependent, so circumscribed, his will so corrupt and irresolute; and the existence of a superior cause is nothing but a theory to you. Yet it presses in on you and surrounds you: it impinges on you, and the whole world tells you of it. When you are told that without it you will be strong only in destruction, this is no vain theory that is retailed to you, but a practical truth founded on the experience of every age and on the knowledge of human nature. Look at history and you will not see one political foundation, indeed any sort of institution of consequence and durability, that is not based on a religious idea, no matter of what kind, for there is no entirely false religious theory....

It can be said without fear of contradiction that, generally speaking, monarchy is the form of government that gives the most distinction to the most people. In this kind of government, the sovereign possesses sufficient luster to share some of it, with the necessary gradations, between a host of agents which it distinguishes to a greater or lesser degree. In a republic, sovereignty is not tangible as in a monarchy, but is a purely moral concept whose greatness is incommunicable. In addition in republics public offices are nothing outside the seat of government, and moreover have consequence only insofar as they are occupied by members of the government; there it is the man who honors the office rather than the office the man, who is distinguished not as agent but as a portion of sovereignty.

One can see in the provinces subject to republican government that public offices (except those reserved for members of the sovereign body) raise their holders very little in the eyes of their fellowmen and have practically no significance in public opinion, for of its nature a republic is the government that gives the most rights to the very small number of men who are called the sovereign, and that takes away the most from the others who are called subjects.

The nearer a republic approaches a pure democracy, the more striking this observation will be.

Just recall the innumerable offices (even leaving out of account all the offices that were for sale) that the old government of France opened to universal ambition.... It is true that the highest positions were more difficult for the ordinary citizen to reach, but this is perfectly reasonable. There is too much movement in the state and not enough subordination where all can aspire to everything. Order demands that offices should be graduated like the condition of citizens and that talents, and sometimes even simply patronage, should surmount the barriers dividing different classes. In this way there is emulation without humiliation and mobility without chaos; indeed, the distinction attached to an office is directly proportionate to the greater or lesser difficulty of attaining it.

To object that these distinctions are bad is to change the question, but I would say: "If your offices do not elevate those filling them, do not boast about giving them to everyone, for you are not giving anything. If, however, offices do and must create distinctions, I repeat that no man of good faith can deny that monarchy is the government which, by its offices alone and independently of nobility, distinguishes the greatest number of the rest of its citizens."

Moreover, one must not be duped by that egalitarian ideal that is simply a matter of words. The soldier who is free to talk to his officer in a grossly familiar tone is not by that his equal. The hierarchy of office, which disappeared at first in the general confusion, begins to emerge ....

[Translation by Jack Lively]

Return to Writings of Joseph de Maistre in English Translation.	

Essay
on the Generative Principle of
Political Constitutions
and other Human Institutions
BY
M. the Count de Maistre,
Minister Plenipotentiary of H.M. the
King of Sardinia
to H.M. the Emperor of Russia,
author of
Considerations sur la France

O YE SONS OF MEN HOW
LONG WILL YE TURN MY
GLORY INTO SHAME ?
(Psalms 4:2)
PREFACE
POLITICS is perhaps the thorniest of the sciences, due to the ever recurring difficulty in discerning what in it is stable and what changeable. It presents a very strange phenomenon, well calculated to make every prudent man called to the administration of states tremble. Whatever common sense first perceives in this science as an evident truth is almost always found, once tested by experience, not only false but disastrous.
Let us begin at the foundation. If we had never heard governments spoken of and men were called upon to deliberate, for example, on hereditary or elective monarchy, we should justly regard one who should decide for the former as a madman. The arguments against it appear so naturally to reason that it is useless to repeat them. History, however, which is experimental politics, demonstrates that an hereditary monarchy is the government most stable, appropriate, and natural to man, while an elective monarchy, on the contrary, is the worst form of government known.

With respect to population, commerce, prohibitory legislation, and a thousand other important subjects, the most plausible theory is almost always found contradicted and brought to nothing by experience. Let us cite a few examples.

What method must be used to make a state strong? "It is necessary first to encourage population by every possible means." On the contrary, every law tending directly to favor population without regard to other considerations is bad. It is even necessary to endeavor to establish in the state a certain moral force which tends to diminish the number of marriages and to make them less hasty. A gain of births over deaths as shown by tables usually shows only the number of the destitute, etc., etc. French economists outlined the demonstration of these truths, and the excellent work of MALTHUS has completed it.

How shall food shortages and famine be prevented? "Nothing is more simple. It is necessary to prohibit the export of grains." On the contrary, a premium must be granted those who export them. The authoritative example of England has forced us to swallow this paradox.

How shall the rate of exchange be maintained in favor of a certain country? "It is unquestionably necessary to curtail the export of specie, and, consequently, to ensure by strong legal prohibitions that the state buy no more than it sells." On the contrary, these means have never been employed without worsening the rate of exchange, or what amounts to the same thing, without increasing the indebtedness of a nation. Nor can the opposite course be taken without improving the rate of exchange, that is, without making it evident that the nation has achieved a favorable balance of payments with its neighbors, etc., etc. But the phenomenon we have observed appears most often in the most fundamental and substantial part of politics: the constitution of empires. It is said that the German philosophers have invented the word metapolitics to be to politics what metaphysics is to physics. This new term seems very aptly invented to express the metaphysics of politics, for there is such a thing, and this science deserves profound attention.

An anonymous writer who was much occupied with such speculations and who has strived to fathom the hidden foundations of the social edifice believed himself in the right when, nearly twenty years ago, he advanced the following propositions as so many incontestable axioms diametrically opposed to the theories of that time.

1. No constitution arises from deliberation. The rights of the people are never written, except as simple restatements of previous, unwritten rights.

2. [In the formation of constitutions] human action is so far circumscribed that the men who act become only circumstances. [It is even very common that in pursuing a certain end they attain another.] 3. The rights of the PEOPLE, properly so called, proceed almost always from the concessions of sovereigns and thus may be definitely fixed in history, but no one can ascertain the date or the authors of the rights of the monarch and the aristocracy.

4. These concessions themselves have always been preceded by a state of things which rendered them necessary and for which the sovereign was not responsible.

5. Although written laws [lois] are merely the declarations of pre-existing laws [droits], it is far from true that all these laws can be written.

6. The more of it one puts into writing, the weaker the institution becomes.

7. No nation can give itself liberty if it is not already free,* for human influence extends only as far as existing rights have developed.

[* Machiavelli is here appealed to as evidence: "A people accustomed to live under a Prince, should they by some eventuality become free, will with difficulty maintain their freedom." Discourses, I, 16.]
8. Legislators, strictly defined, are extraordinary men, belonging perhaps only to the world of antiquity and to the youth of nations.
9. Even these legislators, notwithstanding their marvelous power, have only combined parts of what already existed.

10. In a sense, liberty is the gift of kings, for nearly all free nations were established by kings.

[The great importance of this should be recognized in modern monarchies. Since all legitimate and sacred immunities of this kind must proceed from the sovereign, everything extorted from him by force is smitten with anathema. To write a law, as Demosthenes justly remarked, is nothing. To make it wanted is everything. (Olynthiacs, III) But if this is true of the sovereign's relationship to the people, what shall we say of a nation, that is to say - in the mildest language - of a handful of hot-headed theorists who would propose a constitution to the legitimate sovereign as one would propose a surrender to a besieged general? That would be indecent, absurd, and above all, futile.]
11. There never existed a free nation which did not have seeds of liberty as old as itself in its natural constitution. Nor has any nation ever successfully attempted to develop, by its fundamental written laws, rights other than those which existed in its natural constitution.
12. No assembly of men whatsoever can form a nation. Indeed, such an enterprise should be ranked among the most memorable follies.

[Machiavelli is again cited here: "It is essential that there should be but one person upon whose mind and method depends any similar process of organization." Discourses, I, 9.]
Since 1796, the date of the first edition of the work we quote,* it does not appear that anything has happened in the world which might have induced the author to abandon his theory. On the contrary, we believe it may be worth while to develop fully the theory at this time and to trace out all its implications. One of the most important, no doubt, is announced in Chapter X of the same work in these words: Man cannot create a sovereign. "At most, he may be the instrument in dethroning the sovereign and delivering his kingdom to another ruler already royal .... Moreover, there has never been a royal family which could be assigned a plebeian origin. If such a phenomenon appeared, it would mark the beginning of a new world era."**
[* Considerations sur la France, ch. IV.]
[** Ibid., ch. X, part 3.]

We may recall that divine judgment has only recently sanctioned this proposition in sufficiently solemn fashion. But who knows whether the ignorant levity of our age will not say in all seriousness: If he had wanted it, be would still have his place! just as some persist in repeating, after two centuries, If Richard Cromwell had possessed his father's genius, he would have settled the Protectorate in his family, which is precisely the same as saying that if this family had not ceased to reign, it would reign still.
It is written, BY ME PRINCES RULE.* This is not a church phrase, a metaphor of the preacher. It is a literal truth, simple and palpable. It is a law of the political world. God literally makes kings. He prepares royal races, maturing them under a cloud which conceals their origin. At length they appear, crowned with glory and honor; they take their places; and this is the most certain sign of their legitimacy.

[* Proverbs 8:16.]
Royal families arise of themselves, as it were, unattended either by violence or marked deliberation but with a certain magnificent tranquility which is difficult to express. LEGITIMATE USURPATION would seem the correct phrase (if not too bold) to characterize such origins, which time hastens to consecrate.
Let no one allow the most splendid human appearances to dazzle him. Who has ever concentrated in himself more of them than the extraordinary personage whose fall still resounds throughout Europe? Has there ever been a sovereignty outwardly so well fortified? A greater consolidation of capabilities? A man more powerful, more active, more formidable? For a long time we saw him trample underfoot twenty nations silenced and frozen with terror. Finally, his power had grown firm enough to make hope itself despair. Yet he has fallen, and so low, that Pity, contemplating him, recoils for fear of being touched. Furthermore, we may remark that for a somewhat different reason it has become equally difficult to speak of this man and of the august rival who has rid the world of him. One is beneath insult and the other beyond praise. But I digress.

In a work known only to a few persons at St. Petersburg, the author wrote in 1810: "If when two factions engage in revolutionary conflict we see precious victims fall on one side, we may be sure that it will win at last, despite all appearances to the contrary."

The truth of this assertion also has just been borne out in the most remarkable and startling manner. The moral order has its laws, as does the physical, and their investigation is quite worthy of occupying a true philosopher's meditations. After an entire age of criminal trifling, it is high time to recall what we are and to trace all knowledge back to its source. This consideration has induced the author to release his little work from the timid portfolio which held it these last five years. He allows the original date to stand and presents it word for word as written at that time. Benevolent intent has called forth this publication, which perhaps is so much the worse for the author, since that sentiment is sometimes quite as blind as love. Be this as it may, he enjoys a well-known privilege. He may doubtless be mistaken at times on unimportant points; he may exaggerate, or speak too confidently; the properties of taste or grammar may be offended, and if so, all the better for the malicious, if such there be. But always the well-founded hope remains to him of displeasing no one, since he loves all the world. Moreover, he is certain of interesting a large and estimable class of men without the possibility of injuring a single one, a confidence altogether reassuring.

ON THE GENERATIVE PRINCIPLE OF POLITICAL CONSTITUTIONS
I. One of the greatest errors of a century which professed them all was to believe that a political constitution could be created and written a priori, whereas reason and experience unite in proving that a constitution is a divine work and that precisely the most fundamental and essentially constitutional of a nation's laws could not possibly be written.
II. Certain people have thought to perpetrate an excellent witticism at the expense of Frenchmen by asking, "In what book eras Salic law written?" But Jerome Bignon answered quite appropriately, very likely without knowing how right he was, "that it is written in the hearts of Frenchmen." Indeed, let us suppose that such an important law existed only because it was written. Surely whatsoever authority had written it would have the right to annul it, and the law would not have that quality of divine immutability which characterizes truly constitutional laws The essence of a fundamental law is that no one has the right to abolish it. For how could it stand above all men, if some men had made it? Popular agreement is not possible. And even if it were, an agreement is still not a law at all and obligates no one unless a higher power guarantees its enforcement Locke sought the nature of law in the expression of aggregate wills [volontes reunies]. He must have been favored by chance thus to hit upon the very quality which excludes all idea of law. Indeed, aggregate wills form ordinances and not law. The latter inevitably presupposes a higher will which enforces obedience.* "In Hobbes' system" (the same which has attracted so much attention in our day through Locke's writings), "the strength of civil law rests only on convention. But what good are these if no natural law exists to decree their enforcement? Promises, contracts, and oaths are mere words. It is as easy to break this trifling bond as to make it. Without the doctrine of a Divine Legislator, all moral obligation becomes illusory. Power on one side, weakness on the other: this constitutes all the bonds of human societies."**

[* "Man in the state of nature had only rights.... Upon entering into society, I renounce my private will [volonte particuliere] in order to conform to law, which is the general Will [volonte general]." Le Spectateur Francais, I, 194, has deservedly mocked this definition. But it might have remarked further that this idea belonged to the period and especially to Locke, who has opened this century in such pernicious fashion.]
[** Bergier, Traite historique et dogmatique de la Religion, III, ch. 4 (after Tertullian, Apologeticus, 45).]

That is what a wise, profound theologian has said of moral obligation. It is equally true of political and civil obligations. Law is only truly sanctioned, and properly law, when assumed to emanate from a higher will, so that its essential quality is to be not the will of all [la volonte de tous]. Otherwise, laws would be mere ordinances. As the author just quoted states, "those who were free to make these conventions have not deprived themselves of the power of revocation, and their descendants, with no share in making these regulations, are bound even less to observe them."[Bergier, op. cit.] This is the reason that primitive common sense, which, fortunately, is anterior to sophism, has always sought the sanction of laws in a superhuman power, whether recognizing that sovereignty comes from God or in worshiping certain unwritten laws as given by Him.
III. The codifiers of Roman law unpretentiously inserted a remarkable fragment of Greek jurisprudence in the first chapter of their collection. Among the laws which govern us, it says, some are written and others are not. Nothing could be more simple and yet more profound. Do we know any Turkish law which explicitly allows the Sultan to condemn a man to death immediately without the intervening decision of a tribunal? Do we know of any written law, even a religious one, which forbids this to the sovereigns of Christian Europe?* However, the Turk is no more surprised to see his master summarily order a man's execution than to see him go to the mosque. Together with all of Asia, in fact with all antiquity, he believes that the direct power of life and death is legitimate and inherent in royalty. Our princes, however, would shudder at the very idea of condemning a man to death, for in our eyes this condemnation would constitute an atrocious murder. Yet I doubt whether it be possible to forbid our kings this power by a fundamental written law without producing greater evils than those one would have wished to forestall.

[* "The Church forbids its children, even more strongly than do the civil laws, from being their own judges; and it is by her spirit that Christian kings abstain from doing this and that they deliver up criminals to the judge, that they may be punished according to law and to the procedures of justice." (Pascal, Lettres Provinciales, XIV.) This passage is extremely important and ought to be more widely known.]
IV. Question Roman history about the exact powers of the Senate. It will reveal nothing, at least of the precise limits of this power. In general, it is clear that the people and the Senate mutually balanced each other in an endless struggle. We know that patriotism or exhaustion, weakness or violence ended these perilous battles, but we know no more.* Observing these great moments in history, it is sometimes tempting to believe that things would have gone much more smoothly had there been precise laws defining these powers. But this would be a great mistake. Such laws, always compromised by unforeseen events and necessary exceptions, either would not have lasted six months or Would have caused the republic to collapse.
[* I have often reflected upon this passage from Cicero: "The Senate repealed the Livian laws in one sentence and in a single moment." (Laws, II, 6) By what right did the Senate take this liberty? And why did the people allow it? It is surely a difficult question, but what affair of this sort can astonish us? After all that has been written on history and Roman antiquities, it has been necessary in our time to write treatises in order to discover how the Senate was recruited.]
V. The English Constitution is an example closer to us, hence more striking. Examine it carefully; you will see that it only moves [i.e., works] while standing still (if this play on words may be allowed). It maintains itself through exceptions. The writ of habeas corpus, for example, has been suspended so often and for such extended periods that one might have suspected the exception had become the rule. Suppose for a moment that the authors of this famous act had undertaken to determine the circumstances in which it could be suspended. They would have obliterated it by so doing.
VI. At the sitting of the House of Commons on June 26, 1807, a Lord cited the authority of a great statesman to prove that the King had no right to dissolve Parliament during its session, but this opinion was contradicted. Where is the law? Try to establish it and to determine entirely in writing the instances where the King has this right - you would cause a revolution. One member said that the King has this right in a critical situation. But what is a critical situation? Again, try to decide this by writing.

VII. Here is an even stranger example. Every-one remembers the great question so fervently debated in England in 1806. It was whether the holding of a judicial appointment together with membership in the Privy Council accorded with the principles of the English Constitution. At the sitting of that same House of Commons on March 3, a member remarked: This country is governed by a body not known by the Legislature. It is only, he added, connived at.

[See the London Chronicle for March 4, 1806. Notice that this word Legislature includes the three powers. It follows from this assertion that the King himself is ignorant of the Privy Council. However, I believe he has an inkling of it.]
In this wise and justly famous England, then, there is a body which governs, and in truth does everything, but which the Constitution does not recognize. Delolme has overlooked this feature, which I could corroborate with several others.
After this, can anyone talk to us about written constitutions and constitutional laws made a priori? It is inconceivable that a sane person could imagine the possibility of such a chimera. If anyone should attempt to make a law in England giving a constitutional existence to the Privy Council, and subsequently to regulate and limit rigorously its privileges and functions, with the precautions necessary to limit its influence and to prevent its misuse, he would overturn the State.

The true English Constitution is that admirable, unique, and infallible public spirit which transcends all praise. It guides everything, conserves everything, and restores everything. What is written is nothing.

["The turbulent government of England," said Hume, "ever fluctuating between privilege or prerogative, would afford a variety of precedents, which might be pleaded on both sides." History of England, James I, 1621. Hume, in speaking the truth, does not at all lack respect for his country. He states what it is and must be.]
VIII. Towards the end of the last century, a great outcry was made against a minister who entertained the project of introducing that same English Constitution (or what was called by that name) into a realm in turmoil which clamored wildly for one of any sort. He was wrong, if you will, at least as much as one who acts in good faith can be wrong. One may fairly assume this, and I believe it with all my heart. But who at that time had the right to condemn him? Vel duo vel nemo. He did not say that he wanted to destroy anything of his own accord. He only wished, he claimed, to substitute one thing which seemed reasonable to him for another which was no longer wanted and which for that very reason no longer existed. Besides, if the principle is granted (and indeed it was) that man can create a constitution, this minister (who was certainly human) had as much right as anyone, and more, to make his own. Were these doctrines doubted? Was it not a common belief everywhere that a constitution was the work of the intellect, like an ode or a tragedy? Had not Thomas Paine declared, with a profundity that charmed the universities, that a constitution does not exist as long as one cannot put it in his pocket? The unsuspecting, overweening self-confidence of the eighteenth century balked at nothing, and I do not believe that it produced a single stripling of any talent who did not make three things when he left school: an educational system, a constitution, and a world. Therefore, if a mature man at the peak of his ability, deeply learned in the science of economics and in the current philosophy, had attempted only the second of these things, I should have considered him exceedingly moderate. But I confess he appears to me a true prodigy of wisdom and modesty when I see him, substituting (at least, in his opinion) experience for foolish theories, respectfully ask a constitution of England instead of making one himself. You say, even this was impossible. But he did not, and how could he have known it? There was no one to tell him so.
IX. The more one examines the role of human agency in forming political constitutions, the more one becomes convinced that it enters only in an infinitely subordinate manner, or as a simple instrument, and I do not believe that the slightest doubt remains as to the unquestionable truth of the following propositions:

1. The fundamental principles of political constitutions exist prior to all written law.

2. Constitutional law [loi] is and can only be the development or sanction of a pre-existing and unwritten law [droit].

3. What is most essential, most inherently constitutional and truly fundamental law is never written, and could not be, without endangering the State.

4. The weakness and fragility of a constitution are actually in direct proportion to the number of written constitutional articles.

[This may serve as a commentary to Tacitus' famous epigram, Corruptissima republica plurimae leges. (Annals III, 27)]
X. On this point, we are often deceived by a sophism so natural that it escapes our notice entirely. Because man acts, he thinks he acts alone. Because he is aware of his freedom, he forgets his dependence. He is more reasonable about the physical world, for although he can, for example, plant an acorn, water it, etc., he is convinced that he does not make oaks, since he has witnessed them growing and perfecting themselves without the aid of human power. Besides, he has not made the acorn. But in the social order, where he is always present and active, he comes to believe that he is the sole author of all that is done through his agency. In a sense, it is as if the trowel thought itself an architect. Doubtless, man is a free, intelligent, and noble creature; nevertheless, he is an instrument of God. As Plutarch says in this fine passage "we must not wonder if the greatest and most beautiful things in the world are done by God's will and providence, seeing that in all the principal parts of the world there is a soul. For the body is the organ and tool of the soul and the soul is the INSTRUMENT OF GOD. And as the body makes many movements by itself, but the more noble are derived from the soul, even so is it with the soul. Some of its operations are self-directed, while in others it is led, disciplined and guided by God, as it pleases Him, being it self the most beautiful and ingenious instrument possible. For it would be strange that the wind, the water, the clouds, and the rains should be instruments of God, with which He nourishes and supports many creatures and also destroys many others, and that He should never make use of living beings to perform His works. For it is far more reasonable that they, depending entirely on God's power, should obey His direction, and accomplish all His will, than that the bow should obey the Scythians, the lyre and flute the Greeks."[From Amyot's translation of Banquet des Sept Sages.]
No one could write better, and I do not believe that these sublime reflections could be more appropriately applied than to the formation of political constitutions where one may say with extra1 truth that man does everything, yet does nothing.

XI. If anything be familiar, it is Cicero's analogy on the subject of the Epicurean system, which claimed that the world had been made from atoms falling randomly in space. I would rather believe, said the great orator, that letters thrown into the air would fall so as to form a poem. Thousands have repeated this thought and praised it. Yet as far as I know, no one has thought to give it the completeness which it lacks. Imagine that handfuls of printed characters thrown from the top of a tower should on landing make Racine's Athalia. What could one infer? That a mind had directed their fall and arrangement. Common sense will never find another answer.

XII. Let us now examine any particular political constitution, England's for example. It certainly was not made a priori. Her statesmen never assembled to say, Let us create three powers, balancing them in such a manner, etc. No one of them ever thought of such a thing. The constitution is the work of circumstances whose number is infinite. Roman laws, ecclesiastical laws, feudal laws, Saxon, Norman, and Danish customs; the privileges, prejudices, and pretentions of every segment of society; wars, rebellions, revolutions, the Conquest, the Crusades, every virtue, every vice, all sorts of knowledge, and all errors and passions; in sum, all these factors acting together and forming by their admixture and interdependent effects countless millions of combinations have at last produced, after several centuries, the most complex unity and the most propitious equilibrium of political powers that the world has ever seen.

[Tacitus believed that this form of government would never be more than an ideal theory or a transient experiment. A mixed constitution is "easier to praise than to create; and if created will not last long." (Annals, IV, 33) English good sense can, however, make it last a much longer time than one could imagine, by continually subordinating, to a greater or lesser extent, theory, or what are called the principles, to the lessons of experience and moderation, which would be impossible if the principles were written.]
XIII. Now since these agencies, thus tossed into the air, so to speak, have arranged themselves so neatly, although no man among the vast multitude which acted in this vast world ever knew what he was doing in relation to the whole or foresaw the outcome, it follows that these agencies were guided in their course by an infallible power. Perhaps the greatest misconception in a century of follies was that fundamental laws could be written a priori, while they are obviously the work of a higher power, and committing them to writing long after is the surest way of proving that they are no longer valid.
XIV. It is quite remarkable that God, having condescended to speak to man, has Himself shown these truths in the two revelations His goodness has given us. There was a clever man who marked a sort of era in our century through the desperate conflict his works exhibit between the worst prejudices of the period, of sect, of habit, etc., and the purest intentions, the most sincere sentiment and the most valuable knowledge. He decided that instruction coming directly from God, or given only according to His commands, should primarily certify to man His existence. Precisely the opposite is true. For the prime characteristic of this teaching is not to reveal God's existence or attributes but to suppose the whole already known without our understanding why or how. Therefore it does not state there is or you shall believe in only one God, omnipotent and everlasting, etc. It begins in purely narrative form: In the beginning, God created, etc., which assumes that the dogma was known before the writing.

XV. Let us pass on to Christianity, the greatest of all imaginable institutions, since wholly divine and made for all men and all ages. It, too, conforms to the general law. Its Author certainly was able to write Himself or to cause His doctrines to be written. Yet He did neither, at least not in a legislative form. The New Testament, posterior to the death of the Lawgiver, and even to the founding of His religion, contains narrative, admonitions, moral precepts, exhortations, commands, threats, etc., but nowhere a collection of dogma expressed imperatively. The Evangelists, describing the Last Supper, when God loved us EVEN UNTO THE END, had a fine opportunity to command our belief in writing, but they carefully refrain from declaring or ordaining anything. Indeed, we read, Go, teach! in their admirable history, but never teach this or that. If doctrine is found in the writings of a sacred historian, he is simply expressing it as something already familiar.* The symbols, which appeared later, are professions of faith, that it may be recognized, or for contradicting the errors of the moment. There, one reads we believe, never you shall believe. We recite them in private; we chant them in the temple with stringed instruments and organs** as true prayers because they are formulas of submission, confidence, and faith directed to God, and not ordinances addressed to man. I should like to see the Confession of Augsburg or the Thirty-Nine Articles set to music. They would certainly be amusing.***

[* It is quite remarkable that the Evangelists themselves did not take the pen till late, and mainly to refute the false tales circulated in their times. The canonical Epistles also originated by accident. The Scripture was never part of the founders' primitive plan. Mill, though a Protestant, has expressly recognized this. (Proleg. in Nov. Test. graec.) And Hobbes had already made the same observation in England. (Tripos, III)]
[** Psalms 150:4.]

[*** Reason can only speak. It is love which sings, and that is why we chant our symbols, for faith is only belief through love. It dwells not only in the understanding, but penetrates further to take root in the will. With much truth and ingenuity, a philosophical theologian has said: "There is a difference between believing, and judging what is necessary to believe." (Leonard Lessius, Opuscula, De Praedestinatione, 556)]

The first symbols are far from containing the announcement of all our doctrines. Indeed, the early Christians would have considered the announcement of them all as a great sin. The same applies to the Holy Scriptures. There never was a more shallow idea than to seek the entirety of Christian dogma in them. Not a line in these writings declares or even hints at the plan of making from them a code or dogmatic statement of all the articles of faith.
XVI. Moreover, if a people possesses one of these codes of belief, we may be sure of three things:

1. Their religion is false.

2. They have written their religious code in a fit of delirium.

3. This people will soon scoff at the code, which can have neither strength nor durability. Such, for example, are the famous ARTICLES, "which are signed by more than read, and read by more than believe them."[Gibbon, Autobiography.] Not only is this catalogue of dogma accounted next to nothing in the country which gave it birth, but it is also obvious, even to a foreigner, that the illustrious proprietors of this sheet of paper are greatly hampered by it. They would like to make it disappear, since it irritates the national good sense, enlightened by the passage of time, and since it recalls an unfortunate beginning. But the constitution is written.

XVII. Surely these same Englishmen would never have sought Magna Charta had not the nation's privileges been violated or unless these privileges had also existed before the Charter. In this respect, what is true of the State is true of the Church as well: if Christianity had never been attacked, it would never have determined dogma in writing. But whenever dogma has been fixed in writing, it is always because it existed previously in its natural state, speech. The real instigators of the Council of Trent were the two arch-innovators* of the sixteenth century.* Their followers, having become more moderate, have since suggested that we expunge this basic law because it contains certain words which are disagreeable to them. And they have tried to tempt us by setting this price on a reunion which would make us accomplices without reconciling us. But this request has no justification in religion or philosophy. They themselves formerly introduced to religious language those words which now harass them. Let us hope that they may today learn to pronounce them. The Faith would be a thousand times more angelic if a sophistical opposition had not forced her to write. She weeps over these decisions which rebellion extorted from her and which always were evils, since they all suppose disbelief or attack and could only arise in the midst of the most dangerous disturbances. A state of war raised these venerable ramparts around the truth. No doubt they protect her, but they conceal her, too. They have made her unassailable, but by that very act, less accessible. Ah! That is not her desire. She wants only to hold all humanity in her embrace.

[* One can make the same observation going back as far as Arius. The Church has never sought to write her dogmas. She has always been forced to do so by opponents.]
XVIII. I have spoken of Christianity as a system of belief. Now I shall consider it from the point of view of its governance [souverainete] in its most extensive manifestation. There it is monarchical as everyone knows, and this is as it should be. By the very nature of things, monarchy becomes more necessary in proportion as an association increases in size. It is not forgotten that an infamous person could nevertheless meet with approval in our time when he affirmed that France was geographically monarchical. Indeed, one could scarcely express this incontrovertible truth better. But as the size of the French nation precludes even the thought of every other form of government, how much more must this sovereignty be exclusively monarchical which by the essential nature of its constitution will always have subjects on every part of the globe? Here, experience supports theory. This being established, who would not believe that such a monarchy would be more strictly defined and limited than any as to the prerogative of its leader? Yet the exact opposite is true. Read the countless volumes brought forth by "foreign war," and even by a species of "civil war," which has its advantages as well as its inconveniences - you will invariably see cited facts alone. It is also remarkable, surely, that the Supreme Tribunal should steadily permit dispute over what appears to everyone to be the most fundamental question of the constitution without ever having wished to settle it by a formal law. This is, unless I am greatly mistaken, because of the very basic importance of the question.* Some misguided fellows, bold only because of weakness, took it upon themselves to decide it in 1682 in spite of a great man, and it was one of the most solemn imprudences ever perpetrated. Its monument, which endures, is doubtless wholly to be condemned, but especially so for one feature hitherto unnoticed, although more vulnerable to enlightened criticism than any other. By writing, and without even apparent necessity (which carried the fault to excess), the famous declaration dared to decide a question which should invariably have been left to practical wisdom, enlightened by the UNIVERSAL conscience.
[* I do not know whether the English have noticed that the most learned and ardent defender of the sovereignty here referred to entitled one of his chapters thus: A mixed monarchy tempered by aristocracy and democracy is better than a pure monarchy. [Quod monarchia, aristocratia et democratia admixta, utilior fit in hac vita, quam simplex monarchia.] Bellarmine, De Summo Pontif., I, 3. Not bad for a fanatic!]
This is the only point of view in harmony with the intent of this work. But it is quite worthy, in any case, of the contemplation of every just mind and upright heart.
XIX. In their general sense, these ideas were known to the ancient philosophers, who clearly perceived the faint - indeed, almost total - insignificance of the written word for great institutions. No one has ever realized or expressed this truth better than Plato, who invariably was first on the way to finding all great truths. According to him, the man who acquires all his education from things written will never have more than the appearance of wisdom.[Plato's Phaedrus, XV.] The spoken word, he adds, is to writing as a man is to his portrait. The products of art appear as living things to us, but if questioned, they maintain a dignified silence. It is the same with writing, which knows not what to say to one man and what to conceal from another. It cannot defend itself if groundlessly attacked or insulted, for its author is never present to support it. Thus he who believes himself able by writing alone to establish a clear and lasting doctrine IS A GREAT FOOL. If he really possessed the seeds of truth, he could never believe that a little black liquid and a pen could germinate them in the world, protect them from harsh weather, and make them sufficiently effective. As for whoever undertakes writing laws or civil constitutions in the belief that he can give them adequate conviction and stability because he has written them, he disgraces himself, whether or no other people say so. He shows an equal ignorance of the nature of inspiration and delirium, right and wrong, good and evil. This ignorance is shameful, even when approved by the whole body of the common people.[Plato, Phaedrus.]

XX. After the wisdom of paganism, it will be instructive to hear Christian philosophy again. How much better it would be, said the most eloquent of the Greek Fathers, if we had never needed writing, but had the divine precepts been imprinted by grace in our hearts as they are with ink in our books. Since we have lost this grace through our own fault, we must follow the second-best course, without, however, forgetting the pre-eminence of our original condition. To the righteous of the Old Testament, God revealed nothing in writing. Seeing the purity of their hearts, he spoke directly to them. But when the Hebrew people sank into wickedness, books and laws became necessary. The same process recurred under the empire of the New Revelation, for Christ left not a single writ to His apostles. He commended them not to books but to the Holy Spirit: "He shall bring all things to your remembrance."[John 14:26.] But because, in time, sinful men rebelled against faith and morality, books were again required.[Chrysostom, Homily on St. Matthew, I, i.]

XXI. The whole truth is assembled in these two authorities. They demonstrate the profound idiocy (it is certainly permissible to speak like Plato, who never loses his temper), I repeat, the profound idiocy, of those unfortunate souls who imagine that legislators are men,* laws are paper, and nations may be constituted with ink. On the contrary, the latter show that writings are invariably a sign of weakness, ignorance, or danger and that the more nearly perfect an institution is, the less it writes. What is certainly divine [that is, the Church] wrote nothing at all in establishing itself, in order to make us feel that all written law is merely a necessary evil, generated by human frailty or malice, and which, moreover, has no authority except that received of a previous, unwritten sanction.

[* Among the multitude of wonderful things with which the Psalms of David sparkles, I single out the following: "Appoint, O Lord, a law-giver over them: that the Gentiles may know themselves to be but men."]
XXII. Here we must deplore the glaring fallacy of a system which has divided Europe with such unfortunate consequences. Its partisans say: "We believe only in the Word of God.... " What a misuse of words! We alone believe in the Word while our dear enemies stubbornly persist in believing only Scripture. As if God could or would alter the nature of His creation and impart to Scripture the life and efficacy it lacks! The Holy Scripture - now then, is it not a writing? Was it not formed with a pen and a little black fluid? Does it understand what to tell one man and what to hide from another? Did not Leibnitz and his maidservant read the same words there? Can this writing be more than the image of the Word? However venerable it thus becomes, when we interrogate it, must it not keep a divine silence?[Plato, Phaedrus.] If it were attacked or slurred, could it defend itself in the Father's absence? Praise be to the truth! If the immortal Word [la Parole] does not give life to Scripture, it will never become speech [parole], that is to say, life. May the others invoke THE SILENT WORD as often as they please. We shall smile peacefully at this false god while ever awaiting with tender patience the time when its disillusioned partisans will throw themselves into our arms, which have for nearly three centuries been ready to embrace them.
XXIII. Each sensible person may become convinced on this point by a little reflection on an axiom as important as it is universal - that NOTHING GREAT HAS GREAT BEGINNINGS. All of history yields no exception to this law. Crescit occulto velut arbor aevo; this is the motto of all great institutions. Therefore, any false institution writes voluminously, for it knows its weaknesses and seeks support. From this fact springs the indubitable result that no real and great institution can be based on written law, since men themselves, instruments, in turn, of the established institution, do not know what it is to become and since imperceptible growth is the true promise of durability in all things. A remarkable example of this sort is the power of the Popes, which I do not intend to discuss dogmatically here. Numerous writers since the sixteenth century have employed a prodigious amount of erudition to prove, by going back to the cradle of Christianity, that at first the Bishops of Rome were not what they later became. They took for granted that everything not found in primitive times is an abuse. Now I say, without the least spirit of contention or desire to offend anyone, that in this they displayed about as much philosophy and genuine learning as one who tries to find the dimensions of a mature man by measuring a babe in arms. This sovereignty I am speaking of here was born like others and grows as they do. It is lamentable to watch fine minds exhausting themselves to prove by infancy that manhood is a deformity. The idea of any institution full grown at birth is a prime absurdity and a true logical contradiction. If the enlightened and open-minded enemies of this power (and surely there are many such) examine the matter from this point of view, as I affectionately urge, I am sure all these objections derived from antiquity will vanish like a thin mist from before their eyes.

As for abuses, I should not concern myself with them here. However, since I have already mentioned them, I will say that there is much to be deflated in the oratory the last century had compelled us to read on this big topic. A time will come when every nation will consider the Popes against whom the greatest outcry was heard - such as Gregory VII - as friends, guardians, and saviors of humanity, as the true Founding Fathers of Europe. No one will doubt it when learned Frenchmen shall be Christians and English savants, Catholics - which must surely come to pass at last.

XXIV. But at this moment, what penetrating words can make us heard by an age infatuated with Scripture and so greatly at variance with the Word as to believe that men can make constitutions, languages, and even sovereignties? By an age for which reality is lies, and lies reality; which cannot even see what happens before its eyes; which feasts on books, seeking the equivocal lessons of Livy or Thucydides, while closing its eyes to the truth which shines forth in the newspapers?

If a humble mortal's prayers could obtain from Providence one of those memorable decrees which form history's great eras, I would ask it to inspire some powerful nation which had gravely offended it with the proud idea of constituting itself politically, starting at the bases. And if the ancient familiarity of a Patriarch were permitted me, despite my unworthiness, I would say: "Grant this people everything! Give them genius, knowledge, wealth, esteem, and, especially, an overweening self-assurance and that spirit, both supple and enterprising, which nothing can hinder, nothing intimidate. Extinguish their former government; obliterate their memories; destroy their affections; spread terror around them; blind or paralyze their enemies; set victory to guard all their frontiers so that none of their neighbors could intervene in their affairs or disturb their progress. Let this nation be illustrious in the sciences, rich in philosophy, intoxicated with human power, free from prejudice, from every tie and all higher influence. Supply all her wants, lest in time she should say, I lacked this or that restrained me. In short, let her act freely with this immensity of means, that at length under Thy relentless protection she may become an eternal warning to the human race."

XXV. It is true we cannot expect such a combination of circumstances, which would literally constitute a miracle. But similar though less startling events reveal themselves here and there in history, even in our times. Although they may not all have that ideal force, for example, which I wished for, they can still teach us valuable lessons.

Less than twenty-five years ago, we witnessed a solemn attempt to regenerate a great nation which was mortally ill. It was the first experiment of the great work and the preface, if I may so express it, of the frightful book which we have since been made to read. Every precaution was taken. The country's sages even believed it was their duty to consult the modern deity in its foreign sanctuary. They wrote to Delphi, and two famous Pontiffs solemnly replied. The prophecies they announced on this occasion were not, as formerly, delicate leaves, the sport of breezes; they are bound.

... Quidque haec Sapientia possit,
Tunc patuit ....
It is only fair to acknowledge that in whatever the nation owed merely to its own good sense, there are elements we can still admire today. Certainly every qualification was united in the head of that wise and august person called upon to take the reins of government. Those chiefly interested in maintaining the old laws voluntarily made a noble sacrifice to the public, and in order to strengthen the supreme authority, they consented to a slightly different description of sovereignty. Alas! All this human wisdom was at fault, and everything ended in death.
XXVI. Someone will say: "But we know what caused the failure of the interprise." How, then? Must God send angels in human form, commissioned to destroy a constitution? Secondary causes will always be necessary. What matter which they are? All instruments are effective in the Great Artificer's hands. But people are so blind that if tomorrow some constitution-monger should come to organize a nation and constitute them with a little black fluid, the crowd would hasten once again to believe in the miracle announced. Again they would say, Nothing is missing, all is foreseen, all written down, while precisely because everything could be seen, written, and discussed, it would be shown that the constitution was empty, offering only an ephemeral appearance.

XXVII. I believe I have read somewhere that very few sovereignties are able to justify the legitimacy of their origin. Let us allow the reasonableness of this assertion. Even so, objectionable acts which a chief may have committed will not tarnish his successors. The mists which would more or less conceal the origin of his authority would only be a disadvantage, the necessary consequence of a law of the moral order. Otherwise, it would follow that the sovereign could only rule legitimately by virtue of a deliberation of all the people - that is to say, by the grace of the people. This will never happen, for there are no truer words than those of the author of the Considerations on France: The people will always accept their masters and never choose them.[Ch. IX.] It is essential that the origin of sovereignty should show itself to be beyond the sphere of human power, so that even those men who appear to influence it directly are only circumstances. As for legitimacy, if its origin seems obscure, it is explained by God's prime minister in the province of this world - Time. It is nevertheless true that certain contemporary signs are unmistakable when we are there to observe them. But an expansion of this idea belongs to another work.

XXVIII. Everything brings us back to the general rule. Man cannot create a constitution, and no legitimate constitution can be written. The collection of fundamental laws which necessarily constitute a civil or religious society never has been or will be written a priori. Only when society discovers itself already constituted, not knowing how, can certain particular articles be made known or explained in writing. But almost invariably, these declarations are the effect or the cause of very great evils, and they always cost the people more than they are worth.

XXIX. To this general rule, that no constitution may be written or made a priori, we know. but one exception: the legislation of Moses. This alone was cast, so to speak, like a statue and written even to the smallest details by an extraordinary man who said, FIAT! without this work ever after needing corrections, additions, or modifications by himself or anyone else. This alone has withstood time, from which it borrowed and expected nothing. It survived fifteen hundred years, and even after eighteen more centuries have passed since the great anathema which struck it on the fated day, we see it enjoying a second life and still binding, with some nameless and mysterious bond, the various scattered families of a people dispersed but not disunited. Like magnetism, and with a similar force, it operates at a distance, making one whole of many widely separated parts. Evidently, to intelligent minds, this legislation surpasses the limits of human capability and is a magnificent exception to a general law which has only yielded once, and then to its Author. And it singlehandedly manifests the divine mission of the great Hebrew law-giver much better than the entire work of that English Prelate, who, with the strongest mental powers and immense erudition, nevertheless had the misfortune to support a great truth by a miserable fallacy.

XXX. Since the principle of every constitution is divine, it follows that a man can do nothing with one unless he seeks the aid of God, Whose instrument he then becomes.* Now this is a truth to which the whole human race has always strikingly witnessed. Examine history, which is experimental politics - there we shall inevitably find the Divinity always called to the aid of human frailty.** Fable, much truer than ancient history for those who are ready to understand it, further corroborates this demonstration. Always, it is an Oracle who founds cities. Always, this Oracle affirms heavenly protection and the heroic founder's success. Kings especially, heads of rising empires, are very often designated, almost branded, by Heaven in some extraordinary manner.*** How many frivolous people have mocked the Saint-Ampoule without ever dreaming that it is a hieroglyphic which one need only read to understand.****

[* One can even generalize the assertion and declare that without exception, no institution whatsoever may endure if it be not founded on religion.]
[** Plato, in an admirable and wholly Mosaic passage, speaks of a primitive age when God had confided the establishment and administration of empires, not to men, but to daemons. Then he adds, speaking of the difficulty of creating durable constitutions: The truth is, that if God bas not presided over the founding of a city, and it bas a merely human beginning, it will inevitably suffer the greatest evils. Thus it is necessary to imitate the primitive procedure in every possible way; and reposing our trust in the immortal part of man, we must dedicate houses as well as States by consecrating as laws the will of the (supreme) intelligence. If a State (whatever its form may be) is founded on vice and ruled by men who trample justice underfoot, no means of safety remains for it. (Plato, Laws, IV, 713-714)]

[*** In controversy, much use has been made of the famous rule of Richard of Saint-Victor: "Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ad omnibus." But this rule is general and may be expressed thus: Every constant, universal belief is true, and whenever certain articles peculiar to different nations are separated from any belie[ and something common to all is left, this remainder is a truth.]

[**** By the very nature of things, each religion puts forth a mythology which resembles it. For this reason, Christian mythology is always pure, always useful, and often sublime, while (by a special exemption) it can never be confused with the religion itself. Consequently, no Christian myth can ever be harmful, and it often deserves full attention.]

XXXI. Consecration of kings springs from the same root. There never was a more meaningful and honorable ceremony, or more exactly, profession of faith. The Pontiff's finger has always touched the forehead of rising sovereignty. The many writers who have seen in these august rites only the workings of ambition, or even a deliberate conspiracy of superstition and tyranny, have spoken against the truth, nearly all even against their own conscience. This question deserves study. Sometimes sovereigns have sought consecration, and sometimes it sought them. Others have been seen to reject it as a sign of dependence. We are acquainted with sufficient facts to judge correctly on this score, but it would be necessary to distinguish carefully the men, the periods of history, the countries, and the forms of worship. Here it is sufficient to emphasize the general and eternal opinion which invokes the Divine Power at the establishment of empires.
XXXII. The most famous nations of antiquity, especially the more serious and wise, such as the Egyptians, Etruscans, Lacedaemonians, and Romans, were precisely those with the most religious forms of government. And the duration of empires has always been proportionate to the degree of influence the religious element gained in the political constitution. The cities and nations most attached to divine worship have always been the wisest and longest lasting, just as the most religious ages have always been the most distinguished by genius.

[Xenophon, Memorabilia, I, iv, 16.]
XXXIII. Religion alone civilizes nations. No other known force can influence the savage. Without referring to antiquity's decisive proofs on this point, we can find tangible evidence in America. For three centuries we have been there with our laws, our arts, our sciences, our civilization, our commerce and luxuries. And what have we gained over the savage state? Nothing. We destroy these unfortunate beings with sword and alcohol. We gradually drive them into the middle of the wilderness until at last they wholly disappear, as much victims of our vices as of our callous superiority.
XXXIV. Has any philosopher ever thought to leave his country and its comforts to seek the savages in the forests of America for the purpose of arousing in them disgust for all the vices of barbarism and of giving them a moral system?* They have done much better. They have concocted fine books to prove that the savage is man in his natural state, whom we should all aspire to resemble. Condorcet has said that the missionaries have carried nothing but shameful superstitions into Asia and Africa.** With an inconceivable multiplication of folly, Rousseau has said that to him, the missionaries seemed scarcely more moderate than the conquerors.*** Indeed, their coryphaeus has had the audacity (but what could he lose?) to cast the crudest ridicule upon these peaceful conquerors, whom the ancients would have deified.****

[* It is true that Condorcet has promised us that the philosophers would assume the unceasing responsibility for the civilizing and welfare of primitive nations (in his Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind). We are waiting to see them begin.]
[** Ibid.]

[*** Letter to the Archbishop of Paris.]

[**** "Well! My friends, why don't you stay at home? You might not have found more devils there, but you would have found just as much foolishness." (Voltaire, Essai sur les Moeurs et l'Esprit, Introd., De la Magie)

Nowhere else could you find more nonsense, indecency, and bad taste. Nevertheless, this book, of which few chapters are exempt from similar passages, this showy geegaw, some modern enthusiasts have unhesitatingly called a monument of the human intelligence. No doubt, like the chapel at Versailles and the pictures of Boucher.]

XXXV. It is the missionaries, however, who have accomplished this marvel so far beyond human strength, or even human will. They alone have traveled the vast American continent from one border to the other to create men there. They alone have done what secular power dared not even imagine. But nothing of the kind rivals the missions of Paraguay. There, the exclusive authority and ability of religion in civilizing men has been most marked. This wonder has been acclaimed, but not sufficiently. The spirit of the eighteenth century and another accomplice spirit have been strong enough to stifle partially the voice of justice and even that of admiration. Perhaps one day (for we do hope these great and generous labors will be resumed), in the heart of a prosperous city founded on some old savanna, the father of these missionaries will have his statue. One might read on its pedestal:
TO THE CHRISTIAN OSIRIS
Whose emissaries have covered the globe
to snatch men from misery,
brutishness, and ferocity
by teaching them agriculture
by giving them laws
by teaching them to know God and to serve Him,
thus taming the unfortunate savage,
NOT BY FORCE OF ARMS
which they never required,
but by mild persuasion, moral chants,

AND BY THE POWER OF HYMNS,
so that men believed them angels.

Osiris, reigning in Egypt, rapidly elevated the Egyptians from impoverishment, misery, and savagery by teaching them to sow and plant, by giving them laws, by instructing them to honor and worship the gods. Afterwards, going throughout the world, he reclaimed it also without using any force of arms, but attracting and winning over most of the nations by gentle persuasion and remonstrances contained in songs and in every kind of music. The Greeks thought he was Bacchus himself. (Plutarch, D'Isis et d'Osiris, Amyot trans.)

Recently, on an island in the Penobscot River, a colony of savages was found who still sang many pious and instructive hymns in their language to the music of the Church with a precision that one could hardly find in the best choirs. One of the most beautiful airs sung in the church of Boston comes from these Indians (who had learned it from their teachers more than forty years ago), although since that time these unfortunate people have had no benefits of religious instruction. (Mercure de France, July 5, 1806.)

Father Salvaterra (a fine name for a missionary!), rightly called the Apostle of California, went to meet the most intractable savages ever known with no other weapon than a lute, which he played quite skillfully. He began to sing: I believe in thee, O my God! etc. Men and women alike surrounded him to listen quietly. Muratori says, speaking of this extraordinary man: This seems like the fable of Orpheus, but who knows whether he might not have failed in a similar situation? Only the missionaries have understood that fable and demonstrated its truth. Plainly, they had discovered the sort of music worthy of being associated with these famous stories. They wrote to their friends in Europe: "Send us the songs of the great Italian composers, in order to be most harmonious without the complicated accompaniment of violin obbligato," etc. (Muratori, Christianesimo felice XII, 284.)] XXXVI. Consider this legislative order, reigning in Paraguay by the simple superiority of talent and virtue, never deviating from the humblest submission to the legitimate temporal authority, however misguided. At the same time, this order entered our jails, our hospitals, and our quarantine stations to brave the most vile and repulsive forms of poverty, disease, and despair. These very men, who hastened at the first appeal to lie down beside the indigent on their bed of straw, were at ease in the politest circles. They mounted the scaffold to speak the last words to the victims of human justice and from these scenes of horror hurried into the pulpit to speak vehemently before kings.* They held the paint-brush in China, the telescope in our observatories, Orpheus' lyre amidst the savages, and they exalted the entire age of Louis XIV. When now we realize that a despicable alliance of perverse government ministers, raving magistrates, and infamous secretaries has been able, in our day, to demolish this admirable institution and to congratulate themselves for it, we recall the imbecile who exultingly stepped upon a watch, exclaiming "I'll stop your noise!" But what am I saying? An imbecile is no criminal.

[* "I will speak of Thy testimonies before also kings, and will not be ashamed." (Psalms i19:46) This is the inscription which has been put under the portrait of Bourdaloue and which several of his colleagues have also deserved.]
XXXVII. I have had to dwell principally on the formation of empires as being the most important subject. But all human institutions obey the same rule, being meaningless or dangerous unless they rest on the foundation of all existence. This principle being undeniable, what shall we think of a generation which has thrown everything to the winds, including the very foundations of the structure of society, by making education exclusively scientific? It was impossible to err more frightfully. For every educational system which does not have religion as its basis will collapse in an instant, or else diffuse only poisons throughout the State, religion being, as Bacon aptly says, the spice which preserves the sciences from decay.
XXXVIII. The question so often asked, Why a school of theology in every university? is easily answered. The reason is that the universities may exist and that instruction may not become corrupted. Originally, universities were only schools of theology to which other faculties were attached, as are subjects around their queen. Established on such a foundation, the edifice of public instruction had lasted until our day. Those who have overturned it among themselves will long repent in vain. A mere child or a lunatic can burn down a city. But architects, materials, workmen, wealth, and above all, time, are necessary to restore it.

XXXIX. Perhaps equally much harm has been done to mankind by those who, while preserving the exterior forms of ancient institutions, are pleased to corrupt them inwardly. Already the influence of modern universities upon morals and the national character throughout most of Europe is quite familiar.* In this respect, the English universities have preserved a better reputation than the others, perhaps because the English know better how to keep silence or to praise themselves at the right moments, perhaps also because their unusually vigorous public opinion has there, more effectively than elsewhere, protected these venerable schools from the general curse, However, they must succumb at last, and already Gibbon's wicked heart has made us some strange disclosures on this point.** In brief, to continue with generalities, if we do not return to the old maxims, if the guidance of education is not returned to the priests, and if science is not uniformly relegated to a subordinate rank, incalculable evils await us. We shall become brutalized by science, and that is the worst sort of brutality.

[* I shall not allow myself to publish here my own opinions, however valuable their exposition might be elsewhere. But I believe it is legitimate for anyone to reprint what has already been printed and to quote a German speaking about Germany - a man no one could accuse of infatuation with the old-fashioned ideas. He says this of the universities in his country: "All our German universities, even the best, greatly need a reform of morals. Even the best arc abysses in which a horde of young people are irretrievably losing their innocence, health and future happiness, and from which emerge creatures destroyed in body and soul, more a burden than a help to society, etc. May these pages be a protection to the young! Let them read the following inscription on the doors of our universities: 'Young man! It is here that many of your fellows have lost their happiness along with their innocence.'" (Campe, Recueil de Voyages pour l'Instruction de la Jeunesse, II, 129.)]
[** See his Autobiography, in which, after several noble remarks about the universities of his country, he says in particular of Oxford: "She will as cheerfully renounce me for a son, as I am willing to disclaim her for a mother." No doubt this loving mother, sensitive as she should be to such a declaration, has bestowed on him a magnificent epitaph: LUBENS MERITO.

Sir William Jones in his letter to Mr. Anquetil, falls into a contrary excess, but it does him honor.]

XL. Creation is not man's province. Nor does his unassisted power even appear capable of improving on institutions already established. If anything is apparent to man, it is the existence of two opposing forces in the universe in continual conflict. Nothing good is unsullied or unaltered by evil. Every evil is repressed and assailed by good, which continually impels all existence towards, a more perfect state.* These two forces are present everywhere. We observe them equally in the growth of plants, the development of animals, the formation of languages and empires (two inseparable things), etc. Probably, human powers extend only to removing or resisting evil in order to separate from it the good, which may then develop freely according to its nature. The illustrious Zanotti has said: It is difficult to change things for the better.** This thought conceals a great meaning under the guise of extreme simplicity. It agrees perfectly with another thought of Origen which alone is worth a volume. Nothing, says he, can be altered for the better among men WITHOUT GOD.*** All men sense this truth, even without consciously realizing it. From it derives the innate aversion of all intelligent persons to innovations. The word reform, by itself and prior to any scrutiny, will always be suspect to wisdom, and the experience of every generation justifies this instinct. We know all too well the fruit of the most attractive speculations of this kind.****
[* A Greek would have said: pros ipanorthosin. One might say, towards total restitution, an expression which philosophy might quite fittingly borrow from jurisprudence and which in this new context would be wonderfully appropriate. As to the opposition and the balance between the two forces, it is readily apparent. "Good is set against evil, and life against death. So look upon all the works of the Most High; and there are two and two, one against another." (Ecclesiastes 33:14-15.)
We may say in passing: thence arises the idea of ideal beauty. Nothing in nature is as it should be, but the true artist, he who can say GOD IS IN US has the mysterious ability to discern the least disfigured features of beauty and to assemble them so as to form a whole which exists only in his mind.]

[** Difficile est mutare in melius. (Cited in the Transactions of the Royal Academy of Turin, 1788-9, 6.)]

[*** Athee. Or, to express this idea more tersely and free from grammatical license: SANS DIEU, REIN DE MIEUX (Origen Against Celsus, I, 26.)]

[**** Nihil motum ex antiquo probabile est. (Livy, XXXIV, 54.)]

XLI. Apply these general maxims to an individual example, the great question of parliamentary reform which has so powerfully stirred English minds for so long. Without being in a position to have a settled opinion, I am constrained to believe, from the mere consideration of the extreme danger of innovations founded upon purely human theories, that the idea of such reform is pernicious and that if the English yield too hastily to it, they will have occasion to repent. But, say the partisans of reform (for this is the classic argument), the abuses are striking, undeniable; and can a formal abuse, a defect, be constitutional? Yes indeed, for every political constitution has faults in its nature which cannot possibly be extracted from it. Moreover - and all would-be reformers should quail at the thought - these faults may change with circumstances, so that in showing that they are new, we have not yet proved them unnecessary.* What prudent man, then, would not shudder in setting to work? Social harmony, like musical harmony, obeys the law of just proportions in the keyboard of the universe. Tune the fifths rigorously and the octaves will be dissonant, and conversely. Since discord is inevitable, instead of eliminating it, which is impossible, we must moderate it by a general distribution. Thus, in all parts, imperfection is an element of the perfection possible. This proposition is a paradox in form only. But, one may still object, where is the rule for distinguishing the accidental flaw from that which belongs to the nature of things and is impossible to exclude? Men upon whom nature has merely bestowed ears ask such questions, while those who have a good ear shrug their shoulders in reply.
[* "One must return, they say, to the fundamental and original laws of the state, abolished by an unjust custom; and this is a game certain to lose everything. Weighed on such scales, nothing will be just. However, the crowd is easily persuaded by such arguments." (Pascal, Pensees, First part, article vi.)
Nothing could be truer, and yet - such is man! - the author of this remark and his loathsome sect have incessantly played this game, certain to lose all. Indeed, the game has utterly succeeded. Moreover, Voltaire has spoken like Pascal on this point: " It is a vain idea," he says, "a futile labor, to attempt to justify everything by finding corresponding ancient institutions," etc. (Essai sur les Moeurs et l'Esprit, etc., ch. 85.) Listening to him speak about the popes further on, you will see how well he remembers his own maxim.]

XLII. When abuses are concerned, one must be careful only to judge political institutions by their enduring effects and never by their causes, of whatever sort, which signify nothing,* still less by certain collateral difficulties which (if I may express myself thus) may easily preoccupy men of limited vision, preventing them from seeing the whole picture. Indeed, the cause should have no logical connection with the effect, according to the hypothesis, which seems already proved. Since the disadvantages of all inherently good institutions are only, as I just explained, an unavoidable dissonance in the great keyboard, how can institutions be ever judged by their causes and their faults? Voltaire, who spoke for decades on every subject without once penetrating the surface of any,** has argued facetiously about the sale of judicial offices in France, and perhaps no example would better illustrate the accuracy of my theory. The proof that this sale is an abuse, he says, is that it originated in another abuse.*** Voltaire does not err here in the way anyone is apt to. He errs shamefully, in a total eclipse of common sense. Everything which springs from an abuse is an abuse! On the contrary, one of the most general and obvious laws of the power, at once hidden and striking, which acts and makes itself felt on all sides, is that the remedy for an abuse arises from another and that the evil, having reached a certain point, destroys itself, as it should. For evil is only a negative quality having the dimensions and durability of the being to which it is attached and which it devours. It exists like an ulcer, which only terminates in self-destruction. But then a new reality will of necessity rush to fill the place of what has just disappeared, for nature abhors a vacuum, and good.... but I digress too far from Voltaire.
[* At least with respect to the institution's merit, for from other points of view it may be quite necessary to consider causes.]
[** Dante said to Vergil, honoring him a bit too much, one must admit: Maestro di color che sanno. Parini, although he had his head completely turned, has, however, had the courage to say to Voltaire, parodying Dante: Sei Maestro ... di coloro che credon che sanno - an apt remark.]

[*** Precis du siecle de Louis XV, ch. 42.]

XLIII. This great writer's error proceeds from the fact that divided among twenty sciences, as he himself somewhere confesses, and constantly occupied in communicating instruction to the world, he rarely gave himself time to think. "A sensual and dissipated court, reduced to the greatest want by its foolish expenses, devises the sale of judicial offices, thus creating" (what it never could have done freely, and with a knowledge of the cause) "a wealthy, irremovable and independent magistracy. In this fashion the infinite power, rejoicing in the habitable part of this earth,* employs corruption to create incorruptible tribunals" (as nearly as human frailty allows). Certainly nothing is so plausible to a true philosopher. Nothing is more consonant, by analogy, with that indisputable law which determines that the most important institutions are always the result of circumstances, never of deliberation. Here, the problem, once stated correctly, is nearly solved - the usual result with such problems. Could a country like France be better judged than by hereditary magistrates? If, as I suppose, one answers in the affirmative, I must immediately propose this second problem: The magistracy being necessarily hereditary, is there a more advantageous way first of constituting and then of recruiting it than one which fills the sovereign's coiners for the least cost and which simultaneously assures the affluence, independence, and even the nobility (of a certain kind) of the higher judges? If venality be considered only as a means of inheritance, every fair-minded person is struck by this point of view, the true one. This is not the place to discuss the matter at length? but it is already demonstrated that Voltaire was completely unaware of it.
[* Ludens in orbe terrarum. (Proverbs 8:31)]
XLIV. Imagine a man like him at the head of affairs, uniting, by a happy chance, frivolity, incapacity, and rashness. He will not fail to act according to his scatterbrained theories of law and abuses. He will borrow at 7 per cent to pay off debts carrying a charge of 2 per cent. He will subvert the public by a flood of paid writings which will insult the magistracy and destroy public confidence in it. Soon, patronage, a thousand times more foolish than chance, will begin the endless series of its blunders. The distinguished man, no longer enjoying the right of inheritance for oppressive labors, will depart, never to return. And the great tribunals will be delivered into the hands of nameless adventurers, without prestige or fortune, replacing the venerable magistracy, in which virtue and learning had become as hereditary as the dignities of office, a true priesthood which other nations could envy until the moment when false philosophy, having banished wisdom from all her accustomed haunts, climaxed these noble exploits by driving her from the land altogether.
XLV. Such is the portrait of most reforms. For not only is creation beyond man's scope, but even reform is permitted him only in a subordinate capacity and with a multitude of formidable restrictions. Starting from these unquestionable principles, each man can judge his country's institutions with perfect certainty. Above all, he can evaluate all those creators, those legislators and those restorers of nations, so dear to the eighteenth century, which posterity will contemplate with pity, perhaps even with horror. Castles of cards have been built inside and outside Europe. The details would be odious to relate. But surely no lack of respect is shown anyone by a simple plea to look and judge by the event if he persists in refusing all other types of instruction. Man in communication with his Maker is sublime, his activities creative. The instant he separates himself from God to act alone, on the other hand, he does not lose his power, for it is a privilege of his nature, but his activity is negative and leads only to destruction.

XLVI. The history of all ages contains not one fact to contradict these maxims. No human institution can endure unless supported by Him Who supports all - that is to say, unless it is specially consecrated to Him at its origin. The more it is permeated by the Divine essence, the longer it will survive. How strange is the blindness of men in our time! They boast of their understanding, yet they are ignorant of everything, since they do not know themselves what they are and what they can do. Unconquerable pride goads them incessantly to overthrow everything not made by themselves, and to effectuate new creations they abandon the source of all existence. Jean Jacques Rousseau has correctly said: Vain little man, show me your power, and I shall show you your weakness. He might just as truly have said, but to better advantage: Vain little man, confess your weakness to me, and I shall show you your strength. In fact, once a man has recognized his insignificance, he has taken a great forward stride, for he is quite close to seeking a support with which everything is possible. Exactly the opposite of this has characterized the century which just ended. (Alas! It has ended only in our calendars.) Examine all its enterprises, ail its institutions whatsoever; you will find it always intent on separating them from the Divinity. Man has believed himself to be an independent being, and he has embraced what is really the practice of atheism, which is more dangerous perhaps and more reprehensible than that of theory.

XLVII. Beguiled by his vain sciences away from the only one which truly concerns him, man has come to believe that he has the power of creation, although he actually has not even the power of assigning names. He who cannot even produce an insect or a tuft of moss has thought himself the direct author of sovereignty, the most important, holy, and fundamental part of the moral and political world.* He has believed that a certain family, for example, rules because a certain people has wanted it to, while he is surrounded by absolute proof that every sovereign power rules because it is elected by a superior power. If he does not see these proofs, it is because he shuts his eyes or because he looks too closely. He believes that he himself has invented language. Again, he should realize that every human tongue is learned and never invented and that no conceivable hypothesis within the sphere of mortal powers could explain either the formation or the diversity of languages with the slightest plausibility. He has believed that he could constitute nations, in other words, that he could create that national unity by virtue of which one nation is not another. Finally, he has believed that because he was able to form institutions, he could all the more naturally borrow them from other nations, importing them ready made, with their original name, to enjoy of them the same advantages as had their first possessors. The French press has furnished me a curious example.

[* "(The) principle, which is noble in itself, and seems specious ... is belied by all history and experience, that the people are the origin of all just power." (Hume, History of England, Charles I, ch. LIX, a. 1649.)]
XLVIII. Some years ago, the French people took it into their heads to initiate certain athletic contests in Paris which in several contemporary writings were gravely called Olympic Games. The reasoning of those who invented or revived this high-sounding name was not complicated. Men raced, they said to themselves, on foot and on horseback by the banks of the Alpheus. Men will race on foot and on horseback by the banks of the Seine. Therefore it is the same thing. Nothing could be simpler. But without inquiring why they had not called these games Parisian instead of Olympic, I shall proceed to other observations. Before the Olympic Games were begun, Oracles were consulted, gods and heroes took part, nothing started before sacrifices had been offered and other religious ceremonies enacted. The games were considered the Popular Assembly of Greece, and nothing was more majestic, But before the Parisians instituted their contests, revived from the Greeks, did they go to Rome ad limina apostolorum to consult the Pope? Before running their steeplechase for the amusement of shopkeepers, did they celebrate High Mass? With what great political aims were these races associated? What were the names of the High Priests? But enough. The most ordinary common sense instantly feels the emptiness, even ridiculousness, of this limitation.
XLIX. Yet in a journal written by intelligent men, whose only fault - or misfortune - lay in professing the modern doctrines, the following passage about these Games was written a few years ago with the most amusing enthusiasm.

I predict: The French Olympic Games will one day draw all Europe to the Champ-de-Mars. What frigid and insensitive souls are they who see in this only an athletic contest. As for me, I see a spectacle unparalleled since the pageantry of Elis, where all Greece could watch its own splendor. No, the Roman Circus and our own tournaments of chivalry could not hold a candle to it.

[Decade Philosophique, October, 1797, I, 3:. This passage, seen together with its date, has the twofold value of being highly amusing and also thought provoking. In it one may see what ideas these children were toying with at the time and how much they knew about what man should know before all else. Since then a new order of things has sufficiently refuted these fine conceits. And if all Europe today is drawn to Paris, it is certainly not in order to see Olympic Games.
As for me, I believe, indeed, I know, that no human institution is lasting without a religious foundation and moreover (I entreat the most undivided attention to this), without a name taken from the national language, originating itself without any previous and public deliberation.
L. The theory of names is yet of great importance. They are never arbitrary, as so many men who have lost their names affirm. God calls Himself I Am, and every creature calls itself I am that. The name of a spiritual being is necessarily relative to its action, which is its distinctive quality. Hence among the ancients, the highest honor for a divinity was polyonymy, that is to say, having more than one name, which indicates a variety of functions or a greater extent of power. Ancient mythology has Diana, still a child, asking Jupiter for this honor, and in the verses attributed to Orpheus, she is hailed with the title Demon polynyme (spirit of many names).* Essentially, this means that God alone has the right to bestow a name. He has named everything because he has created everything. He has named the stars** and the angels. The Bible mentions only three of the latter by name, but each relates to the purpose of these ministers. It is the same with men whom God has seen fit to name Himself, with whom Holy Scripture has acquainted us in considerable numbers. The names are always relative to the functions of these men.*** Has He not said that in His future kingdom, He would give the conquerors A NEW NAME**** proportionate to their exploits? Have men, formed in God's image, found a more solemn way to reward victors in battle than by giving them a new name, the most honorable of all in human estimation, that of the vanquished nation?***** Each time that a man's life is supposed to change and take on a new character, thus often does he receive a new name. This is true in baptism, confirmation, enlistment of soldiers, entrance into a religious order, liberation of slaves, etc. In a word, the name of every being explains what he is, and there is nothing arbitrary about it. The common expression, he has a name, he doesn't have a name, is quite true and expressive. No man may be ranked among those who in the time of assembly were called by name****** unless his family is marked by a sign which distinguishes it from all others.

[* See the note of Spanheim on the seventh line of Callimachus' Hymn to Diana, VII. Cited by Lanzi, Saggio di Lingua Etrusca, III, part 1. The Homeric Hymns are in reality only a collection of epithets which belong to the same principle of Polyonymy.
[** Isaiah 1:26.]

[*** Let us remember the greatest name divinely and directly given to man. The reason of the name was given in this case with the name, and the name expresses precisely the destination, or what amounts to the same thing, the power.]

[**** Revelation 3:12.]

[***** This observation has been made by the anonymous but well-known author of the German book entitled Die Siegsgeschichte der christlichen Religion, in einer gemeinnutzigen Erklaerung der Offenbarung (Nuernberg, 1799), 89. There is nothing which can be said against this page.]

[****** Numbers 6:12].

LI. This also applies to nations. There are some which have no name. Herodotus remarks that the Thracians would be the most powerful people in the universe if they were united. But, he adds, this union is impossible, for they all have a different name.* It is an acute observation. There are also some modern people who have no name and others who have several. But polyonymy is as unfortunate for nations as antiquity could think it honorable for their deities.
[* Herodotus, Therpsyc., v. 3]
LII. Since names partake of nothing arbitrary and originate, like all things, more or less immediately in God, we must not believe that man has the unrestricted right of naming even those things of which he has some right to consider himself the author and of imposing names on them to suit the ideas he forms of them. In this connection, God has reserved a sort of direct jurisdiction for Himself, which it is impossible to misconstrue.* Oh my dear Hermogenes! Bestowing names is a weighty matter, which cannot be entrusted to a bad man, or even an ordinary man .... This privilege belongs only to a creator of names (onomaturgos), that is to say, to the legislator alone. But of all human creatures, he is the most rare.**
[* Origen Against Celsus I, 18, 24, and Exhortation to Martyrdom, 46.]
[** Plato, Cratylus, 390.]

LIII. Still, man loves nothing as much as giving names. This he does when he applies expressive epithets to things, a talent for which great writers - great poets especially - are distinguished. The just application of an epithet dignifies a noun, which becomes famous in this new guise.* Examples are found in every language....** Man will never forget his primitive privileges; in a certain sense, he will always exercise them. But how greatly has his degradation curtailed them! Here is a law as true as God its Maker:
Man is forbidden to give great names to works of his which he considers mighty. But if be has proceeded legitimately, the common names for the work will be ennobled by it and become great.

[* So that, as Dionysius of Halicarnassus has observed, if the epithet is distinctive and natural, it will weigh as much as a name. (De la poesie d'Homere, ch. VI.) One can even say that in a certain way it is worth more, for it has the merits of creation without having the flaw of neologism.]
[** I recall no famous epithet of Voltaire - perhaps this is merely due to forgetfulness on my part.]

LIV. This rule is the same, whether it concerns political or material creation. For example, nothing is better known in Greek history than the word Ceramicus. Athens had none more magnificent. Long after it had lost its great men and its political significance, Atticus, then in Athens, wrote pretentiously to his illustrious friend: The other day, finding myself in the Ceramicus, etc., and Cicero teased him about it in his reply.* What is the intrinsic meaning of this famous word Tuilerie?** Nothing could be more ordinary. But heroes' remains mixed with this ground have consecrated it, and the soil has consecrated the name in turn. It is curious that at Such a great distance in time and space this same word TUILERIES, formerly famous as the name of a place of burial, should again be dignified under the name of a palace. The personage who arrived to inhabit the Tuileries did not attempt to give the building some imposing name to match its splendor. If he had made this mistake, there was no reason that the following day this place should not have been inhabited by prostitutes and thieves.
[* In reply to your phrase, finding myself in the Ceramicus the other day, etc. (Cicero, ad Atticus, I, 10.)
[** With a certain latitude which still includes the idea of pottery or a pottery.]

LV. There is another reason worth considering which should also induce us to mistrust any pompous name given a priori. Man's conscience almost always warns him of the imperfections of the work he has just produced. Rebellious pride, which cannot deceive itself, tries at least to deceive others by inventing an honorable name which implies precisely the opposite merit. This invention, consequently, instead of really attesting the excellence of the work, is a clear acknowledgement of the flaws which characterize it. The eighteenth century, so rich in every imaginable fallacy and foolishness, has supplied a myriad of intriguing examples of this point in the form of book titles, epigraphs, inscriptions, and other such things. At the beginning of one of the principal works of that age, for instance, one reads:
Tantum series juncturaque pollet:
Tantum de medio sumptis accedit honoris.
Erase the presumptuous epigraph and boldly substitute, without even having opened the book and without the least fear of being unfair:
Rudis indigestaque moles;
Non bene junctarum discordia seroina rerum.
Indeed, this book is the very image of chaos, and the epigraph eminently expresses what is wanting in the work to the highest degree. If you read at the head of another book A Philosophical and Political History, you know without having read the history announced under this title that it is neither philosophical nor political. Besides which you will know after having read it that it is the work of a madman. Does a man have the effrontery to write beneath his own portrait Vitam impendere veto? Do not hesitate to wager it is the portrait of a liar. Perhaps he himself will someday admit it to you when he may take a fancy to speak the truth. Who can see under another portrait Postgenitus hic carus erit, nunc carus amicis without at once recalling that line, borrowed from the original itself, depicting him in somewhat different fashion: I had worshipers but never a friend? Indeed, never perhaps has there lived a man of letters less able to feel friendship and less worthy to inspire it. Works and enterprises of another kind lend themselves to the same observation. For example, if in a famous nation music suddenly becomes an affair of state. If the spirit of the age, blind in every respect, grants this art a false importance and a false patronage, very different from what it needs, if in fact a temple is erected to music under the venerable and high-sounding title of ODEON - it proves infallibly that the art is decaying. No one need be surprised to hear a famous critic in that country declare soon after, rather strongly, that nothing prevents hanging a ROOM TO RENT sign above the entrance?
["Music played in the Odeon fails to inspire the same emotion in me which I felt in the former Theater of Music, where I used to listen to the same pieces with rapture. Our singers have lost the tradition of this masterpiece (Pergolesi's Stabat Mater). It is written in an idiom foreign to them. They emit the notes without being acquainted with their spirit. Their execution is cold, soulless, unfeeling and inexpressive. Even the orchestra plays mechanically and so feebly that the effect is spoiled.... Ancient music rivals the noblest poetry, ours only the chirping of birds. Therefore, let our modern virtuosi desist from profaning sublime compositions ... let them (especially) play Pergolesi no longer. He is too much for them." (Journal de l'empire, 28 March 1812.)]
LVI. But as I have said, all of this is only an observation of secondary importance. Let us return to the general principle, Man has not, or has no longer, the right to name things (at least, in the times referred to). We must realize clearly that the most respectable names have a plebeian origin in all languages. The name is never commensurate with the thing; the thing always glorifies the name. The name must germinate, so to speak, or else it is false. What did the word throne originally signify? Seat, or even stool. What does scepter mean? A staff to lean upon.* However, the staff of kings was soon distinguished from all others, and this name, with its new meaning, has subsisted for three thousand years. What is nobler in literature and more humble in its beginnings than the word tragedy? What has been more favored in our language than the almost repugnant word drapeau, raised and ennobled by the warrior's lance? Many other names might be mentioned in corroboration - Senate, Dictator, Consul, Emperor, Cardinal, Marshal, etc. We shall conclude with the titles Constable and Chancellor, given to two eminent dignitaries of modern times. The first once meant merely master of the stable;** the second, the man who stands behind a railing (to prevent his being trampled by the crowd of suppliants).
[* I In the second book of the Iliad, Ulysses wants to prevent the Greeks from ignobly renouncing their enterprise. If in the middle of a tumult stirred by malcontents he finds a nobleman or king, he speaks gently to persuade him. But if he finds a man of the people in his hands (demsu andra, a noteworthy Gallicism), he beats him with heavy blows of his scepter. (Iliad, II, 186-201.)
Formerly, Socrates was said to have sinned in borrowing the lines Ulysses then used and in quoting them to prove to the people that they knew nothing and were nothing. Xenophon, Memorabalia, Socrates, I, ii, 58.

Pindar may also be cited on the history of the scepter, the passage where he tells an anecdote of that former king of Rhodes who killed his brother-in-law on the spot, in a moment of high-spiritedness and without evil intent, by striking him with a scepter, which unfortunately happened to be made of a bard wood. (Olymp., VII, 49-55.) A fine lesson for making scepters lighter!]

[** Constable is only a Gallic contraction of COMES STABULI, the companion, or the minister of the prince for the department of the stables.]

LVII. Thus there, are two rules for judging all human creations of any kind whatsoever: the foundation and the name. If the former is purely human, the edifice cannot stand. The more men who engage in its construction, the more deliberation, learning, and especially writing, they supply to it; in short, the more human means of every kind, the more frail shall the institution be. Chiefly by this rule must we judge whatever has been attempted by sovereigns or assemblies of men for the civilizing, the founding, or the regeneration of nations.
LVIII. On the other hand, the more an institution's basis is divine, the more durable it is. For greater clarity, we should add that the religious principle is, by its nature, creative and conservative in two different ways. First, since it acts more strongly on the human mind than does any other element, drawing prodigious efforts from it. For example, if a man's religious beliefs convince him that it is greatly advantageous to him to preserve his body after death as nearly intact as possible without allowing, any rash or profane hand to touch it, after exhausting the resources of embalming, this man will at last build the Pyramids of Egypt. Second, though the religious principle is so powerful in what it effects, it is infinitely more so in what it prevents because of the veneration with which it imbues everything under its protection. If a simple pebble is consecrated, there is immediately a reason why it will escape from hands which might misplace or defile it. The earth is covered with proofs of this truth. The Etruscan vases, for example, preserved by the religion of the tombs, have come down to us, despite their fragility, in greater numbers than the bronze and marble monuments of the same epoch.* If you wish, therefore, to conserve everything, dedicate everything.

[* Mercure de France, June 17, 1809.]
LIX. The second rule, that of names, is no less clear or decisive than the first one. If the name is imposed by an assembly, if it is established by prior deliberation so that it precedes the thing, if it is pompous,* if it has a grammatical proportion to the object it is supposed to represent, lastly, if it is taken from a foreign language, especially an ancient language - all the signs of insignificance are found united, and one may rest assured that the name and the thing will quickly disappear. Contrary conditions indicate the legitimacy, hence the permanency, of the institution. We must take care not to pass over this subject lightly. A genuine philosopher must never lose sight of language, a true barometer whose variations infallibly predict good and bad weather. To confine myself to this subject, it is certain that the immoderate borrowing of foreign words, applied particularly to any sort of national institution, is one of the surest signs of a people's moral degeneracy.
[* Thus, for example, if any man but a sovereign calls himself legislator, it is a certain proof that he is not one. And if an assembly dares call itself legislative, not only does it prove itself otherwise, but also, it has lost its wits and in a little while will be abandoned to the scorn of the universe.]
LX. If the formation of every empire, the progress of civilization, and the unanimous agreement of all history and tradition do not suffice to convince us, the death of empires will complete the demonstration begun at their birth. As the religious principle has created everything, so has its absence destroyed everything. The Epicurean sect, which might be called the skepticism of antiquity, at first corrupted and soon after destroyed any government unfortunate enough to accept it. Everywhere, Lucretius was a harbinger of Caesar.
But all past experience fades in the light of the horrifying example supplied by the last century. Still intoxicated with its fumes, men are, at least in general, very far from being sufficiently composed to contemplate its real significance and, especially, to draw from this the necessary consequences. Thus it is crucial to direct the attention of all to this terrible scene.

LXI. There have always been some forms of religion in the world and wicked men who opposed them. Impiety was always a crime, too. Since there can be no false religion without some ingredients of truth, all impiety does attack some divine verity, however disfigured. But only in the bosom of the true religion can there be real impiety. From which it inevitably results that impiety has never produced in times past the evils which it has brought forth in our day, for its guilt is always directly proportional to the enlightenment which surrounds it. By this rule must we judge the eighteenth century, for in this respect it is unlike any other. It is often said that all ages are alike and men have always been the same. But we must beware of these general maxims, which are invented by the lazy and frivolous to spare themselves the trouble of thinking. On the contrary, every age and every nation has a special distinctive nature which must be carefully considered. Undoubtedly, vice has always existed in the world, but it can differ in quantity, essence, dominant characteristics, and intensity.* Although impious men have always existed, there never was before the eighteenth century, and in the heart of Christendom, an insurrection against God. Never before, above all, has there been a sacrilegious conspiracy of every human talent against its Creator. For this is what we have witnessed in our time. Vaudeville has blasphemed, as well as tragedy, and the novel, along with history and the physical sciences. Men of this age have prostituted genius to irreligion and, according to the admirable phrase of Saint Louis on his deathbed, THEY HAVE WAGED WAR AGAINST GOD WITH HIS OWN GIFTS.** Ancient impiety never becomes angry. Sometimes it reasons; usually it jests, but always without bitterness. Even Lucretius seldom descends to invective, and although his brooding melancholy temperament led him to see. the dark side of things, he remains calm, even when he accuses religion of generating great evils. The ancient religions were not considered sufficiently important to enrage contemporary skepticism.

[* One must be aware of the mixture of virtues, whose proportions have infinite variation. When the same sorts of Vice have been discovered in different times and places, some men believe they have the right to conclude judicially that men have always been the same. There is no more common, no grosser sophism.]
[** Joinville, History of Saint Louis, CXLV.]

LXII. When the good tidings were first broadcast throughout the universe, the attack became more violent. Nevertheless, the enemies of Christianity always retained a certain moderation. They appeared in history at great intervals and invariably alone. They never formed a union or a formal society. They never abandoned themselves to such fury as we have witnessed. Bayle himself, the father of modern disbelief, was unlike his successors. Even in his most reprehensible errors he does not show a great desire to proselytize, even less a mood of irritation or a factious spirit. He denies less than he doubts. He speaks on both sides. Indeed, at times he is more eloquent for the good cause than for the bad.
[* For example, see with what powerful logic he attacked materialism in the article LEUCIPPUS in his Dictionary.]
LXIII. Not until the first half of the eighteenth century did impiety really become a force. We see it at first spreading in every direction with amazing energy. From palaces to hovels, it insinuates itself everywhere, infesting everything. It follows invisible paths, acting secretly but infallibly, so that the most acute observer, seeing the effect, cannot always discover the means. By an unimaginable delusion, k even wins the affections of those to whom it is most deadly, and the authority it is preparing to sacrifice embraces it stupidly before receiving the blow. Soon a simple scheme becomes a formal association, which by degrees rapidly transforms itself into a confederacy and at length into a grand conspiracy which covers all Europe.
LXIV. Then that species of impiety which belongs only to the eighteenth century discloses itself for the first time. It is no longer the cold tone of indifference, of, at worst, the malignant irony of skepticism. It is a mortal hatred, the tone of anger and often of fury. The writers of that period, at least the most distinguished among them, no longer treat Christianity as an unimportant human error. They pursue it like a formidable enemy. They oppose it to the last extreme. It is a war to the death. What would seem incredible, if our own eyes had not seen the sad proofs of it, is that several of these men, who call themselves philosophers, advanced from hatred of Christianity to personal hatred of its Divine Author. They truly hated Him, as one would hate a living enemy. Two men especially, who will forever be covered with the anathemas of posterity, have distinguished themselves in this form of villainy, which seemed beyond the powers of human nature, however depraved.

LXV. Since, however, all Europe had been civilized by Christianity and its ministers had obtained high political prestige in every country, the secular and religious institutions had blended and, as it were, amalgamated in a surprising manner, so that one could with more or less accuracy say of every state in Europe what Gibbon has said of France, that this kingdom was founded by bishops. It was inevitable as a result that the philosophy of the age would unhesitatingly detest the social institutions, from which the religious principle was inseparable. This is what actually occurred. Every government and all the institutions of Europe displeased it because they were Christian, and in proportion as they were Christian, an inquietude of belief, a universal discontent, invaded every mind. In France, especially, the philosophic frenzy knew no bounds, and soon a single powerful voice, formed from many voices in chorus, cried out in the midst of guilty Europe:

LXVI. "Depart from us!* Must we then forever tremble before the priests, receiving from them such instruction as they are pleased to give us? Throughout Europe, the truth is hidden by the fumes of burning incense. It is time that she emerge from this poisonous cloud. We shall no longer speak of Thee to our children. It is left to them, once they become men, to know if Thou exist, what Thou art, and what Thou ask of them. All that exists is distasteful to us, for Thy name is written over all. We wish to destroy everything, rebuilding it without Thee. Depart from our councils, our schools, and our homes. We can act alone; reason is all we require. Depart from us!"

[* Job 21:14. Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of Thy ways.]
How has God punished this execrable raving? He punished it as He created the light, by a single word. He said, "SO BE IT!" - and the world of politics crumbled.
See, then, how the two kinds of proof unite to strike the least discerning eyes. On the one hand, the religious principle presides over all political creation. On the other, everything disappears as soon as it is withdrawn.

LXVII. Europe is guilty for having shut her eyes to these great truths, and she suffers on account of her guilt. Yet still she rejects the light and does not acknowledge the Arm which strikes her. Few men, indeed, of this materialistic generation are in a condition to recognize the date,, the nature, and the enormity of certain crimes perpetrated by individuals, by nations, and by sovereignties. Still less are they able to understand the sort of expiation which these sins demand and the worshipful marvel which compels evil to purify with its own hands the place which the eternal Architect has already measured for His marvelous constructions. The men of this age have chosen their lot. They have sworn to fix their eyes upon the earth.* But it would be useless, even dangerous perhaps, to go into further detail. We are exhorted to profess the truth in love.** Moreover, on certain occasions we must speak it only with respect, and despite every conceivable precaution, this step would be slippery for even the calmest and best-intentioned author. Besides, the world still contains a countless horde of men so perverse, so profoundly corrupt, that if they should bring themselves to suspect the truth of certain things, their wickedness might redouble in consequence, making them, so to speak, as guilty as the rebel angels. Oh! May their brutishness become instead even greater, if possible, in order that they cannot become even as guilty as men can be. Surely blindness is a dreadful punishment Sometimes, however, it can still recognize love. That is all that can be usefully said at this time.

[* Oculos suos statuerunt declinare in terram. (Psalms 16:11)]
[** Aletheuontes en agape. (Ephesians 5:15) This expression is untranslatable. The Vulgate, prefering, with reason, to speak rightly than to speak Latin, says: Facientes veritatem in charitate.]

MAY, 1809
[Translated by Elisha Greifer with the assistance of Laurence M. Porter]

Return to Writings of Joseph de Maistre in English Translation.	

The Saint Petersburg Dialogues
by Joseph de Maistre
FIRST DIALOGUE
THE KNIGHT: You believe, then, that the wicked are not happy? I too would like to believe this, yet I hear it said every day that they succeed in everything. If this were really the case, I would be a little angry that Providence had reserved the punishment of the wicked and the reward of the just entirely for another world; it seems to me that a little on account on both sides, in this life, would have done no harm....
THE COUNT: For long there have been complaints of Providence in the distribution of good and evil, but I confess that these difficulties have never been able to make the least impression on my mind. I see with the certainty of intuition, and I humbly thank this Providence for it, that on this point man misleads himself in the full meaning of the phrase and in its natural sense.

I should have liked to be able to say with Montaigne, Man fools himself, for this is exactly right. It is quite true: man fools himself; he is his own dupe; he takes the sophisms of his naturally rebellious heart (alas, nothing is more certain) for real doubts born of his understanding. If occasionally superstition believes in belief, as it is accused of, more often still, you can be sure, pride believes in disbelief. In both cases, man fools himself, but in the second this is much worse.

In a word, gentlemen, there is no subject on which I feel more strongly than the temporal rule of Providence: it is therefore with complete conviction and profound satisfaction that I shall reveal to two men whom I love dearly some useful thoughts I have gathered through an already long life entirely devoted to serious studies.

THE KNIGHT: I will listen to you with the greatest pleasure, and I have no doubt our common friend will give you the same attention, but allow me, I beg you, to start by contradicting you before you begin. Do not accuse me of replying to your silence, for it is just as if you had already spoken, and I know very well what you are going to say to me. Without any doubt, you were about to start where the preachers end, with the life eternal. "The guilty are happy in this world, but will be tormented in the next; the just, on the other hand, suffer in this but will be happy in the next." This is a commonplace. And why should I hide that this peremptory reply does not satisfy me fully? I hope you will not suspect me of wishing to destroy or weaken this valuable argument, but it seems to me that it would not be harmed at all if it was associated with others.

THE SENATOR: If our friend is indiscreet or too precipitous, I confess that I am at fault like him and as much as he, for I was also about to quarrel with you before you had broached the question; or, more seriously, I should like to ask you to leave the beaten tracks. I have read several of your ascetic writers of the first rank, whom I honor deeply, but, while giving them all the praise they deserve, it pains me that, on this great question of the ways of divine justice in this world, they almost all seem to accept criticisms of the fact and to admit that there is no way of justifying divine Providence in this life. If this proposition is not false, it seems to me at least to be extremely dangerous, for there is grave danger in allowing men to believe that virtue will be rewarded and vice punished only in another life. Skeptics, for whom this world is everything, ask for nothing better, and the masses themselves must take the same line: man is so muddled, so dependent on the things immediately before his eyes, that every day even the most submissive believer can be seen to risk the torments of the after-life for the smallest pleasure. What will be the case with those who do not believe or whose belief is weak? Let us then rely as much as you like on the future life, which answers every objection, but if a truly moral regime exists in this world, and if even in this life crime should go in fear, why relieve it of this fear?

THE COUNT: Pascal observes somewhere that the last thing that is discovered in writing a book is to know what should be put first. I am not writing a book, my friends, but I am beginning a discourse that may well be long and should have had the opportunity to think about its beginning. Fortunately, you have saved me the trouble of deliberation by telling me where I should start.

The familiar expression that should be addressed only to a child or an inferior, You do not know what you are saying, is nevertheless the compliment that a man of good sense has the right to make to the crowd who meddle in discussions of the thorny questions of philosophy. Have you ever heard a soldier complain that in war wounds are suffered only by honest men and that it is sufficient to be a rascal to be invulnerable? I am sure the answer is no, for in fact everyone knows that the bullet does not choose the person it hits. It would be quite proper to lay down at least a perfect parallel between the evils of war in relation to soldiers and the evils of life in general in relation to all men; and this parallel, exact as I assume, is alone sufficient to overcome a difficulty based on a manifest falsehood; for it is not only false but obviously false that crime in general prospers and virtue suffers in this world: on the contrary, it is very evident that good and evil are a kind of lottery in which each, without distinction, can draw a winning or a losing ticket. The question therefore should be changed to, Why, in the temporal world, are the just not exempt from the evils which can afflict the guilty; and why are the wicked not deprived of the benefits that the just can enjoy? But this question is entirely different from the other, and I should even be astonished if the simple statement of it does not show you its absurdity; for it is one of my favorite ideas that the upright man is very commonly informed, by an inner sentiment, of the falsity or truth of certain propositions before any examination, often even without having made the studies necessary to be in a position to examine them with full knowledge of the case.

THE SENATOR: I am so much of your opinion, and so drawn to this doctrine, that I have perhaps exaggerated it by carrying it into the natural sciences; yet I can, at least to a certain point, invoke experience in this respect. More than once, in questions of physics or natural history, I have been shocked, without knowing quite why, by certain accepted opinions, which in one case at least I have had the pleasure subsequently of seeing attacked and even ridiculed by men deeply versed in these very sciences, in which as you know I have few pretensions. Do you think it necessary to be the equal of Descartes to make fun of these flurries? If anyone tells me that this earth we inhabit is only a bit of the sun drawn off some millions of years ago by some erratic comet hurtling through space; or that animals are made like houses by putting this by the side of that; or that geological strata are only the result of some chemical action, and a hundred other splendid theories of this kind that have been spread abroad in our time, must I be very well read and very reflective, should I have been to four or five universities to feel that these theories are absurd? I shall go further: I believe that in those very questions pertaining to the exact sciences or which appear to rest entirely on experience, this rule of the intellectual conscience is far from worthless for those who are not initiated in this kind of knowledge; which is what has led me to doubt, I confess to you in confidence, several things which commonly pass as certain. The explanation of tides by lunar and solar attraction, the decomposition and recomposition of water and other theories that I could quote to you and that are accepted today as dogmas are repelled by my mind, and I feel led to the inevitable conclusion that some day a scholar of good faith will come to teach us that we were in error on these important subjects or that they were not understood. Since friendship carries this right, you might say to me, This is pure ignorance on your part. I have said this to myself a thousand times. But tell me in your turn why I should not be equally intractable about other truths. I believe them on the word of the masters, and never does a single idea against the faith occur to my mind.

Where then does this internal feeling that revolts against certain theories originate? These theories are based on arguments that I am unable to counter, and yet this conscience of which we talked still says, Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi....

THE COUNT: I shall not examine at this point to what degree one can rely on this internal feeling that the Senator so justly calls intellectual conscience. Still less will I allow myself to discuss the particular example to which he has applied it; these details would carry us too far from our subject. I shall say only that righteousness of heart and habitual purity of intention can have hidden effects and results that extend very much further than is commonly imagined. I am therefore very disposed to believe that among men such as those who now hear me, the secret instinct we were just talking about will very often guess correctly even in the natural sciences, but I am led to believe it well-nigh infallible in questions of theoretical philosophy, morality, metaphysics, and natural theology. It is well worthy of the supreme wisdom, which has created and regulated all things, to have excused man from deep learning in everything that really matters to him. I have thus been right to affirm that once the question occupying us was posed exactly, the internal agreement of every right-thinking person had necessarily to precede discussion....

I repeat that I have never understood this eternal argument against Providence drawn from the misfortune of the just and the prosperity of the wicked. If good men suffered because they are good, and likewise the wicked prospered because they are wicked, the argument would be incontrovertible; it falls to the ground once it is assumed that good and ill fortune are distributed indiscriminately among all men. But false opinions are like false money, struck first of all by guilty men and thereafter circulated by honest people who perpetuate the crime without knowing what they are doing. Impiety first noised this objection abroad; frivolity and good nature have repeated it; but in truth it is nothing. I return to my first analogy: a good man is killed in war; is this an injustice? No, it is a misfortune. If he has gout or gravel, if his friend betrays him, if he is crushed under a falling building, this is again a misfortune, but nothing more, since all men without distinction are subject to these kinds of bad fortune. Never lose from sight this great truth: A general law, if it is not unjust to all, cannot be unjust to an individual. You have not a certain illness, but you could have it; you have it, but you could be free from it. Whoever has perished in a battle could have escaped; whoever returns from it could have remained. All are not dead, but all were there to die.

Consequently more injustice: the just law is not that which takes effect on everyone but that which is made for everyone; the effect on such and such an individual is no more than an accident. To find difficulties in this order of things, they must be loved for their own sake; unfortunately they are loved and sought out; the human heart, always in revolt against the authority that constricts it, tells stories to the mind, which believes them; we accuse Providence in order to be freed from accusing ourselves; we raise objections to it that we would be ashamed to raise against a sovereign or even an official whose wisdom we would assess. How strange that it is easier for us to be just toward men than toward God!

It seems to me, gentlemen, that I would abuse your patience if I went any further in proving to you that the question is ordinarily wrongly put, and that really they know not what they are saying when they complain that vice is happy and virtue unhappy in this world; whereas, even on the assumption most favorable to the grumblers, it is patently proved that evils of every kind fall on humanity like bullets on an army, without any distinction of persons. Now, ff the good man does not suffer because he is good, and if the wicked man does not prosper because he is wicked, the objection vanishes and good sense has reasserted itself.

THE KNIGHT: I admit that, if the distribution of physical and external evils alone is considered, the objection drawn from it against Providence is obviously based on inattention or bad faith, but it seems to me that the impunity of crimes is much more significant. This is the great scandal and the point on which I am most curious to hear what you say.

THE COUNT: It is not yet time, Knight. You have decided in my favor a little too quickly on the evils that you call external. If I have up to now assumed, as you have taken it, that evils are distributed equally among all men, this was only for the sake of argument, for in truth this is not the case. But before going any further, let us be careful not to stray from our path; there are questions which are so interconnected that it is easy to slide from one to another without being aware of it. So, for example, the question Why do the just suffer?, leads imperceptibly to another, Why does man suffer? Yet the last is quite different, being a question about the origins of evil. Let us then start by abjuring all equivocation. That evil exists on the earth is alas a truth that needs no proof, but, it should be added, it is there very justly, and God could not have been its author. This is another truth that we here do not, I hope, doubt and that I can dispense with proving since I know to whom I am speaking.
THE SENATOR: I wholeheartedly profess the same belief without any reservation, but this profession of faith demands an explanation precisely because of its scope. Saint Thomas said with the laconic logic that marked him, God is the author of the evil which punishes, but not of the evil which defiles[Aquinas, Summa Theologica, Part x, (Qu. 49, Art. iii.] He is certainly right in one sense, but it is necessary to understand him aright. God is the author of the evil which punishes, that is to say, of physical evil or pain, as a sovereign is the author of punishments inflicted under his laws. In a remote and indirect sense, God himself hangs men and breaks them on the wheel, since all authority and every legal execution derives from him; but in the direct and immediate sense, it is the robber, the forger, the murderer who are the real authors of this evil which punishes. It is they who build the prisons, who raise the gallows and the scaffolds. In all this the sovereign acts, like Homer's Juno, of his free will, but very unwillingly.[Iliad, IV, 43.]

It is the same with God (while still excluding any rigorous comparison which would be blasphemous). Not only can he not in any sense be the author of moral evil or of sin; he cannot even be taken to be originally the author of physical evil, which would not exist if rational creatures had not made it necessary by abusing their liberty. Plato said, and nothing is more immediately obvious, The good person cannot wish to injure anyone.[Timaeus, 29e.] But as no one will ever think of holding that the good man ceases to be so because he justly punishes his son or kills an enemy on the battlefield or sends a ruffian for punishment, let us, as you have just said, Count, guard against being less equitable toward God than toward men. Every right-thinking person is convinced by intuition that evil cannot proceed from an all-powerful being. This was the infallible feeling that formerly taught Roman good sense to join, as if by a necessary link, the two august titles of MOST GOOD and MOST POWERFUL. This wonderful expression, although born of paganism, appeared so right that it passed into our religious vocabulary, so discerning and exclusive. I shall even say that it has occurred to me more than once that the ancient inscription IOVI OPTIMO MAXIMO could be placed in full on the pediments of your Latin churches, for what is IOV-I but IOV-AH?

THE COUNT: You know well that I have no wish to dispute anything you have just said. Without doubt, physical evil could come into the world only through the fault of free beings; it can be there only as a remedy or an expiation, and consequently God cannot be its direct author; these are for us indisputable dogmas. Now I come back to you, Knight. You agreed just now that it was unjustifiable to quarrel with Providence over the distribution of good and evil but that the scandal lies above all in the impunity of sinners. I doubt, however, if you can give up the first objection without abandoning the second, for if there is no injustice in the distribution of pains, on what will you base the complaints of virtue? The world being governed only by general laws, you do not claim, I imagine, that, if the foundations of the terrace on which we are now speaking were suddenly thrown into the air by some underground disturbance, God would be obliged to suspend in our favor the laws of gravity because this terrace holds three men who have never murdered or stolen; we would certainly fall and be crushed. The same thing would happen if we were members of the Bavarian Illumines or of the Committee of Public Safety. Do you wish that, when it hails, the fields of the just man should be spared? This indeed would be a miracle. But if by chance this just man was to commit a crime after the harvest, it would then be necessary for the corn to rot in his barns; here would be another miracle. So that each moment would require a new miracle, and miracles would become the ordinary order of events, or in other words there could be no more miracles, for the exception would be the rule and disorder order. To set out such ideas is enough to refute them.

What misleads us still more often on this point is that we cannot stop ourselves from ascribing to God, without our perceiving it, our own ideas on the dignity and importance of individuals. In relation to us, these ideas are very proper, since we are all subject to the established order in society, but, when we apply them to the general order of the universe, we are like that queen who said, You can well believe that God thinks more than once about damning people like us. Elizabeth of France mounts the scaffold, Robespierre follows the next moment. In coming into the world, the angel and the monster were subjected to all the general laws which regulate it. No terms are strong enough to describe the crime of the villains who spilled the most pure and noble blood in the world, yet, in relation to the general order of things, there is no injustice; it is still a misfortune implicit in the human condition, nothing more. Every man, as a man, is subject to all the misfortunes of humanity: the law is universal and so is not unjust. To suggest that a man's worth or position should shield him from the action of an iniquitous or misguided court of law is the same as wanting them to protect him from apoplexy, for example, or even from death.

Notice however that in spite of these general and inevitable laws it is very far from the truth that this assumed equality, on which I have insisted up to now, actually exists. As I said, I have supposed it for the sake of argument; but nothing is more false, as you will see.

Start first of all by leaving the individual out of account: the general law, visible and visibly just, is that The greatest amount of happiness, even temporal, belongs, not to the virtuous man, but to virtue. If it were otherwise, there would be neither vice nor virtue, merit nor demerit, and in consequence no moral order. Supposing that each virtuous action was repaid by some temporal advantage, the act, no longer having any higher purpose, could not merit a reward of this kind. Supposing on the other hand that, by virtue of a divine law, a thief's hand was to drop off when he committed a theft, men would refrain from stealing as they refrain from putting their hands under a butcher's chopper; and moral order would disappear completely. To reconcile this order (the only one possible for rational beings, as is shown by experience) with the laws of justice, it is necessary for virtue to be rewarded and vice punished, even in this world, but not always or immediately. It is necessary that much the greater share of temporal happiness should be allotted to virtue and that a proportional share of unhappiness should fall to vice, but that the individual should never be sure of anything, as is in fact the case. Any other hypothesis will lead you directly to the destruction of the moral order or to the creation of another world.

To come now to detail, let us start with human justice. Wishing men to be governed by men at least in their external actions, God has given sovereigns the supreme prerogative of punishing crimes, in which above all they are his representatives....

This formidable prerogative of which I have just spoken results in the necessary existence of a man destined to inflict on criminals the punishments awarded by human justice; and this man is in fact found everywhere, without there being any means of explaining how; for reason cannot discern in human nature any motive which could lead men to this calling. I am sure, gentlemen, that you are too accustomed to reflection not to have pondered often on the executioner. Who is then this inexplicable being who has preferred to all the pleasant, lucrative, honest, and even honorable jobs that present themselves in hundreds to human power and dexterity that of torturing and putting to death his fellow creatures? Are this head and this heart made like ours? Do they not hold something peculiar and foreign to our nature? For my own part, I do not doubt this. He is made like us externally; he is born like us but he is an extraordinary being, and for him to exist in the human family a particular decree, a FIAT of the creative power is necessary. He is a species to himself. Look at the place he holds in public opinion and see if you can understand how he can ignore or affront this opinion! Scarcely have the authorities fixed his dwelling-place, scarcely has he taken possession of it, than the other houses seem to shrink back until they no longer overlook his. In the midst of this solitude and this kind of vacuum that forms around him, he lives alone with his woman and his offspring who make the human voice known to him, for without them he would know only groans. A dismal signal is given; a minor judicial official comes to his house to warn him that he is needed; he leaves; he arrives at some public place packed with a dense and throbbing crowd. A poisoner, a parricide, or a blasphemer is thrown to him; he seizes him, he stretches him on the ground, he ties him to a horizontal cross, he raises it up: then a dreadful silence falls, and nothing can be heard except the crack of bones breaking under the crossbar and the howls of the victim. He unfastens him; he carries him to a wheel: the shattered limbs interweave with the spokes; the head falls; the hair stands on end, and the mouth, open like a furnace, gives out spasmodically only a few blood-spattered words calling for death to come. He is finished: his heart flutters, but it is with joy; he congratulates himself, he says sincerely, No one can break men on the wheel better than I. He steps down; he stretches out his blood-stained hand, and justice throws into it from a distance a few pieces of gold which he carries through a double row of men drawing back with horror. He sits down to a meal and eats; then to bed, where he sleeps. And next day, on waking, he thinks of anything other than what he did the day before. Is this a man? Yes: God receives him in his temples and permits him to pray. He is not a criminal, yet it is impossible to say, for example, that he is virtuous, that he is an honest man, that he is estimable, and so on. No moral praise can be appropriate for him, since this assumes relationships with men, and he has none.

And yet all grandeur, all power, all subordination rests on the executioner: he is the horror and the bond of human association. Remove this incomprehensible agent from the world, and at that very moment order gives way to chaos, thrones topple, and society disappears. God, who is the author of sovereignty, is the author also of chastisement: he has built our world on these two poles; for Jehovah is the master of the two poles, and on these he makes the world turn.[1 Samuel 2:8.]

Thus there is in the temporal sphere a visible and divine law for the punishment of crime, and this law, as stable as the society it upholds, has been carried out invariably from the beginning of time. Evil exists on the earth and acts constantly, and by a necessary consequence it must be continually repressed by punishment; indeed, we see over the whole globe constant action by every government to prevent or punish criminal outrages. The sword of justice has no scabbard; it must always threaten or strike. What then do these complaints about the impunity of crime mean? For whom are the knout, the gallows, the wheels, and the stakes? Obviously for the criminal. The mistakes of courts are exceptions that do not shake the rule: I have, besides, several reflections to offer to you on this point. In the first place, these fatal errors are much less frequent than is imagined. If it is allowed to doubt, opinion is always contrary to authority, and the public ear listens avidly to the slightest suggestions of a judicial murder; a thousand individual passions can fortify this general inclination....

That an innocent dies is a misfortune like any other; that is to say, it is common to all mankind. That a guilty man escapes is another exception of the same kind. But it always remains true, generally speaking, that there is on the earth a universal and visible order for the temporal punishment of crimes; and I must again draw your attention to the fact that criminals do not by any means cheat justice so often as might be ingenuously supposed in view of the infinite precautions they take to avoid it. There is often in the circumstances that betray the most cunning scoundrels something so unexpected, so surprising, so unforeseeable, that men who are called by their position or reflections to follow this kind of affair tend to believe that human justice is not entirely without a certain supernatural assistance in seeking out the guilty.

Allow me to add one more consideration to bring to an end this chronicle of punishments. Just as it is very possible for us to be wrong when we accuse human justice of sparing the guilty, since those we regard as being such are not really guilty, so it is equally possible on the other side that a man punished for a crime he has not committed has actually merited it by another completely unknown crime. Fortunately and unfortunately, there are several examples of this kind of thing shown by the confessions of criminals, and there are many more, I believe, of which we are ignorant. This last supposition deserves especially close attention, for, although in such a case the judges are extremely blameworthy or unfortunate, Providence, for whom everything, even an obstacle, is a means, makes full use of dishonesty or mistakes to execute the temporal justice we demand; and it is certain that these two suppositions restrict considerably the number of exceptions. You can see, then, how far this assumed equality that I supposed at the beginning is already disrupted by the consideration of human justice alone.

From the corporal punishment inflicted by justice, let us move now to illnesses. Already you have anticipated me. If intemperance of every kind was removed from the world, most illnesses, perhaps even all of them, would be expelled too. Everyone can see this in general and in a confused manner, but it is as well to pursue the matter more closely. If there had been no moral evil on the earth, there would be no physical evil....

For my part, I must agree with the opinion of a recent apologist who held that every illness has its source in some vice proscribed by Scripture, that this holy rule of conduct is the real medicine for the body as much as for the soul, so that in a society of just men following it death would be no more than the inevitable end of a healthy and robust old age; a view that was, I believe, that of Origen. What misleads us on this question is that, when the effect is not immediate, we no longer perceive it, but it is no less real. Once established, illnesses spread, connect up, and amalgamate by a deadly affinity, so that we can suffer today the physical penalty of an excess committed more than a century ago. However, in spite of the confusion resulting from these terrible mistakes, the parallel between crimes and illnesses is plain to every attentive observer. As with sins, there are diseases that are actual and original, accidental and habitual, mortal and venial. There are illnesses of anger, of gluttony, of incontinence, and so on. Notice, moreover, that there are crimes which have distinctive characteristics and therefore names in every language, such as murder, sacrilege, and incest, while others can be designated only by general terms such as fraud, injustice, violence, and embezzlement. Likewise there are distinctive illnesses such as dropsy, consumption, and apoplexy, and others which can be designated only by the general names of malaise, discomfort, aches, and nameless fevers. Now, the more virtuous a man, the more he is protected against illnesses which have names....

Leaving aside from this discussion everything that could be regarded as hypothetical, I am still entitled to put this indisputable principle: Moral vices can increase the number and intensity of illnesses to a degree that it is impossible to fix; and conversely that this dreadful grip of physical evil can be loosened by virtue to a degree that it is equally impossible to fix. As there is not the slightest doubt of the truth of this proposition, there is no need to go further to justify the ways of Providence even in the temporal sphere, above all if this consideration is joined to that of human justice, since it is clear that from these two points of view the advantage of virtue is incalculable, without giving any reasons or even appealing to religious considerations....

SECOND DIALOGUE
THE COUNT: All pain being a punishment, it follows that no pain can be considered as inevitable and, no pain being inevitable, it follows that every pain can be prevented either by the suppression of the crime which made it necessary or by prayer, which has the power of preventing or mitigating punishment. Since the empire of physical evil can still be restricted indefinitely by this supernatural means, you can see-
THE KNIGHT: Allow me to interrupt you and to be a little impolite, if necessary, in order to force you to be clearer. You are touching here upon a subject which has more than once disturbed me profoundly; but for the moment I shall defer my questions on this point. I should just like to point out to you that, unless I am mistaken, you are confusing the evils immediately due to the faults of those who suffer them with those which an unfortunate heritage has transmitted to us. You said that we perhaps suffer today for excesses committed more than a century ago; now, it seems to me that we ought not to be held to account for these crimes, as for those of our first ancestors. I do not believe that faith extends as far as that; and, if I am not mistaken, original sin is quite enough, since this alone has subjected us to ail the miseries of this life. It seems to me, then, that the physical ills which come to us by heredity have nothing to do with the temporal government of Providence.

THE COUNT: I pray you to notice particularly that I did not by any means insist on this sad heredity and that I did not give it to you as a direct proof of the justice Providence exercises in this world. I talked of it in passing in an incidental observation, but I thank you with all my heart, my dear Knight, for bringing it back to our notice, for it is well worthy of our attention. If I have not made any distinction between illnesses, it is because they are all punishments. Original sin, which explains everything and without which nothing can be explained, unfortunately repeats itself at every moment of time, although in a secondary manner. Since you are a Christian, I do not believe that this idea, when it is explained to you exactly, will shock your mind at all. Doubtless, original sin is a mystery, yet if man examines it closely he will find that this mystery, like the others, has its understandable sides, even to our limited intelligence.

Let us leave on one side the theological question of imputation, which we have not touched, and confine ourselves to the common view, which agrees so well with our most natural ideas, that every being with the power of propagating itself can produce only a being similar to itself. The rule has no exception; it is inscribed all over the world. If then a being is degraded, its descendants will no longer be like the original state of this being, but rather like the state to which it has been reduced by whatever cause. This is very plain, and the rule holds in the physical as in the moral order. But it must be noticed that there is the same difference between an infirm and an ill man as between a vicious and a guilty man. Acute illness is not transmissible, but that which vitiates the humors becomes an original malady that can taint a whole race.

It is the same with moral maladies. Some belong to the ordinary state of human imperfection, but there are certain transgressions or certain consequences of transgression which can degrade man absolutely. These are original sins of a second order which nevertheless portray to us, however imperfectly, the first. This is the origin of the savages of whom so many extravagant things have been said and who have especially been used as an eternal text by J. J. Rousseau, one of the most dangerous sophists of his age and yet the most bereft of true knowledge, wisdom, and above all profundity, having an apparent depth that is entirely a matter of words. He has continually taken the savage to be primitive man, whereas the savage is not and cannot be anything other than the descendant of a man detached from the great tree of civilization by some transgression, but of a kind that can no longer be repeated, as far as I can judge, for I doubt if new savages can be created.

As a consequence of the same error, the languages of the savage have been taken for the original languages, whereas they are not and cannot be other than the debris of ancient languages, ruined, as it were, and degraded like the men who speak it. Indeed, every degradation, individual or national, is immediately marked by a rigorously proportional degradation in language. How could man lose or even blur an idea without losing the word or the correct usage of the word that expresses it? And, on the other hand, how could he extend or sharpen his thinking without this showing itself at once in his language?

There is therefore an original illness just as there is an original sin, that is to say, that by virtue of this primitive degradation, we are subject to all kinds of physical suffering in general, as by virtue of this same degradation we are subject to all kinds of vices in general. This original illness has no other name. It is only the capacity to suffer every disease, as original sin (an abstraction derived from imputation) is only the capacity to commit every crime, which ends the comparison.

But there are, besides, original maladies of the second order, as there are original transgressions of the second order; that is to say, certain transgressions committed by certain men have been able to degrade them afresh to a greater or lesser degree, and so to perpetuate to a greater or lesser degree in their descendants both vices and maladies. It may be that these great transgressions are no longer possible, but it is no less true that the general principle still operates and that Christianity showed that it possesses vital knowledge when it turned its whole attention and all the force of its legislative and originating power on the legitimate reproduction of man to prevent every harmful transmission from father to son. If I have talked of illnesses without distinguishing those we owe directly to our own sins from those we owe to our fathers' vices, the mistake was slight, since, as I just now said, they are all in truth only punishments of sin. It is only the element of heredity that shocks the reason at first; but until we can talk of it at greater length, let us be satisfied with the general rule that I pointed out at the beginning: Every being which reproduces itself can produce only something in its own image.

Here, Senator, I call on your intellectual conscience: if a man has indulged in certain crimes or in a certain series of crimes, so that they are capable of altering the moral principle within him, you accept that this degradation is transmissible, as you accept the transmission of scrofulous or syphilitic vice. Besides, I have no need of these hereditary ailments. If you like, look on everything I have said on this subject as a conversational parenthesis; everything else remains unshakable. Taking into account all the considerations that I have set before you, I hope you will not retain any doubts that the innocent, when he suffers, always suffers only in his quality as a man, and that the great majority of evils fall on crime; which would be enough for me as a start. Now-

THE KNIGHT: It would be quite useless, at least for me, for you to go any further, for I have heard you no more since you spoke of the savages. You mentioned something in passing about this kind of man that entirely occupies me. Can you prove to me that the languages of savages are the remains and not the rudiments of languages?

THE COUNT: The essence of all intelligence is to know and to love. The limits of knowledge are those of its nature. The immortal being learns nothing: he knows by nature everything he should know. On the other side, no intelligent being can love the bad naturally or by virtue of his nature; for this to be so, it would be necessary for God to have created man evil, which is impossible. If then man is subject to ignorance or evil, this can be only by virtue of some accidental degradation, which can be only the consequence of a crime. The need, the hunger for knowledge, which stirs man, is nothing but the natural tendency of his being that carries him toward his primitive state and shows him what he is.

If I can so express myself, he gravitates toward the areas of light. No beaver, swallow, or bee wishes to know more than its predecessors. All these creatures are happy in the place they occupy. All are degraded, but are ignorant of it; man alone senses it, and this feeling is the proof at once of his grandeur and his misery, of his sublime prerogatives, and his incredible degradation. In the state to which he is reduced, he has not even the sad satisfaction of being unaware of himself: he must continually contemplate himself, and this he cannot do without shame; even his grandeur humiliates him, since the understanding that raises him to the angels serves only to show him the abominable tendencies in himself that degrade him to the brutes. He seeks in the depths of his being some healthy part without being able to find it: evil has stained everything and man in his entirety is nothing but a malady.[Hippocrates, Letter to Demagetus.] An incredible combination of two different and incompatible powers, a monstrous centaur, he feels that he is the result of some unknown crime, some detestable mixture that has corrupted him even in his deepest nature.

Every intellect is by its very nature the result, single yet in three parts, of a perception that apprehends, a reason that affirms, and a will that acts. The first two powers are only weakened in man, but the third is broken, and like Tasso's serpent it drags itself along,[Tasso, Jerusalem Delivered, xv, 48.] completely ashamed of its sad powerlessness. It is in this third power that man feels himself fatally injured. He does not know what he wants; he wants what he does not want; he does not want what he wants; he would want to want. He sees in himself something which is not he and is stronger than he. The wise resist and call out, Who shall deliver me?[Romans 7:24.] The foolish surrender and call their cowardice happiness, but they cannot rid themselves of this other will incorruptible of its nature although it has lost its dominance; and remorse, piercing them to the heart, constantly cries out to them, By doing what you do not want, you consent to the law.[Ibid., 7:16.] Who could believe that such men could have been molded in this form by the Creator? This idea is so repulsive that philosophy itself, that is, pagan philosophy, hit on original sin....

After all, when the philosophers ... assure us that the vices of human nature belong more to the father than to the sons, it is clear that they are not talking of any generation in particular. If the proposition remains in the air, it has no meaning, so that the very nature of things relates it to an original and thus universal corruption. Plato tells us that in contemplating himself he does not know if he sees a monster more arrant, more evil than Typhon, or rather a moral, gentle, and beneficent being who partakes of the nature of divinity. He adds that man, so torn between these opposite natures, cannot act well and live happily without mastering that power of the soul in which evil resides, and without setting free that which is the abode and the agent of virtue. This is precisely the Christian doctrine, and original sin could not be more clearly admitted.

What do words matter? Man is evil, horribly evil. Has God created him like this? Emphatically no, and Plato himself hastens to reply that the good being neither wishes nor does evil to anyone. We are then degraded - yet how? This corruption Plato saw in himself was obviously not something peculiar to himself, and certainly he did not believe himself more evil than his fellow men. Thus he was saying essentially what David said, My mother has conceived me in iniquity, and if these words had been presented to him he would have been able to accept them without difficulty. Now, as every degradation can be only a penalty, and as every penalty presupposes a crime, reason alone is forced to accept original sin. For, since our fatal inclination to evil is a truth of feeling and experience attested by every age, and since this inclination is always more or less victorious over conscience and laws, never having failed to produce on earth transgressions of every kind, man has never been able to recognize and deplore this sorry condition without admitting by the same token the woeful dogma I am expounding to you; for he cannot be wicked without being evil, nor evil without being degraded, nor degraded without being punished, nor punished without being guilty.

In short, gentlemen, nothing is so well attested, nothing so universally accepted under one form or another, nothing finally so intrinsically plausible as the theory of original sin.

Let me add this - you will not I hope feel it difficult to accept that an originally degraded intelligence is and remains incapable, short of a substantial regeneration, of that ineffable contemplation that our old masters very aptly call beatific vision, since it produces and even is eternal happiness, just as you accept that a physical eye which is seriously injured can be incapable of bearing sunlight. Now, this incapacity to enjoy the sun is, if I am not mistaken, the only consequence of original sin that we are bound to regard as natural and independent of every present transgression. Reason can, it seems to me, reach this point, and I think that it is right to congratulate itself on this without ceasing to be docile.

Having thus studied man in himself, let us pass on to his history.

All mankind springs from Adam and Eve. This truth has been denied like every other - but what does it matter?

We know very little of the time before the Deluge, and, according to some convincing speculations, we should not know more. One consideration only is of interest to me, and we should never lose sight of it. This is that punishments are always proportionate to crimes and crimes always proportionate to the knowledge of the guilty, so that the Deluge presupposes unparalleled crimes and these crimes presuppose knowledge infinitely higher than that which we possess. This is certain, and needs thorough investigation. This knowledge, untrammeled by the evil that has made it so fatal, survived the destruction of humanity in the righteous family. On the nature and the development of humanity, we are bemused by a rank but attractive fallacy: this lies in judging the age in which men saw effects in causes by that in which they rise painfully from effects to causes, in which they even concern themselves only with effects, in which they say that it is useless to concern oneself with causes, in which they do not even know what a cause is. It is constantly repeated, Just imagine the time it took to get to know such and such a thing! What incredible blindness! It needed only a moment. If man could know the cause of a single physical phenomenon, he would probably understand all the others. We do not want to see that the most difficult truths to discover are very easy to understand. The solution of the problem of the annulus once brought joy to the best geometer of antiquity, but this very solution is now to be found in all the elementary mathematical textbooks and is well within the capacities of a fifteen-year-old.

Plato, talking somewhere of what it is most important for man to know, adds immediately, with that incisive simplicity natural to him, that these things are easily and perfectly learned if someone teaches them to us.* This is exactly right. It is, moreover, obviously apparent that the first men who repeopled the world after the great catastrophe needed miraculous help to conquer the diverse difficulties facing them. And notice, gentlemen, the splendid character of this argument! Do you want to prove it? Witnesses present themselves on every side: they never contradict one another, whereas witnesses of error are contradictory even when they lie. Listen to what wise antiquity has to say about the first men. It will tell you that they were wonderful men, whom beings of a superior order favored with the most important messages. There is unanimity on this point: initiates, philosophers, poets, history, myth, Asia and Europe speak with one voice. Such complete agreement of reason, revelation, and all human traditions constitutes a proof that cannot reasonably be contradicted. Thus, not only did men start with knowledge, but with a knowledge different from and superior to our own, since it penetrated more deeply, which made it the more dangerous. This is why science at the beginning was mysterious and confined within the temples, where the flame finally burned out when once it had no purpose other than to burn....

[* What follows is no less valuable; but, he says, no one will teach us unless God shows him the way. - Epinomis 989d.]
It is impossible to think of modern science without seeing it perpetually surrounded by all the apparatus of the mind and every kind of methodological aid.... So far as we can penetrate the mists of time to perceive the science of the earliest days, it always emerges free and independent, flying rather than walking, and presenting in its entire person something aerial and supernatural.... Yet, although it owed nothing to any man and knew no human support, it is no less the case that it possessed the rarest understanding. If you think of it, this is a convincing proof that ancient science had been freed from the travail imposed on our own and that nothing could be more mistaken than the calculations we make on the basis of modern experience....
If all men spring from the three couples who repeopled the world, and if humanity began with a science, the savage can be, as I have said, nothing more than a branch broken off from the social tree. Although it is incontestable, I could abandon the argument from science and rely on religion alone, which is of itself enough to exclude a state of savagery, however imperfectly. Wherever an altar is found, there civilization exists. The poor man in his hut with straw alone to cover him is doubtless less learned than we are, yet more truly social if he attends his catechism class and profits from it. The most shameful errors, the most despicable cruelties have stained the history of Memphis, Athens, and Rome, but all the virtues together honor the huts of Paraguay.... We must then recognize that the state of civilization and science is in a certain sense the natural and primitive state of man.... Has not Voltaire himself (and nothing more need be said) admitted that the motto of every nation has always been, The golden age was the first to show itself on earth? So every nation has protested in unison against the hypothesis of an original state of barbarism, and surely this protest counts for something.

What does it matter at what point in time such and such a branch was broken from the tree? It has been, and that is enough for me: there is no doubt about the degradation and, I dare add, no doubt about the cause of the degradation, which could only have been a crime. Once the leader of a people had changed its moral character by some of those grave transgressions which are apparently now no longer possible, since happily we no longer know enough to become guilty to this degree, this leader passed on the curse to his posterity; and since every constant force is by nature accelerative because it is accumulative, this degradation bears constantly on his descendants until finally it makes them into what we call savages. It is this final degree of brutalization that Rousseau and his like call the state of nature. Two quite different causes have thrown an obfuscating cloud around the dreadful situation of the savages, one is ancient; the other belongs to our own age. In the first place, in its immense charity the Catholic Church has often, in talking of these men, imposed its desires upon reality. There was only too much truth in the first reaction of the Europeans, who refused in Columbus's time to recognize these degraded men peopling the New World as equals. The priests employed all their influence to contradict this opinion which favored too much the barbarous despotism of the new rulers. They cried out to the Spaniards, "No violence; the Scripture condemns it. If you cannot overthrow the idols in the hearts of these unfortunates, what good is it to destroy their wretched altars? To make them know and love God, you must take up other tactics and weapons." From deserts watered with their sweat and blood, they traveled to Madrid and Rome to ask for edicts and bulls against the pitiless greed which wanted to enslave the Indians. The merciful priest exalted them in order to make them precious; he played down the evil, he exaggerated the good, he stated as truth what he wished to be true; indeed, a reliable witness, Robertson, warns us in his History of America, that on this subject one must be suspicious of all the writers who belonged to the clergy, seeing that they are in general too favorable to the natives.

Another source of false judgments about them lies in the philosophy of our own age, which has made use of the savages to support its empty and culpable harangues against the social order; but even the slightest consideration is enough to put us on our guard against the errors of both charity and bad faith. It needs only a glance at the savage to see the curse written not only on his soul but on the external form of his body. He is a deformed child, sturdy and fierce, on whom the light of intelligence throws no more than a pale and fitful beam. A formidable hand weighing on these doomed races wipes out in them the two distinctive characteristics of our grandeur: foresight and perfectibility. The savage cuts the tree down to gather the fruit; he unyokes the ox that the missionary has just entrusted to him, and cooks it with wood from the plow. For over three centuries, he has known us without wanting anything from us except powder to kill his fellows and spirits to kill himself, yet he has never thought of making these things for himself: he relies for them on our greed, which will never fail him.

Just as the meanest and most revolting substances are nevertheless still capable of some degeneration, so the vices natural to humanity are still more corrupt in the savages. He is a thief, he is cruel, he is dissolute, but he is these things in a different way than we are. To be criminals, we surmount our nature: the savage follows it, he has an appetite for crime, and has no remorse at all. While the son kills his father to preserve him from the bothers of old age, his wife destroys in her womb the fruit of their brutal lust to escape the fatigues of suckling it. He tears out the bloody hair of his living enemy; he slits him open, roasts him and eats him while singing; if he comes across strong liquor, he drinks it to drunkenness, to fever, to death, equally deprived of the reason which rules men through fear and the instinct which saves animals through aversion. He is visibly doomed; he is flawed in the very depths of his moral being; he makes any observer tremble: but do we tremble at ourselves, in a way which would be very salutary? Do we think that with our intelligence, our morality, our sciences and our arts we are to primitive man what the savage is to us?

I cannot leave this subject without suggesting to you yet another important point. The barbarian, who is a kind of midway point between the civilized man and the savage, could and still can be civilized by any religion whatever, but the savage, properly speaking, has never been civilized except by Christianity. This is a miracle of the highest order, a kind of redemption, the exclusive prerogative of the true Church.... The savage must not be confused with the barbarian. In the one the germ of life is dying or dead; in the other it has been sown, and needs only time and circumstances to develop itself. At this point his language, which was degraded with the man, is reborn with him and perfects and enriches itself. If one wishes to call this a new language, I should agree: the phrase is right in one sense, but a sense very different from that which is taken by the modern sophists when they talk of new or invented languages.

No language could be invented, either by a single man, who would not be able to compel obedience, or by several men, who would not be able to understand one another. Nothing can be better said about words than what has been said by that which is called THE WORD. They are those whose goings forth have been from of old, from ever-lasting... who shall declare their generation?[Micah 5:2; Isaiah 53:8.] Already, in spite of the unhappy prejudices of the age, a natural philosopher - yes, truly, a natural philosopher - has taken upon himself to agree, with a timid intrepidity, that man first spoke because SOMEONE spoke to him. God bless the word SOMEONE, so useful on difficult occasions. While rendering this tentative effort all the justice it deserves, it is nevertheless necessary to admit that every philosopher of the last century, not even excepting the best, was chickenhearted, afraid of thought....

But before finishing on this subject, I should like to draw your attention to a thought that has always struck me. How is it that in the primitive languages of all the ancient peoples there are words which imply ideas foreign to these peoples? ... These words ... are obviously the remnants of more ancient languages that have been destroyed or forgotten....

Reading the modern metaphysicians, you will come across huge generalizations on the importance of symbols and on the advantages of what they call a philosophical language, which should be created a priori or perfected by philosophers. I do not want to throw myself into the question of the origins of language (the same question, incidentally, as that of innate ideas). What I can assure you of, since nothing is clearer, is the astonishing talent of infant nations in forming words and the total inability of philosophers to do likewise. I recall that Plato, in the most refined of ages, drew attention to this talent of nascent peoples. What is astonishing is that it has been said that they proceeded by way of deliberation, by virtue of an established system of agreement, although such a thing is strictly impossible from every point of view. Each language has its genius, and this genius is one and indivisible, so that it excludes any idea of composition, of arbitrary formation and of previous agreement....

Each language, taken separately, mirrors the spiritual realities that were present at its birth, and the more ancient the language, the more perceptible are these realities. You will not find any exception to the observation on which I have insisted so much, which is that the further back you go toward the ages of ignorance and barbarism which saw the birth of languages, the more logic and profundity you will find in the formation of words, and that this talent disappears conversely as you move toward the ages of civilization and science....

Languages have started, but not the word, not even with man. The one has necessarily preceded the other since the word is possible only through the WORD OF GOD. Every particular language comes into being like an animal, by birth and development, without which man would have passed from the state of aphonia to the use of speech. He has always talked, and it is sublime reason that prompted the Hebrews to call him a TALKING SOUL. When a new language emerges, it is born in the heart of a society which already has full possession of a language, and no word is invented arbitrarily in this formation; the new language uses the materials it finds around it or that it calls from further off; it lives off them, it chews them, it digests them; it never adopts them without modifying them to some degree....

In all the writings of the time on this interesting matter there has been continually expressed a wish for a philosophical language, but without any knowledge or even suspicion that the most philosophical language is that in which there is the least philosophy. Philosophy lacks two small things to be a creator of words - the intelligence to invent them and the power to make them used. If it sees a new object, it leafs through its dictionaries to find an ancient or a foreign word; and almost always it turns out badly.... If the right to create new expressions belonged to anyone, it would be to the great writers and not to the philosophers, who are in this respect peculiarly inept: yet the writers use this right only very sparingly, never in moments of inspiration and only for making nouns and adjectives; as for words themselves, they hardly dream of offering new ones. Indeed, this idea of new languages should be erased, except only in the sense I have just explained; or, to put this another way, the spoken word is eternal and every language is as old as the people who speak it.... It is certain that every nation has had the power of speech and that it has spoken precisely as much and as well as it thought; for it is equally foolish to believe either that a symbol can exist for an idea which does not exist or that an idea can exist without a symbol to express it....

THE KNIGHT: In talking of another subject, you claimed that the question of the origin of language was the same as that of the origin of ideas. I would be interested to hear your reasons for this....

THE COUNT: Before anything else, I should like to suggest to you that authority should be the fundamental ground for decision. Human reason is manifestly incapable of guiding men, for few can reason well, and no one can reason well on every subject, so that it is in general wise to start from authority, whatever people say. Just balance the voices on both sides; against the ideas that knowledge originates in sensory perceptions there are Pythagoras, Plato, Cicero, Origen, Saint Augustine, Descartes, Cudworth, Lami, Polignac, Pascal, Nicole, Bossuet, Fenelon, Leibnitz, and the renowned Malebranche, who occasionally went wrong in the pursuit of truth but never abandoned it. I shall not give the names of the spokesmen for the other side, for they offend my tongue. When I am ignorant about a problem, I decide without any reason other than my taste for good company and my aversion for bad.

I would put yet another preliminary argument to you which has much force; this is the hateful results of that absurd system which would wish, so to speak, to materialize the origins of our ideas. To my mind, nothing is more degrading or destructive to the human spirit. Because of it, reason has lost its wings and drags itself along the ground like some filthy reptile; it has dried up the divine source of poetry and eloquence; because of it, all the moral sciences have fallen into a decline.

THE KNIGHT: It is not perhaps for me to dispute the consequences of the system, but as far as its defenders are concerned, it seems to me, my dear friend, that it is possible to cite various respectable names besides those which offend your tongue....

THE COUNT: Now, whether universal ideas are innate in us, or whether we derive them from God, or whatever you like, is not relevant, and I do not want at this point to examine it: the negative side of the question is undoubtedly the most important; let us establish first of all that the greatest, noblest, and most virtuous geniuses in the world are agreed in rejecting the origin of ideas in sensory perceptions. It is the holiest, most unanimous, most inspiring protest of the human spirit against the gravest and vilest of errors....

After this short preliminary, Knight, I should like first of all, as you have done me the honor of choosing me to introduce you to this kind of philosophy, to remark that any discussion of the origin of ideas is extremely foolish until the question of the nature of the soul has been decided. Would you allow anyone to claim in the courts an inheritance as a relative, if it were doubtful that he was such? Well, gentlemen, there are equivalents in philosophic discussions to those questions that lawyers call pre-judicial which must be cleared up completely before other questions can be considered. If the estimable Thomas was right in the beautiful phrase, Man lives by his soul, and the soul is thought, everything has been said; for if thought is the essential nature of man, to ask what is the origin of ideas is to ask what is the origin of the origin.

Here is what Condillac has to say, I shall be concerned with the human spirit, not with ascertaining its nature, which would be foolhardy, but only with examining its operations. Let us not be fooled by this modest hypocrite: every time you see a philosopher of the last century bowing respectfully before some problem and telling us that the question passes beyond the boundaries of the human mind, that he will not undertake to resolve it, and so on, you can be sure that on the contrary he fears the problem is only too clear and that he is hurrying to leave it on one side in order to retain the right of causing trouble. I do not know one of these gentlemen to whom the sacred title of honest man would be fitting. You can see an example in the point under discussion. Why lie? Why say that one does not want to pronounce on the essential nature of the soul while one is expressly putting forward a view on this point by holding that ideas come to us through the senses, which obviously excludes thought from the category of essences?

I do not see, moreover, that there is any more difficult problem relating to the nature of thought than that of its origin, which is tackled so courageously. Can thought be conceived as an accident of a substance that does not think? Or rather, Can this accident-thought be conceived as knowing about itself, as thinking and meditating on ihe nature of that which gives rise to it and which does not itself think? Here is the problem posed in two different forms, and for my part I confess that I do not see it as hopeless; yet one is perfectly free to pass it over on condition of agreeing and even warning people at the head of every work on the origin of ideas that it should be treated as simple jeu d'esprit, as a completely airy hypothesis, since the question is not seriously broached so long as the preceding question is not resolved.

I would then point out, Knight, that there is something equivocal in the very title of all the books written in the modern idiom on the origin of ideas, since the word origin can apply equally to the cause simply occasioning and exciting ideas and to the cause producing ideas. In the first case, there is no argument since the ideas are assumed to preexist; in the second, it is precisely the same as holding that the substance of an electrical discharge is produced by that which sparks it off.

We should now examine why these writers always talk of the origin of ideas, and never of the origin of thoughts. There must have been a hidden reason for the preference continually given to one word rather than the other, but this point should not take long to clear up. I would simply say to you, using the words of Plato, whom I am always happy to quote, Do you and I understand the same thing by this word, "thought"? For my part, thought is the DIALOGUE THAT THE MIND HOLDS WITH ITSELF.[Theaetetus, 189-190.]

And this sublime definition alone should show you the truth of what I was just saying, that the question of the origin of ideas is the same as that of the origin of language, for thought and language are simply two splendid synonyms, the mind not being able to think without knowing what it thinks, nor being able to know what it thinks without putting it into words, since it must say, I know. So if some follower of modern doctrines comes and says to you that you speak because someone has spoken to you, ask him (but will he understand you? ) if, in his view, understanding is the same as hearing, and if he believes that to understand language it is enough to hear the noise that strikes the ear.

For the rest, let us leave this question on one side. If we want to study the main question, I would ask you to look at a very essential preliminary, which is that, even after so much argument, the definition of innate ideas is still not properly understood. Is it conceivable that Locke never took the trouble to tell us what he meant by this phrase? Yet this is the exact truth. The French translator of Bacon says, in the course of pouring scorn on innate ideas, that he confesses that he does not remember having known about the square on the hypotenuse when he was in his mother's womb. Here then is an intelligent man (for Locke was this) who attributes to spiritualistic philosophers the belief that a foetus in its mother's womb knows mathematics, that we can know without learning, or, in other words, learn without learning, and that this is what philosophers call innate ideas.

A very different writer with quite a different authority, who honors France today by his superior talents or by the distinguished use he can make of them, thought it a decisive argument against innate ideas to ask, "How, if God has engraved a certain idea on our minds, could man succeed in obliterating it? How, for example, can the idolatrous child, born just like the Christian with the clear notion of a single God, yet be reduced to the point of believing in a multitude of gods?"

I would have much to say on this clear notion and on the appalling power that, only too really, man possesses to obliterate more or less his innate ideas and to pass on his degradation. I shall restrict myself here to noticing an obvious confusion of an idea or simple notion with a statement of belief, two things which are nevertheless quite different. It is the first which is innate and not the second, for no one, I believe, has thought of saying that there have been innate powers of reasoning. The deist says, There is only one God, and he is right; the idolater says, There are several Gods, and he is wrong, but he is wrong in the same way as a man who makes a mistake in a process of calculation. Does it by any chance follow that the latter has no idea of number? On the contrary, it proves that he possesses it, for without such an idea, he could not even be mistaken. In fact to be mistaken one must state a view, which one cannot do without any use of the verb to be, which is the soul of all speech, and every statement of view assumes a preexisting idea. Thus, without the previous idea of a God, there would be neither theists nor polytheists, inasmuch as one can say neither yes nor no to what one does not know about, and as it is impossible to be mistaken about God without having an idea of God. It is therefore the notion or the pure idea that is innate and necessarily does not derive from the senses....

THIRD DIALOGUE
THE KNIGHT: Allow me to point out a contradiction to you that has always struck me ever since I entered into the world's bustle, which is also a good teacher, as you know. On the one side, everyone extols the happiness, even in this world, of virtue.... But, on the other side, a no less universal voice, from one end of the earth to the other, tells us of innocence on its knees baring its bosom to crime. It is said that virtue exists in this world only to suffer, to be martyred by barefaced vice which always goes unpunished. The successes of audacity, fraud, and bad faith are on every tongue, as is the continual disappointment of ingenuous probity....
THE COUNT: Yes, you are no doubt right, humanity dwells on both the happiness and the calamities of virtue. But, in the first place, men could be told, Since profit and loss seem so evenly balanced, you should, in cases of doubt, decide for that virtue which is so lovable in itself, especially as this saves us from making such calculations. In fact, you will find this contradiction of which you have just spoken everywhere, since the whole world is subject to two forces.... In truth, there is no real contradiction, since it is not the same subject who holds these opposing views. Like us, you have read:

My God, what a cruel war is this,
I find two men in myself....
Well, here is the solution to your problem and to so many others which are only the same basic problem in different forms. It is a man who quite rightly praises the advantages of virtue, even in this world, and it is another man within the same man who will argue a moment later that virtue exists on earth only to be persecuted, disgraced, butchered by crime. What then has the world shown you? Two men who are in disagreement. There is nothing really astonishing in that, but it is far from the truth that these two men are equal in worth. It is right reason, it is conscience which tells us, with the weight of facts behind it, that in every calling, in every undertaking, in every piece of business, the advantage, other things being equal, always lies on the side of virtue; that health, the first of temporal goods, without which all others are useless, is in part a result of it; that finally it bestows on us an inner contentment a thousand times more precious than all the wealth in the world.
On the other hand, it is rebellious or resentful pride, it is envy, avarice, and impiety which complain of the temporal disadvantages of virtue. It is then no longer man who speaks, or rather it is another man....

THE SENATOR: It seems to me that the existence and progress of governments cannot be explained by human means, any more than the movement of bodies by mechanical means. Mens agitat molem. There is in each state a directing spirit... that animates it as the soul animates the body and that produces death when it fades out.

THE COUNT: You are rephrasing, in what seems to me a happy manner, a very simple phenomenon, the necessary intervention of a supernatural power. This is recognized in the physical world without anyone contesting the effects of secondary causes. Why not recognize it in the same way in the political world, where it is no less essential? Without accepting its direct intervention, one cannot, as you very rightly say, explain either the creation or duration of governments. It manifests itself in the national unity that constitutes them, in a multiplicity of wills working unconsciously to the same end, showing that they are simply instruments, and above all in the wonderful mechanism that makes use of all the circumstances we call accidental, of our very follies and crimes, to maintain and often to establish order....

FOURTH DIALOGUE
THE COUNT: Here is how I was led to talk to you about prayer. Every pain being a punishment, it follows that no pain can be regarded as necessary, since it could have been prevented. On this point, as on so many others, the temporal order is the image of a higher order. Punishments being made necessary only by crimes, and every crime being the act of a free will, every punishment could have been prevented, since the crime need not have been committed. I would add that even after it has been committed, the punishment can still be prevented in two ways; for in the first place the merits of the guilty person or even those of his ancestors can balance his faults, and in the second place his earnest entreaties or those of his friends can disarm the sovereign....
THE KNIGHT: I never mocked my cure when he threatened his parishioners with hailstones or blight because they had not paid their tithes, yet I see an order in the physical world so invariable that I do not really understand how the prayers of these poor little men could have any effect on these phenomena. When a meteorologist is certain, because of a series of exact observations, that so many inches of rain must fall in a certain country each year, he would begin to laugh if he attended public prayers for rain. I am not approving of him; but why hide from you the fact that the jeers of the natural philosopher give me an uneasy feeling which I distrust all the less as I should like to dismiss it?...

THE SENATOR: Believe me, my dear Knight, you have just shown us the most perfidious temptation the human mind can face, that of believing in invariable laws of nature. This theory has an attractive appearance, yet it leads directly to the decline of prayer, that is the death of spiritual life, for prayer is the breath of the soul, as M. de Saint-Martin said, I believe. Whoever has ceased to pray no longer lives. No religion without prayer, said Voltaire . . .; nothing is more evident, and it necessarily follows, No prayer, no religion. This is very nearly the state to which we are reduced. Since men have never prayed except by virtue of a revealed religion (or one recognized as such), they have ceased to pray to the degree that they have approached deism, which is and can be nothing; and now you can see them with their eyes glued to the physical world, occupied solely with physical laws and studies and without any longer the slightest feeling for their natural dignity. Such is the misfortune of these men that they can no longer even desire their own regeneration, not only because of the recognized reason that what is not known cannot be desired, but because they find in their moral brutalization some curious but frightful charm, which is an appalling chastisement. In vain are they told what they are and what they will become. Plunged in the divine atmosphere, they refuse to breathe, whereas if they only opened their mouths, they would draw down the spirit to themselves.[Psalm 119:131.] Such is the man who no longer prays; no other proof of the indispensable necessity of public worship is required than that, if it did not check a little the general degradation, we would end up, I honestly believe, no better than animals. Consequently the antipathy of the men of whom I am speaking toward this worship and its ministers is boundless.

Unhappy confidences have taught me that there are those for whom the atmosphere of a church is a kind of poison gas which literally stifles them and forces them to leave; whereas healthy souls feel themselves there refreshed by some spiritual dew which is beyond description, but needs none since no one can fail to recognize it. Vincent de Lerins set out a well-known religious rule, saying that it was necessary to believe what has been believed ALWAYS, EVERYWHERE AND BY ALL. Nothing is so true and so universally true. Man, in spite of his fatal degradation, bears always the evident marks of his divine origin, in that every universal belief is always more or less true. Man may well have covered over and, so to speak, encrusted the truth with the errors he has loaded onto it, but these errors are local, and universal truth will always show itself. Now, men have always and everywhere prayed. Doubtless it is possible that they have prayed badly, asking for what they had no need and not asking for what they needed, but this is man's nature; yet they have always prayed, and this is the work of God.

The splendid theory of invariable laws would lead us straight to fatalism and make an automaton of man. As our friend did yesterday, I swear that I do not mean to insult reason. I respect it infinitely in spite of all the harm it has done to us, but it is certain that, every time it is opposed to common sense, we should reject it as pernicious. It is reason that has said, Nothing can happen except what happens, and nothing happens except what must happen. But good sense has said, If you pray, something which was to have happened will not happen; in which common sense was very reasonable, whereas reason lacked common sense. For the rest, it matters little that certain subtle arguments can be raised against proven truths and cannot be answered immediately, for there is no source of gross error more fruitful or more dangerous than rejecting such and such a dogma simply because it raises an objection we cannot resolve.

COUNT: You are perfectly right, my dear Senator: no objection can be admitted against the truth, otherwise it would no longer be the truth. Once its character is recognized, the unanswerability of an objection shows nothing more than a defect in the knowledge of those who cannot answer....

It is enough for me to draw from the mass of instances a general theory, a kind of formula which will serve to resolve all particular cases. I would say that "every time a proposition is proved by the kind of proof relevant to it, no objection whatever, even an unanswerable one, should be countenanced." The very inability to reply shows that the two propositions, taken to be true, are not really contradictory; which can always happen when the contradiction is not in the terms.

KNIGHT: Would you explain that more fully?

THE COUNT: No authority on earth, for example, has the right to claim that three and one are the same; for I know the meaning of one and three, and, since the sense of the terms does not change in the two propositions, to ask me to believe that one and three are and are not the same is the same as God telling me to believe that God does not exist. But if someone said to me that three persons partake of one nature, I am ready to believe it, provided that revelation provides me with a sufficient proof, especially, though not necessarily, if revelation is backed by solid psychological theories and even by the more or less obscure traditions of every nation; it does not matter to me that three is not one, for this is not here the question, which is to know if three persons can have one nature, quite another problem.

SENATOR: Indeed, in this case where is the contradiction, when it cannot be supported either by the facts, since we do not know them, or by the terms, since they have changed? Allow, then, the stoics to tell us that the proposition It will rain tomorrow is as certain and as immutable in the ordained order of things as the proposition It rained yesterday; allow them to perplex us, if they can, with the most dazzling sophisms. We shall let them prattle on, for no objection, even an unanswerable one (which I am very far from admitting in this case), can stand against the proof that resides in the innate belief of all men. If you accept what I say, Knight, you will continue when you return to your homeland to say your Rogation-day prayer. In the meantime, it will be as well to pray to God with all your might to bless you by returning you there, in the same way letting them prattle on who would object that it is determined beforehand whether or not you will see your dear country again.

THE COUNT: Although I am, as you have seen, completely convinced that the general sentiments of all men constitute, so to speak, intuitive truths before which all rationalist sophistries fade away, I nevertheless think like you, Senator, that in the present question we are by no means reduced to these intuitions. For, first, if you look at it more closely you will recognize the fallacy without being able to explain it fully. No doubt, the proposition It rained yesterday is no more certain than the other, It will rain tomorrow, but only if in fact it must rain, but this is precisely the point at issue, and one is back where one started.

In the second place, and this is the main point, I do not see these inevitable laws and this inflexible chain of events about which so much is spoken. On the contrary, I see in nature only complex forces, as must necessarily be the case if the functioning of free agents, interacting frequently in this world with the natural laws of matter, is to be accommodated. Just look at the variety of ways and the degree to which we influence the reproduction of animals and plants. Grafting, for example, is or is not a law of nature according to whether man exists or does not exist. You speak, Knight, of a certain precise quantity of rain that falls on each country during the year. As I have never concerned myself with meteorology, I do not know what has been said on this point, although, to tell you the truth, it seems to be impossible that this can be proved, at least not with even an approximate certainty. However that may be, here it can be a question only of an average year; then on what period of time are we to base this average? It could be ten years, it could be a hundred. But I want to pick more quarrels with these theorists. I shall allow that precisely the same amount of water must fall in every country each year; let this be an invariable law; but the distribution of this rain will be, so to speak, the flexible part of the law. So you see that even with your invariable laws we can still very well have floods and droughts, general rains for the world at large, and exceptional rains for those who have asked for it.[Psalm 68:9.]

... I can well accept that philosophers of our time all talk constantly about inevitable laws: their aim is simply to prevent man from praying, and this is the infallible means of success. This is the reason for the anger of these unbelievers when preachers or moralists are led to tell us that the physical scourges of this world, such as volcanoes, earthquakes, and so on, were divine punishments. They affirm that it was absolutely inevitable that Lisbon should have been destroyed on November 1, 1755, as it was inevitable that the sun should have arisen that same day - a truly splendid theory, very suited to bring man to perfection. I recall how indignant I was one day while reading a lecture that Herder addressed somewhere to Voltaire on the subject of his poem about the Lisbon disaster. Seriously he said, "You dare to complain to Providence about the destruction of this town: you are thoughtless, for this is an explicit blasphemy against the eternal wisdom. Do you not realize that man, like his beams and his tiles, is a debtor for his existence, and that all things in existence must pay their debts? Elements combine, elements come apart; this is a necessary law of nature: what then is surprising in this or that event that should give rise to complaints?"

Is not this, gentlemen, a splendid consolation, well worthy of the honest comedian who preached the Scripture in the pulpit and pantheism in his writings? But this is the limit of the wisdom of philosophy. From Epictetus to the bishop of Weimar and to the end of time, this will be its unchanging role and its necessary law. It is ignorant of the balm of consolation. It withers and hardens the heart, and thinks it has made a man a sage by making him callous. In any case, Voltaire had already replied to his critic in this same poem on the Lisbon earthquake:

"No, offer no more to my distressed heart,
These immutable laws of necessity,
This chain of bodies, minds and worlds;
Oh, learned dreams and deep illusions!
God holds the chain and is not bound:
All is determined by his beneficent choice;
He is free, he is just, he is merciful."
Up to this point, this could not be better put; but as if repenting of having talked sense, he adds immediately:
"Why then do we suffer under a just master?
This is the fatal knot that must be untied."
Here the rash questions begin. Why then do we suffer under a lust master? The catechism and common sense agree in replying, BECAUSE WE DESERVE IT. This is the fatal knot wisely untied, and any deviation from this solution is meaningless. In vain does Voltaire exclaim:
"Seeing this pile of victims, do you say;
God is avenged; their death is the price of their crimes?
What crime, what fault lies on these children
Broken and bloody on their mothers' breasts?"
This is bad reasoning, lacking care and close analysis. Doubtless there were children at Lisbon as there were at Herculaneum in A.D. 79, as there were at Lyons some time previously, or as there were, if you like, at the time of the flood. When God punishes any society for its crimes, he enacts justice as we do it ourselves in this sort of case, without anyone thinking of complaining about it. A town revolts; it massacres the king's representatives; it closes its gates to him; it resists him; it is taken. The king dismantles it and strips it of all its privileges; no one will condemn this judgment on the grounds that there were innocent people in the town. We should never deal with two questions at once. The town has been punished because of its crime, and without this crime it would not have suffered. This is a true proposition, independent of any other. Will you then ask me why innocent people have been included in the same punishment? This is another proposition to which I am not obliged to reply. I could reply that I have no idea of the reason without weakening in any way the first proposition. I can also reply that the king can do no other, and I would have good grounds for claiming this.
THE KNIGHT: Allow me to ask you this - what would prevent the good king from taking into his protection the inhabitants of the town who remained faithful and taking them to some more fortunate district so that they could there enjoy, not the same privileges, but greater privileges, more fitting to their loyalty?

THE COUNT: That is precisely what God does when innocent people perish in a general catastrophe. But let us go back. I flatter myself that I feel no less sincere a pity than Voltaire for these unfortunate children broken and bloody on their mothers' breasts; but it is madness to cite them to contradict the preacher who claims, God is avenged; these evils are the price of our crimes, for nothing is in general more true. The question is only to explain why the innocent are included in the penalty directed against the guilty: but, as I have just said to you, this is only an objection, and if we allow troth to submit to difficulties, there is no more philosophy. Moreover, I wonder if Voltaire, who wrote in such haste, took care to treat this as a general question rather than as a particular question relating to the event concerning him on this occasion. I wonder too if he did not ask, without realizing it, why infants who could not yet be either condemned or praised are subject throughout the whole world to the same evils which can afflict grown men. For if it is determined that a certain number of infants must perish, I do not see that it matters to them whether they die in one way rather than in another. A man dies whether he is stabbed to the heart or has a brain tumor, but it is said in the first case that he ended his days by a violent death. But, to God, there is no such thing as a violent death. A steel blade thrust in the heart is an infirmity like a simple corn that we call a polypus.

We must then go to a further question and ask why it became necessary for a host of infants to be stillborn, for a good half of those born to die before the age of ten and for a great many others still to die before reaching the age of reason....

Why are these children born and why do they die? What will one day happen to them? These are perhaps unapproachable mysteries, but it is senseless to use the incomprehensible as an argument against the easily comprehensible.

Would you like to hear another sophistry on the same subject? It is Voltaire again who gives it to us and still in the same work:

"Had Lisbon, which is no more, more vices
Than London or than Paris steeped in its delights?
Lisbon is destroyed, and they dance in Parisl"
Good God, does this man want the Almighty to convert every great city into an execution chamber? Or does he want God never to punish because he does not punish always and everywhere and at the same time?
Had then Voltaire been given the divine balance for weighing the crimes of kings and individuals and for fixing punishments at the right time? And what would this rash man have said fi, when he was writing these senseless lines, in the middle of the town steeped in its delights, he could have seen suddenly, in the not so distant future, the Committee of Public Safety, the Revolutionary Tribunal and the long pages of the Moniteur quite red with human blood?

Doubtless pity is one of the noblest sentiments to honor man, and nothing should be done to kill it, even to weaken it in men's hearts; yet in treating philosophic subjects, every kind of poetry should be carefully avoided and things should be seen as they are. For example Voltaire, in the poem I quoted, shows us a hundred thousand unfortunates devoured by the earth; but, first of all, why a hundred thousand? Especially as he could have told the truth without spoiling the meter, since in fact only about twenty thousand people died in this horrible catastrophe, many less in consequence than in many battles I could name to you.

It should then be noticed that in these great catastrophes many things are only superficial. For example, the crushing of a child under a rock is a frightful sight to us, but to the child it is much better than dying of smallpox or a painful dental operation. To the reason, it is the same thing no doubt whether three or four thousand men scattered over a wide area perish, or they die all at once in a single catastrophe, in an earthquake or a flood; but to the imagination the difference is enormous. So that it can very well happen that one of those terrible events that we place among the world's greatest scourges is in reality of no account, not just to humanity in general but to a single country.

You can see here a fresh example of those laws, at once flexible and invariable, that rule the universe. If you will let us accept as a proven point that in a given time in a certain country a certain number of men must die, this is what is invariable; but the distribution of life among individuals, as well as the place and time of deaths, constitute what I have called the flexible part of the law, so that a whole town can be destroyed without the general mortality being increased. A scourge can even be just in two ways, by reason of the guilty who have been punished and the innocent who have gained in compensation a longer and happier life. The omnipotent wisdom governing all things has means at its disposal so numerous, so diversified, so wonderful that the part we can comprehend should well teach us to revere the other. A good many years ago, I came across certain mortality statistics gathered in a small province with great care and exactitude. I was not at all surprised to learn from these figures that two serious epidemics of smallpox had not increased the mortality rate in the year when they raged. So much is it true that this hidden force we call nature has means of compensation which can scarcely be doubted.

THE SENATOR: A sacred saying says that pride is the beginning of sin;[Ecclesiasticus 10:13.] I think one could very well add, and of error. It misleads us by rousing in us an unfortunate spirit of contention that leads us to seek out difficulties for the pleasure of argument rather than referring them to a proved principle; but, unless I am very much mistaken, the disputants themselves at bottom feel that it is all in vain. How many arguments would be saved if every man was forced to say what he really thought!

THE COUNT: I agree with you entirely, but, before going any further, allow me to point out a peculiar characteristic of Christianity which strikes me in regard to the calamities of which we are speaking. If Christianity were a human artifact, its teaching would vary with human opinions, but since it emanates from the unchangeable Being, it is as unchangeable as he. Certainly this religion, the fount of all good and true knowledge in the world, whose greatest concern is the advancement of this very knowledge, takes great care not to forbid it to us or to impede its progress. For example, it approves strongly of our inquiring into the nature of all the physical factors that play a part in great natural convulsions. As for itself, in direct relation with God, it scarcely bothers about the agents which execute his orders. It knows that it was created to pray and not to dispute, since it knows with certainty what it needs to know. Whether one approves of it or condemns it, admires or ridicules it, it remains unmoved; and on the ruins of a town destroyed by an earth tremor, it says to the eighteenth century what it would have said to the twelfth:

We beg of you, O Lord, to be pleased to protect us; by your supreme grace make firm once more this earth unsettled by our iniquities, so that every man may recognize in his heart that it is your wrath that imposes punishments on us, as it is your mercy that delivers us from them....

FIFTH DIALOGUE
THE SENATOR: No living creature can have knowledge other than that which is part of its nature and which is entirely relative to its place in the world; and to my mind this is one of the many and unanswerable proofs of innate ideas; for, if there were no ideas of this sort in every cognitive creature, each of them, owing its ideas to its own particular and fortuitous experience, could move outside its proper sphere and overturn the order of things; however, this will never happen. The half-reasoning dog, monkey, or elephant will, for example, draw near to the fire and find pleasure in its warmth as we do, but you will never teach them to throw a log on the embers, because fire is alien to their nature; otherwise the human domain would be invaded. They can very well grasp the notion of one, but never that of unity; the rudiments of numbering but never the idea of number; one, two, or a thousand triangles together or one after another but never the concept of triangularity. The constant association of certain ideas in our minds makes us confuse them, although they are essentially distinct. I see your two eyes and immediately I associate my perception of them with the idea of duality; in fact, however, the two notions are of a totally different order, and one does not lead to the other.
Since I am on the subject, I shall add that I shall never understand how the morality of intelligent beings, either the human species or any other cognitive species, can be separated from innate ideas. But let us go back to animals. My dog accompanies me to some public spectacle, an execution, perhaps: certainly it sees everything that I see: the crowd, the melancholy procession, the officers of justice, the soldiers, the scaffolds, the condemned man, the executioner, in a word everything: but what does it understand of all this? - what it should understand in its quality as a dog: it will be able to make me out in the crowd and find me again if by chance we are separated; it will contrive not to be trampled underfoot by the spectators; when the executioner raises his arm, the animal, if it is nearby, will draw back for fear that the blow is meant for him; if it sees blood, it might tremble, but it would do the same in a butcher's shop. Its understanding stops there, and, no matter how much intelligent instruction it is given, it will never progress beyond this point; the ideas of morality, sovereignty, crime, justice, authority, and so on, which are implicit in this dismal spectacle, mean nothing to it. All the symbols of these ideas surround it, touch it, press in on it, but all to no avail, for no symbol can be meaningful unless the idea it represents is preexistent. It is one of the most obvious laws of the temporal rule of Providence that every active creature acts within a sphere laid down for it without being able to escape from it. And no one of good sense could imagine otherwise! Starting from this incontestable principle, who can deny that a volcano, a whirlwind, or an earthquake is to me what the execution is to my dog? Of these phenomena, I understand what I should understand, that is to say, everything that is in keeping with those innate ideas appropriate to the human condition. The rest is a closed book....

As I have just said, animals are surrounded, touched, pressed in by all the symbols of comprehension without being able to improve the least of their acts: refine as much as you like by thought this soul, this unknown principle, this instinct, this inner light which has been given to them with so great a variety of direction and intensity, yet you will find only an asymptote of reason, capable of approaching it, if you will, but never of reaching it; otherwise the province of creation would have been encroached upon, which is obviously impossible.

For a very similar reason, no doubt we can ourselves be surrounded, touched, pressed in by actions and agents of a superior order of which we have no knowledge other than that appropriate to our present situation. I am fully aware of the sublime uncertainty about which you have just spoken: yes, I know that I do not know, perhaps I know something more still; but it remains true that, by virtue of our intelligence, we shall never be capable of achieving direct knowledge on this point. I make great use, besides, of this uncertainty in all my inquiries into causes. I have read thousand of witticisms about the ignorance of the ancients who saw gods everywhere: it seems to me that we, who see them nowhere, are much more foolish. We are constantly told about physical causes, but what is a physical cause?

THE COUNT: It is a natural cause, if we want to confine ourselves to defining the word; but, in the modern usage, it is a material cause, that is to say, a cause which is not a cause, for matter and cause are mutually exclusive like black and white or circle and square. Matter has an effect only by movement: however, all movement being an effect, it follows that a physical cause is, strictly speaking, NON-SENSE and even a contradiction in terms. Thus there are and can be no physical causes properly speaking, because there is and can be no movement without an original mover, and because every original mover is outside matter; everywhere, that which actuates comes before that which is actuated; that which leads comes before that which is led; that which commands comes before that which is commanded: matter can be and even is nothing other than evidence of mind. If a hundred balls are placed in a line and each is moved successively by an impulse from the first, does this not presuppose a hand which impelled the first ball through an act of will? And when the disposition of things prevents me from seeing this hand, is it any the less obvious to my intelligence? Is not the mind of a clockmaker comprised within the drum of this clock, in which the mainspring is charged, so to speak, with the instructions of an intelligence?... The question is to know if there are nothing but material bodies in the world, and if these bodies can be moved by impulses of another kind. However, not only can they be so moved but originally they must have been so: for, since every movement can be conceived only as the result of another, it is necessary either to accept the idea of an infinite series of movements, that is to say, of effects without cause, or to agree that the principle of movement cannot be found in matter; and we carry in ourselves the proof that movement starts in the will. In a common and essential sense, it is quite legitimate to call causes effects that produce other effects: it is this sense that, in the line of balls I just referred to, every moving force is a cause except the first. But if we wish to speak with philosophic precision, we must use the word otherwise. It cannot be too often repeated that the ideas of matter and cause are mutually and rigorously exclusive.

On the question of the forces acting in the universe, Bacon developed a chimerical idea which has led to confusion in a host of thinkers: he supposed first of all material forces, then superimposed them indefinitely one on top of another; and the suspicion has often forced itself upon me that, in putting forward these genealogical trees in which everyone is a son except the first and everyone a father except the last, he made on these lines a god of the ladder, and that he arranged causes in the same way in his head; in his own way believing that one cause was the son of that which preceded, and that the generations, contracting as one goes back, would lead the true interpreter of nature to a common ancestor. Here are the ideas that this great jurist formed of nature and the science which must explain it: but nothing is more illusory.

I do not want to draw you into a long discussion. A single observation will suffice for the moment. It is that Bacon and his disciples have never and will never be able to quote to us a single example to support their theory. Let someone show us this alleged order of general, more general, and most general causes, as they are pleased to call them. Much has been argued and much discovered since Bacon: let someone give us an example of this wonderful genealogy, point out to us a single mystery of nature that has been explained, not necessarily by a cause, but even by a primary effect previously unknown, reached by working back from one to the other. Imagine the most common phenomenon, elasticity, for example, or any other you care to choose. Now, I shall not pose any difficulties; I do not ask for either the grandparents or the great-great-grandparents of the phenomenon, but will be content with its mother: alas, everyone remains silent; and always it is (I mean in the material order) Proles sine matre creata. How can anyone be so blind as to seek causes in nature when nature itself is an effect? So long as the material sphere is looked at in isolation, no one man can progress more than any other in the investigation of causes: all are and must be checked at the first step.

The genius of discovery in the natural sciences consists solely in uncovering unknown facts or relating unexplained phenomena to already known primary effects that we take as causes. Thus, the discoverers of the circulation of the blood and of the sex of plants doubtless both advanced science; but the discovery of facts has nothing to do with the discovery of causes. For his part Newton immortalized himself by relating to gravity phenomena which no one had ever thought of attributing to it; but the great man's footman knew as much as he did about the cause of gravity. Certain disciples, for whom he would blush if he returned to the world, have ventured to say that gravitation is a mechanical law. Newton never blasphemed against common sense in such a way, and it is in vain that they have sought to give themselves so distinguished an accomplice. On the contrary, he said (and this certainly is quite a lot) that he left to his readers the question of deciding if the agent which produces gravity is physical or spiritual. Read, I pray you, his theological letters to Dr. Bentley: you will be equally enlightened and edified by them.

You can see, Senator, that I strongly approve of your way of envisaging this world and, unless I am absolutely mistaken, base it on very good arguments. For the rest, I repeat what you said, I know that I do not know; and this uncertainty fills me at once with joy and with gratitude, since I find united in it both the ineffaceable title deed to my grandeur and a salutary protection against all ridiculous or foolhardy speculation. In looking at nature from this point of view, in the greatest as in the least of its works, I always recall (and this is enough for me) the phrase of a Lacedaemonian thinking about what prevented a stiffened corpse from standing upright however it was positioned: My God, he said, there must have been something inside. Always and everywhere the same can be said, for without this something everything is a corpse and nothing can stand upright. The world, considered thus as a collection of appearances in which the least phenomenon hides a reality, is a true and wise system of ideal forms. In a very true sense, I can say that material objects are nothing like what I see; but what I see is real in relation to me, and it is sufficient for me to be so led to the existence of another order in which I believe firmly without seeing it. Resting on these principles, I understand perfectly not only that prayer is useful in general in warding off physical evil, but that it is the true antidote, the natural specific, for it and that in its essence it tends to destroy it....

This digression on causes leads us to an equally just and fruitful idea: it is to look at prayer from the point of view of its effects simply as a secondary cause; for from this standpoint, it is nothing but that and should not be differentiated from any other secondary cause. If then a fashionable philosopher is surprised to see me use prayer to protect myself against lightning, for example, I shall say to him, And why do you, sir, use lightning rods? Or, to restrict myself to something more usual, Why do you use fire engines in fires and medicines in illnesses? Are you not setting your face against eternal laws quite as much as I am? "Oh, but that is very different," I shall be told, "for if it is a law, for example, that fire burns, it is also a law that water puts out fire." I shall reply, That is exactly what I say for my part, for if it is a law that lightning produces a certain catastrophe, it is also a law that prayer, sprinkled in time on the HEAVENLY FIRE, extinguishes or diverts it. And you can be sure, gentlemen, that there is no objection of this kind that I cannot counter to my advantage: there is no mid-point between a rigid, absolute, and universal fatalism and the widespread faith of men in the efficacy of prayer....

How great has been the cost of natural sciences to man! It is entirely his own fault, for God had offered him sufficient safeguards; but pride has lent its ear to the serpent, and once again man has put his guilty hand to the tree of knowledge; he has lost his way, and unfortunately does not know it. Notice a fine decree of Providence; since the primitive ages (of which I shall not speak at this point), it has granted the experimental sciences only to Christians. The ancients certainly surpassed us in intellectual power, as is shown by the superiority of their languages, in a way which seems to silence all the sophistries of our pride; for the same reason, they surpassed us in everything that they undertook in common with us. On the other hand, their physical science was almost nothing; for not only did they not attach any value to physical experiments, they despised them, and even suspected them slightly of impiety, and this confused feeling came from further back. Once the whole of Europe was Christian, once priests were the universal teachers, once all the institutions of Europe were Christianized, once theology had taken its place at the head of teaching and all the other faculties had grouped themselves around it like ladies-in-waiting around their queen, humanity being prepared for them in this way, the natural sciences were given to it, tantae molis erat ROMANUM condere gentem. Ignorance of this great truth has misled very strong minds, and Bacon is no exception, and perhaps the misconception even started with him.

THE SENATOR: Since you have reminded me of him, I confess that I have more than once found him extremely amusing with his desiderata. He has the air of a man who frets beside a cradle, complaining that the infant who is being rocked is still not a professor of mathematics or an army commander.

THE COUNT: That is very well said, although I fancy one could quarrel with the exactness of your comparison, for science at the beginning of the seventeenth century was by no means an infant in the cradle. Leaving aside the illustrious monk of the same name three centuries earlier in England, whose teachings could still earn him from men of our time the title of scholar, Bacon was the contemporary of Kepler, Galileo, and Descartes, while Copernicus had preceded him: leaving aside a hundred other less well-known persons, these four giants alone deprive him of the right to talk with so much contempt of the state of the sciences, which already threw such a dazzling light in his own times and were at bottom as developed as they could then be. The sciences are not progressing as Bacon imagined: they germinate like everything that germinates; they grow like everything that grows; they are connected with the moral condition of man.

Although free and active, and in consequence capable of devoting himself to science and its perfection, as with everything that has been put within his reach, man is nevertheless left to his own devices in this field less perhaps than in any other; but Bacon took it into his head to abuse the knowledge of his age without ever being able to grasp it, and nothing is more curious in the history of the human mind than the imperturbable obstinacy with which this famous man continued to deny the existence of the light shining around him, because his eyes were not capable of seeing it, for there was never a man more ignorant of the natural sciences and the laws of the world.

Bacon has very justly been accused of having retarded the progress of chemistry by trying to make it mechanical, and I am intrigued that the charge has been leveled against him in his own country by one of the foremost chemists of our day.* He has done worse still by retarding the progress of that transcendental or general philosophy, of which he never stopped telling us, without ever having any idea of what it was about; he even invented words which are false and dangerous in the sense he gave to them, for example, form which he substituted for nature or essence, and to which modern gross ignorance has not failed to lay claim, by seriously proposing to inquire into the form of heat, expansiveness, and so on: and who knows if some day someone, following in his footsteps, will not come to teach us the form of virtue?

[* J. Black, Lectures on the Elements of Chemistry ( London, 1803), I, 261.]
The force which seduced Bacon was not by any means yet fully developed at the time when he wrote, yet it can be seen even then fermenting in his writings, in which it boldly nurtured the seeds that we have seen blossom out in our own day. Full of an unconscious rancor, whose origin and nature he did not himself recognize, against all spiritual ideas, Bacon fastened the general attention with all his might upon the physical sciences in such a way as to turn men away from all other branches of learning. He rejected all metaphysics, all psychology, all natural and positive theology, and locked them all up in the Church, forbidding them to come out; he relentlessly denigrated final causes, which he called the limpets on the ship of science: and he dared to hold openly that the inquiry into causes was harmful to true science, an error as gross as it was dangerous, and yet incredibly an infectious error, even for well-disposed minds, so much so that one of the closest and most distinguished followers of the English philosopher felt no compunction in warning us to take great care not to allow ourselves to be carried away by the order we see in the universe.
Bacon did not ignore any means to turn us away from Plato's philosophy, the human preface to the Scriptures, and praised, expounded, and propagated that of Democritus, that is to say, atomic philosophy, a desperate attempt of materialism pushed to extremes, which, being aware that matter escapes it and explains nothing, plunges into the infinitely small, seeking, so to speak, matter without matter and being completely happy even amid absurdities so long as it does not find intelligence.

In conformity with this system of philosophy, Bacon urges men to seek the cause of natural phenomena in the configuration of constituent atoms or molecules, the most false and gross idea ever to have stained the human understanding. And this is why the eighteenth century, which has always loved and praised men only for the evil they bear, made Bacon its god, while nevertheless refusing to give him justice for his good and even excellent qualities. It is quite wrong to believe that he forwarded the progress of science, for all the real scientific innovators preceded him or were ignorant of him. Bacon was a barometer who announced good weather, and because he announced it people believed that he had made it. Walpole, his contemporary, called him the prophet of science,* and this is all that can be granted to him. I have seen the design of a medal struck in his honor, of which the main part is a rising sun with the motto Exortus uti aethereus sol. Nothing is more obviously false; I would sooner accept a rising sun with the inscription Nuntia solis, and even this could be said to be exaggerated, for, when Bacon arose, it was at least ten o'clock in the morning. The immense respect paid to him in our own time is due, as I just before said, only to his reprehensible sides. Notice that he was not translated into French until the end of the eighteenth century, and by a man who told us naively that he had, against his own experience, a hundred thousand reasons for not believing in God.

[* See the preface to the small English edition of the Works of Bacon, published by Dr. Shaw, London 1802.]
THE KNIGHT: Are you not afraid, Count, of being abused for such blasphemies against one of the great gods of our age?
THE COUNT: If it was my duty to be abused, I would have to bear it patiently, but I doubt if anyone is going to abuse me here. However, if it were a question of writing and publishing what I have said, I should not hesitate for a moment; I should not be very afraid of the storms, so convinced am I that the true intentions of a writer are always felt and that everyone renders justice to them. I am sure then that I would be believed if I protested that I think myself inferior in talent and knowledge to most of the writers now in the public eye, as much as I surpass them in the truth of the doctrines I profess. I am even pleased to confess their superiority in the first, which provides me with the subject of a charming reflection on the inestimable gift of the truth and on the sterility of talents which dare to divorce themselves from it.

There is a splendid book to be written, gentlemen, about the harm inflicted on works of genius, and even on the characters of their authors, by the errors they have professed for three centuries. What a subject if it were ably treated! The book would be the more useful as it would rest entirely on facts and so would lay itself open very little to pettifogging criticism. I can quote to you a striking example on this point, that of Newton, who comes to mind here as one of the most outstanding men in the realm of science. What did he lack to justify fully the beautiful tribute of an English poet, who called him

"... pure intelligence, whom God
To mortals lent, to trace his boundless works
From laws sublimely simple."
[Thomson, The Seasons, "Summer."]

He lacked the ability to rise above national prejudices, for surely if he had held more firmly to the truth, he would have written one book less. Exalt him as much as you like, and I shall agree fully, provided that he keeps to his place; but if he comes down from the heights of his genius to dabble in theology, I no longer owe him my respect. In error, there are not and cannot be great names or ranks or distinctions, NEWTON being the equal of Villiers.
After this profession of faith, which I am always ready to repeat, I am perfectly at peace with myself. I assure you I cannot accuse myself of anything, because I know what I owe to genius, but I know also what I owe to truth. Moreover, gentlemen, the time is now ripe, and all the old idols must now fall. Let us get back to the subject.

Do you find any difficulty at all in this idea that prayer is a secondary cause and that any objection to it could be made in the same way to medicine, for example? This sick man is to die or he is not to die; thus it is useless to pray for him, and for my part I say, then it is useless to give him cures and there is no art of medicine. Where, pray, is the difference? We do not want to hold that secondary causes form part of the higher scheme of things. This sick man will die or will not die: yes, undoubtedly he will die if he does not take remedies, and he will not die if he does: this condition is itself a part of the eternal order.

Without doubt God is the universal moving force, but each being is moved according to the nature that God has given it. What would you yourselves do, gentlemen, if you wanted to lead that horse we see in the meadow over there? You would mount it or lead it by the bridle, and the animal would obey you, according to its nature, although it is quite capable of resisting you and even of killing you with a blow of its hoof. But if you wanted that child we see playing in the garden to come to us, you would call him or, if you did not know his name, you would make some signal to him; the most understandable thing for him no doubt would be to show him this cake, and he would come according to his nature. If finally you had need of a book from my library, you would go to fetch it, and the book would be moved by your hand in a purely passive way according to its nature. This is quite a straight-forward parallel to the action of God on his creatures. He directs angels, men, animals, brute matter, in sum all created things, but each according to its nature, and man having been created free, he is freely led. This rule is truly the eternal law and in it we must believe.

THE SENATOR: I agree with you with all my heart, yet it must be confessed that the agreement of the divine will with our free will and the acts that flow from it is one of those questions in which human reason, even when it is quite firm in its convictions, has not nevertheless the power to rid itself of a certain doubt that derives from fear and assails it in spite of itself. This is an abyss into which it is better not to look.

COUNT: My good friend, it is not entirely possible for us not to look into it; it is there before us, and, not to see it, we should have to be blind, which would be much worse than being afraid. Let us rather repeat that there is no philosophy without the art of ignoring objections, otherwise mathematics itself would be shaken. I must admit that, when one thinks of certain intellectual mysteries, one's head whirls a little. Yet it is possible to recover completely, and nature itself if wisely consulted leads us toward the truth. No doubt you have thought a thousand times about the relationship between movements. For example, if you run from east to west while the earth turns from west to east, what do you want to achieve? Let me suppose you want to travel a verst on foot from east to west in eight minutes: you have done it; you have achieved your end; you are weary and covered in sweat; you feel, in a word, all the symptoms of fatigue: but what did this superior power, this prime moving force, which is carrying you along with it, aim at? It wanted you to be carried back in space with an incredible speed, rather than moving forward from east to west; and this is what happened. It, like you, has thus achieved what it wanted. If you play at shuttlecock on a ship in sail, is there not in the movement which carries both you and the shuttlecock along something that interferes with your action? Suppose you hit the shuttlecock from the bows to the stern with a speed equal to that of the boat (which can be rigorously true): the two players are certainly doing everything that they wanted, but the prime moving force has also done what it wanted. One of the two believed he hit the shuttlecock, but only stopped it: the other player went to the shuttlecock rather than, as he thought, waiting for it and getting it on his racket.

Would you say perhaps that, since you have not done all you believed, you have not done all you wanted? In this case, you would be ignoring the fact that the same objection can apply to the superior moving force, about which it could be said that while it wished to carry the shuttlecock along, yet the shuttlecock remained where it was. Thus the argument could be used equally against God. Since the argument that divine power can be limited by human power has precisely the same force as the converse proposition, it follows that it is not applicable in either case and that the two powers act together without harming each other.

Many lessons can be learned from the relationship between moving forces which, whatever their number and direction, can act on the same body simultaneously and which all have their effect, so that the moving body at the end of a single movement produced by them will be at precisely the same point at which it would have stopped if they had all acted one after another. The only difference between the two dynamics is that in the case of bodies, the force moving them never belongs to them, while in the case of minds, the wills, which are in substance motions, themselves join, intersect, or collide, since they are nothing but motions. It can even come about that a created will cancels out, not perhaps the exertion, but the result of divine action; for in this sense, God himself has told us that God WISHES things which do not happen because man DOES NOT WISH THEM!* Thus the rights of men are immense, and his greatest misfortune is to be unaware of them; but his real spiritual action is prayer by means of which, by putting himself in harmony with God, he so to speak exercises an omnipotent power by determining it.

[* O Jerusalem, Jerusalem... how often would I have gathered thy children together... and ye would not! (Luke, 13:34).]
Do you want to know what this power is and what its extent? Think what the human will can achieve in the sphere of evil; it can contradict God, as you have just seen: what then can this same will do when it acts in harmony with him? What are the limits of this power? Its nature is not to have any. The efficacy of the human will is dimly visible to us in social matters, and we often say that man can do what he will; but in the spiritual sphere, where effects are not so perceptible, ignorance on this point is only too general, and even in the material sphere we do not by far reflect sufficiently. For example, you can easily knock over this rosebush but you cannot overthrow an oak; why is this, I pray? The earth is full of foolish men who will hasten to reply, Because your muscles are not strong enough, thus mistaking completely the limit for the means of power.
Human power is limited by the nature of man's physical organs, and this is necessary in order that he can disturb the established order only up to a certain point; for you can imagine what would happen in this world if a man could unaided pull down a building or root up a forest. It is perfectly true that that same wisdom which made man perfectible has given him dynamics, that is to say, artificial means of augmenting his natural powers, but this gift is still accompanied by a striking sign of infinite foresight: for, wishing that every possible advance should be proportionate, not to the limitless desires of man, which are immense and almost always ill directed, but only to his wise desires, based on his needs, this wisdom has determined that each of his powers is attended by a check which is born and grows with it, so that the power must necessarily destroy itself by the very effort it makes to expand.

For instance, the power of a lever cannot be increased without a proportional increase in the difficulties of working it, which must eventually render it useless; it can be said, moreover, that in general and in the very operations which are, properly speaking, far from mechanical, man cannot increase his natural powers without using proportionately more time, space, and material, which in the first place inconveniences him in a cumulative way and then prevents him from acting secretly, and this should be carefully observed. So, for instance, every man can blow up a house by means of dynamite, but the indispensable preparations are such that the public authorities will always have the time to ask him what he is doing. Optical instruments give another striking illustration of the same law, since it is impossible to perfect one of the qualities whose combination constitutes the perfection of these instruments without weakening another. Something similar could be said about firearms. In a word, there is no possible exception to a law the suspension of which would destroy human society. Thus, on all sides, in the natural as in the artificial order, limits are set. You will not bend the bush I was talking about before if you push it with a reed; but this would be because the reed, and not you, lacked the power; and this overweak instrument is to the rosebush what men's arms are to the oak. By its nature, the will would move mountains, but the muscles, nerves, and bones given to it as its means of acting in the material world give way to the oak as the reed gives way to the rosebush.

Imagine the suspension of the law that lays down that the human will can act materially in an immediate manner only on the body which it animates (a purely accidental law relative to our state of ignorance and corruption), and this will will be able to pull up a tree as easily as it lifts an arm. However one looks at the human will, one finds that its powers are extremely wide. But since prayer is the dynamic granted to men in the spiritual order, of which the material world is only an image and a kind of reflection, let us take great care not to deprive ourselves of it, for this would be like wanting to substitute our unaided strength for a winch or a fire engine.

The philosophy of the last century, which will appear to posterity as one of the most shameful phases of the human mind, ignored nothing in seeking to turn us away from prayer by considering eternal and inevitable laws. Its favorite, I almost said its only, object was to separate man from God: and what better means of success had it than by weakening prayer? In actual fact, this whole philosophy was nothing but a real system of practical atheism; I have given a name to this strange disease, calling it theophobia, which you can see in all the philosophic works of the eighteenth century, if you look closely. No one said openly, There is no God, an assertion that could have led to some physical inconvenience, but they said: "God is not there. He is not to be found in your ideas, which originate in the senses; he is not to be found in your thoughts, which are only converted sensations; he is not to be found in the scourges which afflict you, for these are physical phenomena like others that are explained by known laws. He does not think of you and has done nothing for you as an individual; the world is made for the insect as for you; he does not revenge himself on you for you are too insignificant and so on." In short, the name of God could not be mentioned to this philosophy without throwing it into consternation. Even those writers of the period who stood out above the crowd and were distinguished by excellent if partial views freely denied the creation. How could divine punishments be mentioned to these men without sending them into a rage? No physical event can have a cause superior to man: this was their dogma. Perhaps sometimes this philosophy does not dare to state this dogma in general, but when it is a question of detail, they constantly assert it, which comes to the same thing.

I can quote to you a remarkable example of this, which is in some ways amusing although in others it is saddening. Nothing shocked these writers so much as the Flood, the greatest and most terrible judgment God has ever imposed on man, yet nothing is better established by every kind of proof capable of establishing an important fact. What then were they to do? They started by obstinately refusing to us all the water necessary to the Flood, and I recall that in my salad days my young faith was unsettled by their reasoning; but, as the fantasy has since occurred to them that the world was created by precipitation and as water is absolutely necessary to them in this remarkable operation, the lack of water no longer troubles them, and they have gone as far as us by granting freely that there was an envelope eight miles high around the whole surface of the globe - which is very honest. Some have even thought of calling Moses to their aid and of forcing him by the strangest distortions to testify in favor of their cosmogenetic dreams. Of course, it is well understood by them that divine intervention does not enter at all into this venture, which has nothing extraordinary in it. Thus they have admitted the total submersion of the globe at the very time fixed by this great man, which seems to them sufficient seriously to declare themselves defenders of Revelation, but of God, of crime, and of punishment, not a word. We have even been given a gentle hint that there were no men on the earth at the time of the great flood, which is, as you can see, very Mosaic. The word flood, having something too theological about it to please them, it has been suppressed in favor of catastrophe: so they accept the flood, which they need for their futile theories, but they remove God, who tires them. Here, it seems to me, is a very clear symptom of theophobia.

I honor with all my heart the numerous exceptions which console the observer and, among the very writers who have been able to sadden the true faith, I gladly make the necessary distinctions; but the general character of this philosophy is nonetheless as I have described it, and it is this philosophy which, by working ceaselessly to separate man from God, has produced in the end the despicable generation which has done or allowed what we see before our eyes....

Can I think, Knight, that you are now perfectly happy about eternal and inevitable laws? Nothing is necessary except God, and nothing is less necessary than pain. All pain is a punishment, and every punishment (except the last) is inflicted for love as much as for justice.

THE KNIGHT: I am happy that my petty quibbles have brought us reflections from which I will profit, but, I pray, what did you mean by the words, Except the last?

THE COUNT: Look around you and you will see the acts of human justice. What does it do when it condemns a man to a punishment less than the capital? It does two things in regard to the condemned; it chastises him, which is the work of justice, but it also wants to correct him, which is the work of love. If justice could not hope that punishment will make the condemned man examine his conscience, it would almost always punish by death; but when justice is finally persuaded, either by the repetition or the extent of the crimes, that a criminal is incorrigible, love withdraws and justice pronounces an eternal punishment, because every death is eternal, for a dead man cannot cease to be dead. Without doubt, both human and divine justice punish but to correct, and every punishment, except the last, is a remedy: but the last is death....

We can then contemplate divine justice in our own, as in a mirror, dull in comparison with reality yet faithful, which can reflect no images other than those it has received. We see there that the only end of punishment is to root out evil, so that the greater and more deeply rooted is the evil, the longer and more painful is the operation. But if a man has surrendered completely to evil, how can it be cut away from him? And what room does he leave for love? All true teaching, so mingling fear with consolatory ideas, warns the free being not to advance to the limit beyond which there is no limit....

SIXTH DIALOGUE
THE COUNT: If ever you are called on to make a strict examination of the Essay concerning Human Understanding, I recommend the chapter on liberty to you. La Harpe, forgetting what he had more than once said, that he understood only literature, went into ecstasies over Locke's definition of liberty. Here, he said majestically, here is philosophy. He would have done better to say, Here is incapacity demonstrated, for Locke makes liberty consist in the power to act, whereas this purely negative word signifies only absence of obstacles, so that liberty is and can be only the unimpeded will, that is to say, the will. Condillac, embellishing the mediocrity of his master, said in his turn that liberty is only the power of doing what one has not done or of not doing what one has done. This pretty antithesis can no doubt dazzle a mind unaccustomed to this kind of discussion, but it is obvious to every educated or experienced man that Condillac here takes the result or external sign of liberty, which is physical action, for liberty itself, which is entirely moral.
Liberty is the power to do. How is this? Has not the man who is in prison and laden with chains the power to make himself guilty of all crimes without acting? He has only to will them.... If then liberty is not the power to do, it can be only the power to will, but the power to will is the will itself, and to ask if the will can will is like asking if perception has the power to perceive, if reason has the power of reasoning, if a circle is a circle, a triangle a triangle, in a word if a thing in itself is a thing in itself. Now, if you consider that even God is unable to coerce the will, since a coerced will is a contradiction in terms, you will see that the will can be moved and led only by sympathy - an admirable word that all the philosophers together could not have invented. However, sympathy can have no effect on the will other than increasing its vigor by making it will still further, so that sympathy could no more detract from liberty or the will than teaching of any kind could harm the understanding. The curse that weighs on unfortunate human nature is the double sympathy.

Vim sentit geminam paretque incerta duobus?[Ovid, Metamorphoses, VIII, 472.] The philosopher who reflects on this terrible enigma will render justice to the Stoics, who at one time predicted a fundamental Christian dogma by declaring that only the wise man is free. Today this is no longer a paradox but an incontestable truth of the first order. Where the spirit of God exists, there is to be found liberty. Whoever has not grasped these truths will forever move around the principle, like Bernouilli's curve, without even reaching it. Now, would you like to see how far Locke was from the truth on this as on so many other subjects? I pray you, listen to his splendid nonsense. He claimed that liberty, which is one faculty, has nothing in common with the will, which is another faculty, and that it is no less absurd to ask if the human will is free than it would be to ask if a man's sleep is rapid or his virtue squared. What do you say to that?

THE SENATOR: This indeed is going a bit too far! But would your memory be good enough to recall the demonstration of this splendid theory, for doubtless it had one?

THE COUNT: It is of a kind that could never be forgotten. Listen and you will judge for yourself.

You are going across a bridge; it collapses; at the moment you feel it giving way under your feet, the exertion of your will, if it were free would no doubt carry you to the opposite bank; but its effort is useless: the sacred laws of gravitation must be carried out in the world, and you must therefore fall and perish: THEREFORE liberty has nothing in common with the will.[Essay, Book II, Chap. xxi, Para. 9.] I hope you are convinced....

Locke is perhaps the only author known who has taken the trouble to refute his whole book or to declare it useless, from the beginning, by telling us that all our ideas come from the senses or from reflection. But who has ever denied that certain ideas come to us from the senses? What is it Locke wants to teach us? The number of simple perceptions being nothing compared to the innumerable combinations of thought, it remains clear, from the first chapter of the second book, that the immense majority of our ideas do not come from the senses. But where then do they come from? The question is embarrassing and, in consequence, his disciples, fearing the results, no longer talk of reflection, which is very prudent from their point of view.[Condillac, Art de penser, Chap. 1; Logique, Chap. vii.]

Since Locke started his book without reflection or any deep thought on his subject, it is not surprising that he constantly went off the tracks. He had first of all put forward the argument that all our ideas come to us from the senses or from reflection. Then, spurred on by his bishop pressing him hard and perhaps also by his conscience, he reached the point of agreeing that general ideas (which alone make up the intelligent being) came neither from the senses nor from reflection but were inventions and CREATURES of the human mind.[Essay, Book II, Chap. xxii, Para. 3. ] For, according to the doctrine of this great philosopher, man makes general ideas with simple ideas, just as he makes a boat with planks, so that the most abstract general ideas are only collections or, as Locke, seeking as always for the coarsest expression, says, companies of simple ideas....[Ibid., Book II, Chap. xxx, Para. 2.]

Here I beg you to admire the illuminating course of Locke's argument: he establishes first that all our ideas come to us from the senses or from reflection and takes this opportunity to tell us that he understands by reflection the knowledge that the mind gains of its different operations.[Ibid., Book II, Chap. i, Para. 4.] Then, torturing the truth, he confesses that general ideas come neither from the senses nor from reflection but are created or, in his ridiculous phrase, invented by the human mind. Now, as reflection has just been expressly excluded by Locke, it follows that the human mind invents general ideas without reflection, that is to say, without any knowledge or examination of its own operations. But every idea that does not originate in either the interaction of the mind with external objects, or the consideration of itself by the mind, necessarily appertains to the substance of the mind. There are therefore innate ideas or ideas anterior to all experience; this, it seems to me, inevitably follows, but it is not a surprising conclusion.

All the writers who have set themselves against innate ideas have found themselves led by the force of truth alone to make admissions more or less favorable to this theory. I do not except even Condillac, although he was perhaps the eighteenth century philosopher the most on guard against his conscience. But I have no desire to compare these two men of very different character, the one foolish, the other brazen. Yet what reproaches cannot rightly be leveled against Locke and how can he be exonerated from having unsettled morality in order to overthrow the theory of innate ideas without knowing what he was attacking? At the bottom of his heart he himself felt that he was rendering himself guilty; but, he said, excusing himself by deceiving himself, the truth must come first,[Ibid., Book I, Chap. iii, Para. 24.] which is to say that the truth must come before the truth.

Perhaps the most dangerous and the most culpable of these fatal writers who will not cease to damn the last century in the eyes of posterity, the one who has used the most talent with the most composure to produce the most evil, Hume, has also told us in one of his terrible Essays, that the truth comes before everything else, that it is a somewhat ingenuous critic who reproaches certain philosophers for the harm that their opinions can do to morality and religion, and that such injustice can only hamper the discovery of truth. But no man, at least if he does not wish to fool himself, will be misled by this dangerous sophistry. No error can be useful, just as no truth can be harmful. What is misleading on this point is, in the first place, that the error is confused with some element of truth mingled in it, an element which is, according to its nature, beneficial in spite of its association with error; and, in the second place, that the announcement of truth is confused with the acceptance of truth. Doubtless it can be imprudent to expose the truth, but it is injurious only if it is rejected, whereas error, knowledge of which can be useful only like knowledge of poisons, begins to destroy the moment it has succeeded in ingratiating itself under the mask of its divine enemy. It is thus harmful because people accept it, whereas truth can be harmful only because people combat it: therefore everything that is harmful in itself is false, just as everything that is useful in itself is true. Nothing is clearer to the wise....

In vain does Locke, as ever troubled in his mind, seek to deceive in another way by the explicit statement he makes, "That in denying an innate law, he does not at all mean to deny a natural law, that is to say, a law prior to all positive law."[Essay, Book II, Chap. ii, Para. 13.] This is, as you can see, a new conflict between conscience and obligation. In fact, what is this natural law? And if it is neither positive nor innate, what is its base? Has he given us a single argument valid against innate law that is not equally valid against natural law? The latter, he tells us, can be known by the light of reason alone, without the help of positive revelation.[Ibid.] But what then is this light of reason? Does it come from men? Then it is positive. Does it come from God? Then it is innate.

If Locke had had more insight or diligence or good faith, instead of saying, A certain idea is not present in the mind of such and such a people, therefore it is not innate, he would on the contrary have said, Thus it is innate for every man who possesses it, for this shows that, if the idea did not preexist, the senses would never have given birth to it, since the nation which lacks it has five senses just as much as any other; and he would have inquired into how and why such an idea could have been destroyed or distorted in such a human group. But such a fruitful notion was very remote from a man who again went so far as to hold that a single atheist in the world was for him a sufficient justification for denying that the idea of God is innate in man,[Ibid., Book I, Chap. iii, Para. 8.] or, to put this another way, that a single deformed child, born, for example, without eyes, would prove that sight is not natural to man. But nothing would stop Locke. Has he not told us that the voice of conscience is no proof of innate principles, as the claims of conscience can differ from person to person?[Ibid., Book I, Chap. ii, Para. 8.]

It is very strange that it has never been possible to show to either this grand patriarch or his sorry followers the difference between ignorance of a law and admitted mistakes in applying this law. An Indian woman sacrifices her newborn infant to the goddess Gonza and they say, Thus there is no innate morality; but it should still be said, Thus it is innate, since the idea of duty is sufficiently strong in this unfortunate mother to make her prepared to sacrifice to her duty the most tender and powerful feeling of the human heart. Abraham formerly showed his worth by determining on this same sacrifice which he rightly believed to be divinely ordained; he echoed the Indian woman, God has spoken, and I must close my eyes and obey. The one, bowing before divine authority which wished only to test him, obeyed a sacred and direct command; the other, blinded by a deplorable superstition, obeys an imaginary command; but, on both sides, the fundamental idea is the same, the idea of duty carried to its highest degree. I ought to do it - this is the innate idea whose nature is independent of every error of application. Do, by any chance, the errors men commit every day in their calculations prove that they have no idea of number? Now, if this idea was not innate, they could never have acquired it; they would never even have been able to be mistaken, since to be mistaken is to deviate from some anterior and known rule. The same is true of other ideas, and, I would add, what seems to me to be clear in itself, that, if this assumption is not accepted, it becomes impossible to conceive of man, that is to say, the unity of mankind or the human species, or consequently any coherence relative to a given class of rational beings.

It must also be admitted that Locke's critics are on a false track when they distinguish between ideas and take innate ideas to be only first-order moral beliefs, which seems to make the solution of the problem depend upon the rightness of these beliefs. I do not want to imply that they do not deserve particular attention, and I can come back to this subject; but for the philosopher who looks at this question in its most general terms, there is no distinction to be made here, because there is no idea that is not innate or foreign to the senses by virtue of the universality from which it takes its shape and of the intellectual act of thinking it.

Every rational belief is founded on antecedent knowledge, for man can learn nothing except because he knows. Since syllogism and induction always start from already known principles, it must be admitted that before reaching a particular truth we must already know it in part. Take, for example, a particular triangle; of course you were ignorant of it before seeing it, yet you already knew, if not this triangle, the triangle or triangularity, and this is how from different standpoints one can know and be ignorant of the same thing. If one rejects this theory, inevitably one falls into the insoluble dilemma of Plato's Meno, and is forced to agree either that men cannot learn anything or that everything they learn is only recollection. If one refuses to accept these innate ideas, no proof is any longer possible, for there are no longer any first principles from which it can be derived. Indeed, the essence of first principles is that they are anterior, evident, primary, undemonstrable, and causal in relation to the conclusion; otherwise they would themselves need to be proved, would in other words cease to be first principles, and it would be necessary to admit what the school calls infinite regression, which is impossible. Moreover, notice that these first principles on which proofs are founded must be not only known, but better known than the truths uncovered by their means, for whatever or whoever imparts something must have a greater grasp of it than the subject who receives it. For example, just as the man we love for love of another is always less loved than the latter, in the same way every acquired truth is less clear to us than the first principle which has made it visible to us. The light being by nature brighter than the lit, one must believe not only in science but also in the scientific principle, whose character is to be at once both necessary and necessarily believed. For proof has nothing in common with arbitrary and external assertion which denies whatever it wishes, but derives from that profounder voice that speaks in the heart of man and has no power to contradict truth. All the sciences communicate with one another by means of these common first principles; and I beg you to understand clearly that I mean by this word common not what these different sciences prove but that which they use in order to reach proofs - in other words, the idea of the universal, which is the root of every proof, which exists before any sensory perception or process, and which is so little the result of experience that without it each experience would always be unrelated and could be repeated to eternity without the gap being bridged between it and the universal. This puppy playing before you now played in the same way yesterday and the day before. Thus it has played and played and played, but from its point of view it has not played three times, as is apparent to you; for if you exclude the fundamental and consequently preexisting idea of number by which one experience can be related to another, one and one are nothing but this and that, never two.

You can see, gentlemen, how pitiful Locke is with his "experience," since the truth is nothing but an equation between human thought and the object known, so that if the former is not natural, preexistent, and immutable, the latter necessarily fluctuates and there is no truth.

Every idea therefore is innate in relation to the universal from which it derives its form, and is moreover totally foreign to the senses by reason of the intellectual act of affirmation; for, since thought or (what is the same thing) speech belongs only to the mind, or better since they are the mind, no distinction should be made in this respect between different classes of ideas. Once man says, THIS IS, he is necessarily talking by virtue of an internal and anterior knowledge, for the senses have nothing in common with truth, which the understanding alone can attain. Since what does not pertain to the senses is foreign to the material world, it follows that there is in man a nonmaterial principle in which knowledge resides; and since the sense can receive and transmit to the mind only impressions, not only is its function, which is essentially to judge, not helped by these impressions, but rather it is hindered and confused by them. We should therefore accept, as do the greatest men, that we have concepts naturally which have not come to us through the senses, the contrary opinion offending good sense as much as religion....

The day will come, and perhaps it is not far off, when Locke will be universally placed among those writers who have perpetrated the most evil among men. Yet, despite all the charges I have brought against him, I have touched on only a part of his misdeeds, and perhaps the least part. Having laid the foundations of a philosophy as false as it is dangerous, his deadly mind turned toward politics with a no less deplorable effect. He spoke about the origin of laws as badly as about the origin of ideas, and on this point he again stated principles whose effects are now apparent. These fateful seeds would perhaps have withered in the coldness of his style, but nurtured in the hothouses of Paris, they have produced the revolutionary monster which has devastated Europe....

SEVENTH DIALOGUE
THE KNIGHT: Today, Senator, I hope you will make good your promise to say something to us about war.
THE SENATOR: I am quite ready to do so, for this is a subject on which I have thought a great deal. Ever since I began to think, war has been in my mind; this terrible subject has engrossed my thoughts, yet I have never fully plumbed its depths.

The first charge I shall level against it will no doubt astonish you, but it is for me an incontestable truth: "Given man with his reason, sentiments, and affections, there is no way of explaining how war is humanly possible." That is my seriously considered opinion. Somewhere La Bruyere describes this huge human absurdity with all the power you know he commands. It was many years ago that I read this fragment, yet I can recall it perfectly. He insists strongly on the folly of war; yet the more foolish, the less explicable it is.

THE KNIGHT: Yet it seems to me that one could say at the outset that rulers order you and you must obey.

THE SENATOR: This is not at all the case, my dear Knight, I assure you.... Rulers can exact effective and durable obedience only when supported by opinion, which they cannot themselves determine. In every country there are much less repellent things than war that a sovereign would never dare to command.... Peter the First needed all the strength of his invincible personality to get beards shaved off and to alter the style of clothing: to lead countless legions on to the battlefield, even at the time when he was vanquished to learn how to vanquish, he needed, like every other ruler, only to say the word. Yet there is in man, in spite of his profound degradation, an element of love that draws him to other men: compassion is as natural to him as breathing. By what strange magic is he ever ready, at the first beat of the drum, to cast off his divine character in order to set out without resistance, often even with a certain gladness which has also its peculiar character, to hack to pieces on the battlefield a brother who has never offended him and who on his side comes to inflict the selfsame wounds if he can? I could still understand a truly national war, but how many such wars have there been? Perhaps one in a thousand years. As far as the others are concerned, especially those between civilized nations who can consider their actions and know what they are doing, I confess I am puzzled. It could be said, Glory explains everything, but, first, only the leaders gain the glory, and , second, this only pushes back the difficulty a stage, for I then ask precisely why this extraordinary prestige surrounds war.

I have often imagined a scene in which I want you to participate. I suppose that for some good reason a stranger to our planet comes here and talks to one of us about the condition of this world. Among the strange things that are recounted to him, he is told that corruption and vices, of which he has been fully informed, in certain circumstances necessitate men dying by the hand of men, and that we restrict the right of killing within the law to the executioner and the soldier. He will also be told: "The one brings death to convicted and condemned criminals, and fortunately his executions are so rare that one of these ministers of death is sufficient for each province. As far as soldiers are concerned, there are never enough of them, because they kill without restraint and their victims are always honest men. Of these two professional killers, the soldier and the executioner, one is highly honored and always has been by all the nations who have inhabited up to now this planet to which you have come; but the other has just as generally been regarded as vile. Try to guess on which the obloquy falls."

Surely this spirit from afar would not hesitate a moment; he would heap on the executioner all the praise which you did not feel able the other day to refuse him, Count, in spite of all our prejudices, when you talked of this gentleman, to use Voltaire's phrase. "He is a sublime being," he would say to us, "the cornerstone of society. Since crime is part of this world's order and since it can be checked only by punishment, once deprive the world of the executioner and all order will disappear with him. Moreover, what grandeur of soul, what noble disinterestedness must necessarily be assumed to exist in a man who devotes himself to services which are no doubt worthy of respect but which are so distressing and so contrary to human nature! For, since I have lived among you, I have noticed that it hurts you to kill a chicken in cold blood. I am therefore convinced that opinion must cover him with all the honor necessary' and so rightly owing to him. As for the soldier, he is on the whole an agent of cruelty and injustice. How many obviously just wars have there been? How many obviously unjust! How many individual injustices, horrors, and useless atrocities! I imagine therefore that opinion among you has very properly poured as much shame on the head of the soldier as it has thrown glory over the impartial executor of the judgments of sovereign justice."

You know the truth, gentlemen, and the extent of the spirit's mistake. In fact, the soldier and the executioner stand at the two extremes of the social scale, but in quite the opposite extremes put forward by this splendid theory. Nothing is so noble as the first, nothing so abject as the second.... The soldier is so noble that he ennobles what public opinion regards as most ignoble, since he can act as an executioner without debasing himself, provided however that he kills only his fellow soldiers and that he uses only his weapons to kill them.

THE KNIGHT: Ah, but that is important, my dear friend! Wherever, and for whatever reason you like, a soldier is ordered to execute civilian criminals, in a twinkling of an eye and without apparent reason all the glory surrounding him fades. No doubt he will still be feared, for any man who carries a good and accurate rifle in the course of his day's work merits considerable attention: but the indefinable spell of honor has been irretrievably broken. The officer is no longer anything as an officer. If he has birth or virtues, he can still be well thought of, in spite rather than because of his military rank; he ennobles his commission rather than being ennobled by it, and, if his rank provides a large income, he can be wealthy but never noble. But you said, Senator, "Provided, however, that the soldier does not kill anyone except his fellows and that he has only the weapons of his profession to kill them." It should be added, and provided that it is a question of a military crime: once it is a question of a low crime, it is a matter for the executioner.

THE COUNT: In fact, this is the custom. Since the ordinary courts have jurisdiction over civil crimes, soldiers guilty of such offenses are sent to them. However, if it pleased the sovereign to order otherwise, I am very far from thinking it certain that the character of the soldier would be harmed by it. But we are all three agreed on the other two conditions, and do not doubt that this character would be stained indelibly if the soldier were forced to shoot an ordinary citizen or to kill his comrade by burning or hanging....

THE SENATOR: Although the military is in itself dangerous to the well-being and the liberties of every nation, because the motto of this profession will always be more or less that of Achilles, Jura, nego mihi nata, nevertheless those nations most jealous of their liberties have never disagreed with the rest of mankind on the preeminence of the military profession. Antiquity thought as we do on this subject; it is one of those on which men have always been and will always be in agreement. Here then is the problem I want to pose to you, Explain why the right innocently to spill innocent blood is regarded as most honorable by the whole of humanity. If you look at it more closely, you will see that there is something mysterious and inexplicable about the extraordinary value men have always placed on military glory, more especially as, if we consulted only theory and human reason, we should be led to directly opposite ideas. It is then not a question of explaining the possibility of war by the glory surrounding it, but first of all of explaining this glory itself, which is not easy.

I should like to tell you of another idea on the same subject. We have been told thousands of times that, since nations are in a state of nature in regard to one another, they can settle their differences only by war. But, as I am in a mood for questions today, I will put another one, Why has every nation remained in a state of nature toward the others without making a single attempt to break out of it? According to the foolish doctrines on which we were succored in our youth, there was a time when men did not live in society, and this imaginary state was ridiculously called the state of nature. They add that men, having judiciously balanced the advantages of these two states, decided on that which we know -

THE COUNT: Allow me to interrupt you for a moment to tell you of a thought that comes to my mind against this doctrine you have so rightly called foolish. The savage holds so strongly to his most brutal habits that nothing can tear him away from them. You have no doubt seen, at the head of the Discourse on the Inequality of Conditions, the engraving based on an anecdote, true or false, of the Hottentot who returns to his fellows. Rousseau little suspected that this frontispiece was a powerful argument against the book. The savage sees our arts, laws, sciences, wealth, taste, pleasures of every kind, and above all our superiority, from which he cannot hide yet which could arouse some ambition in those capable of it; but all this does not even tempt him, and continually he returns to his fellows. If then the savage of our own time, being aware of the two states and being able to compare them every day in certain countries, remains resolutely in his own, how can it be supposed that the primitive savage emerged from his state by means of deliberation and moved into another state of which he had no knowledge? Hence society is as old as man, and the savage is and can be nothing but a degraded and punished man. In truth, it seems to me that nothing is clearer to common sense unclouded by sophistry.

THE SENATOR: You are preaching to the converted, as the saying goes, but I thank you for your argument; one can never have too many weapons against error. But to return to what I was saying just now: If man passed from the state of nature, in the common usage of the term, into a civilized state either by deliberation or by chance (I am still speaking the language of the madmen), why have nations not had as much foresight or good fortune as individuals; and how is it that they have never agreed on an international society to end quarrels between nations, as they have agreed on a national sovereignty to end those between individuals? It is easy to ridicule the impracticable peace of the Abbe de Saint-Pierre (for I agree that it is impracticable), but I would ask why this is so, why nations have not been able to raise themselves to a social state like individuals; above all, how it is that an enlightened Europe has never attempted anything of this kind.

I would put a particular question to the faithful with still more confidence. How is it that God, the author of the society of individuals, allowed it to happen that man, his cherished creation with the divine attribute of perfectibility, has never even attempted to create a society of nations? Every possible argument to show that such a society is impossible militates in the same way against the society of individuals. The argument drawn primarily from the claim that such an extensive territory would be too comprehensive to be practical has no force, for it is not true that it would have to cover the whole world. Nations are already distinguished and divided by rivers, seas, mountains, creeds, and above all by more or less distinct languages. In practice it would be a great step in itself toward the good of humanity if only a certain number of nations agreed to move into a state of civilization. It might be said that the other nations will attack them. Well, what of it? They would still be more peaceful amongst themselves and stronger in regard to outsiders, which is enough. There is no need for absolute perfection; an approach to it would be a lot, and I cannot persuade myself that nothing of this kind would ever have been tried if it were not for a terrible and mysterious law demanding human blood.

THE COUNT: You look on it as an undeniable fact that this civilization of nations has never been attempted, yet in truth it has often and even stubbornly been tried - true, without it being known what was being attempted (which indeed was a factor working for its success), and in fact has come very close to succeeding, at least so far as the imperfection of our nature allows. But men made mistakes, mistaking one thing for another, and everything failed, apparently because of that mysterious and terrible law of which you spoke.

THE SENATOR: I would put several questions to you if I was not afraid of losing the thread of my ideas. I ask you then to look at a fact well worthy of your attention. It is that the profession of arms does not in the least tend to degrade or to make wild and hard at least those who follow it, as we might believe or fear if experience did no teach us: on the contrary, it tends to improve them. The most honest man is commonly the honest soldier, and, as I said not long ago, I have always for my own part had a particular respect for military good sense. I infinitely prefer it to the long circumlocutions of men of affairs. In ordinary human relationships, soldiers are often more pleasant, more relaxed and, it seems to me, often even more civil than other men. Amid political upheavals, they generally act as intrepid defenders of ancient beliefs, and the most dazzling sophistries are almost always wrecked on their uprightness. They willingly turn their attention to useful works and knowledge, political economy, for example. Perhaps the only work antiquity has left us on this subject is by a soldier, Xenophon, and the first recorded French work on the same subject is also by a soldier, Marshal de Vauban. In them religion combines with honor in a remarkable way; and even when religion reproaches them gravely for their conduct they will not refuse it their sword if it needs it. Much is said about the licence of camps; no doubt it is great, but usually the soldier does not find these vices in his camps; he carries them there. A moral and austere people always make excellent soldiers, frightening only on the battlefield. Virtue, even piety, easily allies itself with military courage, and, far from enfeebling the warrior, it exalts him.... Not only does the profession of arms generally ally itself very well with morality, but what is quite extraordinary is that it does not at all weaken those gentle virtues which seem the most opposed to military attitudes. The gentlest of men love war, desire war, and go to war with passion. At the first call, this likable young man here, brought up with a horror of violence and blood, rushes from his father's house, his weapons in his hand, to seek on the battlefield what he calls the enemy without yet knowing what an enemy is. Yesterday he would have fainted if he had accidentally killed his sister's canary; tomorrow you will see him climb a pile of corpses in order to see further, as Charron put it. The blood flowing on all sides serves only to inspire him to spill his own and that of others. He gradually inflames himself until he reaches an enthusiasm for carnage.

THE KNIGHT: You do not exaggerate. Before I was twenty-five, I had seen the enthusiasm for carnage three times. I have experienced it myself and I especially remember a terrible moment when I would have put an entire army to the sword if I had been able.

THE SENATOR: But if, at this moment, someone asked you to catch a white dove as cold-bloodedly as a cook, then-

THE KNIGHT: For shame, you make me sick at heart!

THE SENATOR: This is precisely what I was just talking about. The terrifying sight of carnage does not harden the warrior. Amid the blood he spills, he is humane, just as the wife is chaste in the transports of love. Once he has put back the sword into its scabbard, saintly humanity regains its sway, and perhaps the highest and most generous feelings are found among soldiers....

In short, gentlemen, the functions of the soldier are terrible, but they must result from a great law of the spiritual world, and no one should be astonished that every nation in the world is united in seeing in this scourge something still more peculiarly divine than in others. You can well believe that there is a good and profound reason for the title LORD OF HOSTS being found on every page of the Holy Scriptures. Guilty, and unhappy because we are guilty, we ourselves make necessary all physical evils, but above all war. Usually and very naturally, men lay the blame on their rulers: Horace wrote playfully, "By the madness of kings nations are punished." But J. B. Rousseau said more seriously and philosophically:

"The wrath of kings brings the earth to arms,
The wrath of Heaven brings kings to arms."
Notice, moreover, that this law of war, terrible in itself, is yet only a clause in the general law that hangs over the world.
In the immense sphere of living things, the obvious rule is violence, a kind of inevitable frenzy which arms all things in mutua funera. Once you leave the world of insensible substances, you find the decree of violent death written on the very frontiers of life. Even in the vegetable kingdom, this law can be perceived: from the huge catalpa to the smallest of grasses, how many plants die and how many are killed! But once you enter the animal kingdom, the law suddenly becomes frighteningly obvious. A power at once hidden and palpable appears constantly occupied in bringing to light the principle of life by violent means. In each great division of the animal world, it has chosen a certain number of animals charged with devouring the others; so there are insects of prey, reptiles of prey, birds of prey, fish of prey, and quadrupeds of prey. There is not an instant of time when some living creature is not devoured by another.

Above all these numerous animal species is placed man, whose destructive hand spares no living thing; he kills to eat, he kills for clothing, he kills for adornment, he kills to attack, he kills to defend himself, he kills for instruction, he kills for amusement, he kills for killing's sake: a proud and terrible king, he needs everything, and nothing can withstand him. He knows how many barrels of oil he can get from the head of a shark or a whale; in his museums, he mounts with his sharp pins elegant butterflies he has caught in flight on the top of Mount Blanc or Chimborazo; he stuffs the crocodile and embalms the hummingbird; on his command, the rattlesnake dies in preserving fluids to keep it intact for a long line of observers. The horse carrying its master to the tiger hunt struts about covered by the skin of this same animal. At one and the same time, man takes from the lamb its entrails for harp strings, from the whale its bones to stiffen the corsets of the young girl, from the wolf its most murderous tooth to polish frivolous manufactures, from the elephant its tusks to make a child's toy: his dining table is covered with corpses. The philosopher can even discern how this permanent carnage is provided for and ordained in the whole scheme of things. But without doubt this law will not stop at man. Yet what being is to destroy him who destroys all else? Man! It is man himself who is charged with butchering man.

But how is he to accomplish this law who is a moral and merciful being, who is born to love, who cries for others as for himself, who finds pleasure in weeping to the extent of creating fictions to make himself weep, to whom finally it has been said that whoever sheds blood unjustly will redeem it with the last drop of his own?[Genesis 9:6.] It is war that accomplishes this decree. Do you not hear the earth itself demanding and crying out for blood? The blood of animals does not satisfy it, nor even that of criminals spilled by the sword of the law. If human justice struck them all, there would be no war; but it can catch up with only a small number of them, and often it even spares them without suspecting that this cruel humanity contributes to the necessity for war, especially if at the same time another no less stupid and dangerous blindness works to diminish atonement among men. The earth did not cry in vain: war breaks out. Man, seized suddenly by a divine fury foreign to both hatred and anger, goes to the battlefield without knowing what he intends or even what he is doing. How can this dreadful enigma be explained? Nothing could be more contrary to his nature, yet nothing is less repugnant to him: he undertakes with enthusiasm what he holds in horror. Have you never noticed that no one ever disobeys on the field of death? They might well slaughter a Nerva or a Henry IV, but they will never say, even to the most abominable tyrant or the most flagrant butcher of human flesh, We no longer want to follow you. A revolt on the battlefield, an agreement to unite to repudiate a tyrant is something I cannot remember. Nothing resists, nothing can resist the force that drags man into conflict; an innocent murderer, a passive instrument in a formidable hand, he plunges unseeing into the abyss he himself has dug; he dies without suspecting that it is he himself who has brought about his death.[Psalm 9:16.]

Thus is worked out, from maggots up to man, the universal law of the violent destruction of living beings. The whole earth, continually steeped in blood, is nothing but an immense altar on which every living thing must be sacrificed without end, without restraint, without respite until the consummation of the world, the extinction of evil, the death of death.[I Corinthians 15:26.]

But the curse must be aimed most directly and obviously at man: the avenging angel circles like the sun around this unhappy globe and lets one nation breathe only to strike at others. But when crimes, especially those of a particular kind, accumulate to a certain point, the angel relentlessly quickens his tireless flight. Like a rapidly turned torch, his immense speed allows him to be present at all points on his huge orbit at the same time. He strikes every nation on earth at the same moment. At other times, minister of an unerring and infallible vengeance, he turns against particular nations and bathes them in blood. Do not expect them to make any effort to escape or abridge their sentence. It is as if these sinful nations, enlightened by conscience, were asking for punishment and accepting it in order to find expiation in it. So long as they have blood left, they will come forward to offer it, and soon golden youth will grow used to telling of devastating wars caused by their fathers' crimes.

War is thus divine in itself, since it is a law of the world.

War is divine through its consequences of a supernatural nature which are as much general as particular, consequences little known because they are little sought but which are nonetheless indisputable. Who could doubt the benefits that death in war brings? And who could believe that the victims of this dreadful judgment have shed their blood in vain? But this is not the time to insist on this kind of question; our age is not yet ready to concern itself with it. Let us leave it to its physics and for our own part keep our eyes fixed firmly to that invisible world which will explain everything.

War is divine in the mysterious glory that surrounds it and in the no less inexplicable attraction that draws us to it.

War is divine in the protection granted to the great leaders, even the most daring, who are rarely struck down in battle, and only when their renown can no longer be increased and when their mission is completed.

War is divine by the manner in which it breaks out. I do not want to excuse anyone inopportunely, but how many of those who are regarded as the immediate authors of wars are themselves carried along by circumstances! At the exact moment brought about by men and prescribed by justice, God comes forward to exact vengeance for the iniquity committed by the inhabitants of this world against him....

War is divine in its results which cannot be predicted by human reason, for they can be quite different for two different nations, although the war seems to have affected both equally. There are wars that degrade nations, and degrade them for centuries; others exalt them, improve them in all kinds of ways and, what is more extraordinary, very quickly replace momentary losses by a rapid increase in population. History often shows us the sight of a population growing in wealth and numbers during the most murderous conflicts; but there are vicious wars, accursed wars, more easily recognized by conscience than by reason: nations are mortally wounded by them, both in their power and in their character; then you can see the victor himself degraded, impoverished, and miserable among his victory laurels, whereas you will find that in the vanquished land, in a very short time, there is not an unused workshop or plow.

War is divine through the indefinable power that determines success in it. Surely you were not thinking, my dear Knight, when you repeated the other day the well-known saying that God is always on the side of the big battalions. I will never believe that it was really by the great man to whom it is attributed;[Turenne] perhaps he put forth this maxim as a jest, or seriously in a limited and very true sense, God in his providential temporal government does not depart (except in the case of miracles) from the general laws he has laid time. Thus, as two men are stronger than one, so a hundred thousand must be more powerful and effective than fifty thousand. When we ask God for victory, it would be foolish to be asking depart from the general laws of the world, but these laws combine in a thousand different ways and can bring victory in a manner cannot be foreseen. Doubtless three men are stronger than one: the general proposition cannot be contested; but one clever man can from certain circumstances, and one Horatius will kill three Curatii. A body with the greater mass has the greater momentum: this is true if speeds are equal, but three parts of mass and two of speed are equivalent to three of speed and two of mass. In the same way an army of forty thousand men is physically inferior to another of sixty thousand, but, if the former has more courage, experience, and discipline it can beat the latter, for it is more effective with fewer numbers. This we can witness on every page of history. Wars, moreover, suppose a certain equality, otherwise there would be no wars. I have never read of the Republic of Ragusa declaring war on the sultans, nor that of Geneva on the kings of France. There is always a certain balance in the political world and (if certain rare, precise, and limited cases are excepted) man cannot upset it at will. This is why coalitions are so difficult. If they were not, since politics is little governed by justice, there would be continual combinations to destroy a particular power; but such projects seldom succeed, and history shows even the weakest power escaping from them with an astonishing ease. When an overdominant power frightens the world, men are angry that no means have been found of checking it, and bitter reproaches are leveled against the selfishness and immorality of the rulers who are preventing an alliance to ward off the common danger. This was the cry heard at the height of Louis XIV's power. But at bottom these complaints are not valid. A coalition between several powers, based on a pure and disinterested morality, would be a miracle. God, who is not obliged to do miracles and never does one needlessly, uses two very simple means to restore the balance: sometimes the giant kills itself; sometimes a much weaker power throws in its path some small obstacle, which yet then grows in some unaccountable way and becomes insurmountable, just as a small branch, stuck in the current of a river, can in the end cause a blockage which diverts its course.

Starting, then, from this hypothesis of a balance, ever present at least in a rough form either because the belligerent powers are equal or because the weakest have allies, how many unforeseen circumstances can disrupt the balance and bring frustration or success to the greatest plans in spite of every prudential calculation! . . . Moreover, if you take a more general look at the role played by moral power in war, you will agree that nowhere does the divine hand make itself felt more acutely to man. It might be said that this is a department, if you will allow me the phrase, whose direction Providence has reserved to itself and in which it has left to man the ability to act only in a well-nigh mechanical manner, since success here depends almost entirely on something he can least control. At no time other than in war is he warned more often and more sharply of his own feebleness and of the inexorable power ruling all things. It is opinion that loses and wins battles. The fearless Spartan used to sacrifice from fear (Rousseau somewhere expresses astonishment at this, I don't know why); Alexander also sacrificed from fear before the Battle of Arbeh. Certainly these people were quite right and, to correct this sensible devotion, it is enough to pray to God that he deigns not to send fear to us. Fear! Charles V made great fun of that epitaph he read in passing, Here lies one who never felt fear. And what man never has felt fear in his life? Who has never had occasion to realize, both in himself, in those around him and in history, the way in which men can be overcome by this passion, which often seems to have the more sway over us the fewer the reasonable causes for it. Let us then pray, Knight, for it is to you that I should like to address this discourse, since you have called up these reflections; let us pray to God that he keeps us and our friends from fear, which is within his power and which can ruin in an instant the most splendid military ventures.

And do not be frightened by this word fear, for if you take it in its strictest sense you can say that the experience it expresses is rare and that it is shameful to be afraid of it. There is a womanish fear reflected in panicky flight, and this it is proper, even necessary, to dismiss entirely, although it is not a completely unknown sight. But there is another very much more terrible fear that descends on the most masculine heart, freezes it, and persuades it that it is beaten. This is the appalling scourge constantly hanging over armies. I put this question one day to a soldier of the highest rank whom you both know. Tell me, General, what is a lost battle? I have never been able to understand this. After a moment's silence, he answered, I do not know. After another pause he added, It is a battle one thinks one has lost. Nothing could be truer. One man fighting with another is beaten when he is killed or overthrown while the other is standing. It is not so with two armies; the one cannot be killed while the other remains on its feet. The balance of strength swings one way, then the other, as does the number of deaths, and, especially since the invention of gunpowder gave more equality in the means of destruction, a battle is no longer lost materially, that is to say, because there are more dead on one side than on the other. It was Frederick II, no mean thinker on this question, who said, To win is to advance. But who is the person who advances? It is he whose conscience and bearing make the other fall back. Do you recall, Count, that young soldier of your own acquaintance who one day portrayed to you in one of his letters that solemn moment when, without knowing why, an army feels itself carried forward, as if it was sliding down an inclined plane. I remember that you were struck by this phrase which indeed describes exactly the crucial moment; but this moment is far from a matter of reflection. Notice particularly that it is by no means a question of numbers. Has the soldier who slides forward counted the dead? Opinion is so powerful in war that it can alter the nature of the same event and give it two different names, for no reason other than its own whim. A general throws his men between two enemy armies and he writes to his king, I have split him, he has lost. His opponent writes to his king, He has put himself between two fires, he is lost. Which of the two is mistaken? Whoever is seized by the cold goddess. Assuming that all things, especially size, are at least approximately equal, the only difference between the two positions is a purely moral one. It is imagination that loses battles.

It is not even by any means always on the day they are fought that it is known whether they have been lost or won; it is on the next day, even two or three days afterward. Men talk a great deal about battles in ignorance of what they are. There is an especial tendency to consider them as happening on a particular spot, whereas they stretch over five or six miles. One is asked seriously, How is it that you do not know what happened in this battle when you were there? Whereas precisely the opposite could very often be Said. Does the man on the right flank know what is happening on the left? Does he even know what is happening two paces from him?

I can very well imagine one of these frightful scenes. On a vast field covered with all the apparatus of carnage and seeming to shudder beneath the feet of men and horses, amid the fire and the whirling smoke, dazed and befuddled by the din of firearms and cannons, by voices that command, howl, or die away, surrounded by dead, dying, and mutilated corpses, possessed in turn by fear, hope, anger, by five or six different passions, what happens to a man? What does he see? What does he know after a few hours? What can he know about himself and others? Among this host of fighting men who have battled the whole day, there is often not a single one, not even the general, who knows who the victor is. I need only cite modern battles to you, famous battles whose memory will never fade, battles which have changed the face of Europe, and which have been lost only because such and such a man has believed they were lost; whereas, in the same circumstances and with the same losses, another general would have had the Te Deum sung in his country and forced history to say quite the opposite of what it will say. But, I ask you, what age has seen moral power play a more astonishing role in war than our own? Is not what we have seen for the last twenty years truly magical? Without doubt it behoves men of this epoch to cry out:

"And what age has ever been more fertile in miracles?"...

EIGHTH DIALOGUE
THE KNIGHT: Our conversations started by an examination of the great and eternal complaint constantly being raised against the success of crime and the misfortune of virtue; and we have been wholly convinced that nothing in the world has less justification than this complaint and that, even for those who do not believe in another life, the path of virtue is the best way of securing the highest chance of temporal happiness. What has been said about punishment, illness, and remorse does not leave the slightest doubt on this point. I have paid particular attention to two fundamental axioms; namely, in the first place, that no man is punished because he is just, but always because he is a man, so that it is false that virtue suffers in this world; it is human nature that suffers and it always deserves it: and, second, that the greatest temporal happiness is not and cannot be promised to the virtuous man but to virtue. In fact it is enough to make the dispensation visible and irreproachable even in this world that the greatest volume of happiness goes to the greatest volume of virtues in general; and, given man as he is, our reason cannot even envisage another order of things which would have any appearance of rationality and justice. But, as there is no such thing as a just man, there is no one who has the right to refuse to accept readily his share of human miseries, since he is necessarily guilty or has guilty blood; which led us to a full examination of the whole theory of original sin, which is unhappily that of human nature. We have seen in savage tribes a pale image of the original crime; and, since man is only a talking animal, the degradation of language appears to us, not as the sign of human degradation, but as this degradation itself; which gave rise to several reflections on languages and on the origins of speech and ideas. These points cleared up, prayer naturally presented itself to us as a supplement to everything that had been said, since it is a remedy given to man to restrict the ravages of evil by perfecting himself, and since he should lay the blame only on his own defects if he refuses to make use of this remedy. We have considered the great objection raised against this word prayer by a foolish or guilty philosophy which, seeing physical pain as nothing but the inevitable result of the eternal laws of nature, persists in maintaining that for that very reason it could not be affected in the least by prayer. This fatal piece of sophistry has been discussed and countered in the greatest detail. The scourges which strike us, and which are very rightly called scourges of Heaven, seemed to us laws of nature in precisely the same way as punishments are laws of society, and are consequently only secondarily necessary, which should stimulate rather than discourage our prayer. Doubtless in this connection we could have contented ourselves with general ideas and lumped all these kinds of calamity together; however, we allowed the conversation to roam a little over this sad field, and war in particular occupied our attention. I assure you that, of all our digressions, this is the one that has held me most, for you have made me see the scourge of war from a point of view totally new to me, and I expect to think again on this matter with all my might--
THE SENATOR: Excuse me if I interrupt, Knight, but before leaving the interesting discussion on the sufferings of the just completely, I should like just to put to you one or two ideas which I believe to be well founded and which, to my mind, can make the temporal afflictions of this life appear as one of the greatest and most natural answers to all the objections raised on this point to divine justice. The just man, as a man, is subject to all the ills that threaten humanity and, precisely because he is submitted to them only as a man, he has no rightful grievance; you have observed this and nothing is clearer. But you have also observed, what unfortunately has no need of proof, that there is no such thing as a just man in the full rigor of the term; and it follows that every man has something to expiate. Now, if the just man (so far as he is possible) accepts the sufferings due to his being a man, and if divine justice in its turn accepts his acceptance, I think nothing could be more fortunate for him, nor so evidently just.

Moreover, I believe, in my soul and conscience, that if man could live in this world free from every kind of misfortune, be would end by degenerating to the point of forgetting completely all spiritual matters and God himself. In such a situation, how could he be interested in a superior order, seeing that, even in the world we actually inhabit, the miseries overwhelming us cannot disenchant us with the deceptive charms of this unhappy life?

THE KNIGHT: Perhaps I am wrong, but it seems to me that nothing could be more unfortunate than a man who had never experienced misfortune, for such a man could never be sure of himself or know his own worth. For the virtuous man, sufferings are what battles are for the soldier; they improve him and add to his worth. Does the brave soldier ever complain at being chosen always for the most hazardous expeditions? On the contrary, he seeks them out and glories in them; for him, sufferings are a job and death an adventure. Let the poltroon spend his life in frivolity as much as he likes, but let him not bemuse us with his impertinences about the unhappiness of those who do not resemble him. The comparison seems to me perfectly fair. If the brave man thanks the general who sends him to the assault, why should he not thank the God who imposes sufferings on him in the same way? I do not know how it comes about, but it is nevertheless certain that man gains in stature by voluntary suffering and that general opinion itself thinks the more of him for it. I have often noticed in regard to religious asceticism that the very vice that makes game of it cannot prevent itself from rendering homage to it. Has any libertine ever discovered a rich courtesan, who sleeps on feathers at midnight, happier than the austere Carmelite, who rises and prays for us at the same hour? But always I return to what you have so rightly observed, that there is no such thing as a just man. Thus it is by a special act of mercy that God punishes in this world rather than punishing much more severely in the next.

You should know, gentlemen, that there is nothing in which I believe more firmly than in purgatory. Why are sufferings not always proportionate to crimes? It strikes me especially that the new reasoners who have denied everlasting punishment make a strange blunder if they do not expressly admit purgatory, for, I ask you, whom can these people persuade that Robespierre's soul goes from the scaffold to God's arms like that of Louis XVI? Yet this view is not so uncommon as one might think. I have spent several years since my hegira in different parts of Germany where the doctors of law no longer want either hell or purgatory. Nothing could be more absurd. Whoever thought of having a soldier shot because he had stolen a clay pipe from a barrack room? Yet this pipe must not be stolen with impunity; the thief must be purged of his theft before he can take his place in line with his honest fellows .... Now, I claim that purgatory is a dogma of good sense; as every sin must be expiated in this world or the next, it follows that the afflictions visited by divine justice on men are a real benefit, since these punishments, when we have the wisdom to accept them, are, so to speak, deducted from those of the future. I should add that they are a manifest sign of love, for this anticipation or commutation of the punishment obviously excludes an eternal penalty. Whoever has not suffered in this world cannot be certain of anything, and the less he has suffered, the less sure he is. But I do not see what he can fear or, to put it more precisely, what he can allow himself to fear who has suffered without complaint.

COUNT: You have argued very soundly, Knight .... But I beg you to be on your guard against a slight confusion of ideas. There is no problem about the glory attached to the virtue that bears dangers, privations, and suffering tranquilly, for everyone is in agreement about this: the question is to know why it has pleased God to make this excellence necessary. You will find blasphemous and even simply facile men inclined to tell you that God would have done much better to exempt virtue from this sort of glory .... Even while putting this consideration to one side, you, Senator, have very properly recalled that every man suffers because he is a man, because he would be God if he did not suffer, and, because those who ask for a man beyond grief ask for another world. You added something no less indisputable when you said that, as no man is wholly righteous, that is to say, free from present sin (if saints, properly understood, are excepted, and they are very rare), God is really merciful to the guilty by punishing them in this world ....

The righteous, in suffering voluntarily, make amends not only for themselves but for sinners by way of substitution.

This is one of the greatest and most important truths of the spiritual order, but, to treat it fully, I should need more time than remains to me today. Let me then postpone the discussion until tomorrow and let me devote the remaining time this evening to developing one or two ideas that have struck me on this same subject.

It is said that reason alone cannot explain the success of the wicked and the sufferings of the righteous in this world. Which doubtless means that there is in the temporal order an injustice which violates the justice of God, otherwise the objection would have no sense. Now, as this objection can be heard from an atheist or a theist, I shall take to begin with the case of the atheist to avoid all confusion. You can see the intention of this on the part of one of these atheists by faith and profession.

I do not know if the unfortunate Hume himself knew what he was saying when he remarked so criminally, and even, with all his genius, so foolishly, that it is impossible to justify the character of the Divinity. To justify the character of an unknown being!

Again, what is the meaning of this? It seems to me that it all boils down to this reasoning--God is unjust; therefore he does not exist. How curious! This is as good as the Spinoza of Voltaire who said to God, Just between ourselves I believe that you do not exist. The unbeliever must therefore turn round and say that the existence of evil is an argument against the existence of God, for, if God existed, this evil, which is an injustice, would not exist. But then these gentlemen know that the God who does not exist is just by nature! They know the attributes of a chimerical being, and are ready to tell us to the last detail how God would be made if by chance there was one. In truth, there could be no more well-seasoned folly. If one could laugh on such a sad subject, who could refrain on hearing men, who have surely a head on their shoulders like us, argue against God using the very idea he has given to them of himself, without their thinking that this idea alone proves the existence of God, since one cannot have an idea of something that does not exist? . . . Man can conceive only what is; thus the atheist, to deny God, assumes him.

Moreover, gentlemen, all this is only a kind of preface to a favorite idea I should like to impart to you. Let me admit the foolish supposition of a hypothetical God, and admit further that the laws of the universe can be unjust or cruel in respect to us without their having a cogitative author: all this is the height of nonsense, but what follows from it against the existence of God? Nothing at all. A mind can prove itself to the mind only by means of proportionality. All other considerations can relate only to certain properties or qualities of the thinking subject, which have nothing in common with the basic question of existence.

Proportionality, gentlemen, proportionality. Or order and symmetry, for order is nothing but deliberate proportionality, and symmetry nothing but recognized and compared order.

I pray you, tell me if, when Nero formerly lighted his gardens with torches each of which enclosed and burned a living man, the alignment of these horrible torches did not prove to the onlooker an ordering intelligence just as much as the peaceable illuminations put on yesterday for the Queen Mother's name day? If the plague recurred each year during July, this pretty cycle would be just as regular as the return of harvest time. Let us start, then, by seeing if there is proportionality in the world, only then to seek if and why man is treated well or badly in this same world; this is a different question that can be looked at some other time and that has nothing to do with the first.

Proportionality is the obvious barrier between brute beasts and ourselves; in the spiritual as in the physical order, the use of fire distinguishes us from them in a sharp and unmistakable manner. God has given us proportionality, and it is by proportionality that he proves himself to us, as it is by proportionality that man proves himself to his fellows. Remove proportionality and you remove the arts, sciences, speech, and in consequence intelligence. Bring it back and with it reappear those two graces, harmony and beauty; cries become songs, noise receives rhythm, movements are dances, blind force is called dynamics, and doodles are shapes. A clear proof of this truth is that in languages (at least in those I know, and I believe the same is true in those I do not) the same words express the ideas of proportionality and of thought ....

Like beauty, intelligence takes pleasure in contemplating itself: the mirror of intelligence is proportionality. From this arises the liking we all have for symmetry, for every intelligent being likes on every side to recognize and find a place for its manifestation, which is order. Why are soldiers more pleasing to the eye in uniform than in mufti? Why would we rather see them marching in line than straggling? Why must the trees in our gardens, the dishes on our tables, the furniture in our houses be placed symmetrically to please us? Why do rhymes, meters, refrains, time, and rhythm delight us in music and poetry? Can it ever be imagined that there is, for example, any intrinsic beauty in rhyming couplets? This form and so many others can please us only because the intelligence takes pleasure in everything that proves intelligence and because its principal manifestation is proportionality. Thus it rejoices wherever it recognizes itself, and the pleasure symmetry gives us cannot have any other cause. But let us disregard this pleasure and examine only the thing in itself. Just as the words I am now speaking prove to you the existence of the speaker, and if they were written, would in the same way prove it to all those who read these words arranged according to the laws of syntax, so all created beings prove by their syntax the existence of a supreme writer who communicates with us by these symbols. Indeed, all these beings are letters whose combination forms a discourse proving God, that is to say, the intelligence that gives it: for there can be no discourse without a talking soul, or writing without a writer, unless one wants to hold that the rough curve I draw on paper with compasses adequately proves an intelligence that has drawn it while a similar curve described by a planet proves nothing, or that an achromatic telescope fully proves the existence of Dollond and of Ramsden while the eye, of which this wonderful instrument is only a gross imitation, does not prove in any way the existence of a supreme artist or an intention to prevent optical aberration! . . . Perhaps it will be said that this is chance: what nonsense! Some desperate madmen go about it in another way: they say, and I have heard this, that it is a law of nature. But what is a law? Is it the will of a legislator? In this case they are saying the same as we are. Is it the purely mechanical result of certain elements set going in a certain way? Then, as these elements must be set in order and work in some unvarying manner to produce a general and invariable order, the question comes up again, and it is found that, in place of one proof of order and the intelligence that has produced it, there are two; as if several dice thrown a great number of times all always show sixes, intelligence is proved by unvarying proportionality which is the effect, and the internal travail of the creator, which is the cause.

In a certain town excited by philosophic ferment, I have had reason to notice a curious fact. it is that the sight of order, of symmetry, and in consequence of proportionality and intelligence struck certain men, whom I remember clearly, too sharply for them to escape pangs of conscience, and they invented an ingenious subterfuge of which they made the greatest use. They began to maintain that it is impossible to recognize intention unless one knows the purpose of the intention. You cannot imagine how strongly they held to this idea, so attractive to them since it freed them from the common sense tormenting them. They made the study of intentions into a matter of the first importance, a kind of arcanum involving, according to them, profound knowledge and immense labors. I have heard them say, in talking of a great scientist who had said something of this sort, He dares to inquire even into final causes (this is what they call intentions). What a splendid effort! Another time they warned us to take great care not to mistake an effect for an intention, which would indeed be very dangerous as you can see, for if you come to the conclusion that God interferes in an automatic process, or that he has a certain intention whereas he formerly had another, what serious consequences would follow from such an error! . . . But, sooner or later, every argument comes back to their great maxim, that the intention cannot be proved so long as the purpose of the intention has not been proved. Yet I can imagine no grosser sophistry. How is it not seen that there can be no symmetry without purpose, since the symmetry itself is a purpose of the maker of symmetry? . . . Thus having no need of a purpose to support our conclusion, we need not reply to the sophist who asks us, What purpose? I have a canal cut around my country house: someone says, It is to preserve fish; someone else, It is as a protection against thieves; finally a third, It is to drain and reclaim the land. All of them could be mistaken, but he would certainly be right who restricted himself to saying, He has had it cut for ends known to himself ....

These philosophers talk of disorder in the world; but what is disorder? It is obviously a departure from order. Thus one cannot object to disorder without admitting a previous order and consequently intelligence ....

You see now the essence of the well-known argument, Either God could prevent the evil we see and was deficient in kindness; or, wishing to prevent it, he could not and was deficient in power. My God, what does this mean? It is not a question of either omnipotence or omni-benevolence, but only of existence and power. I well realize that God cannot change the natures of things, but I know only an infinitesimal part of their natures, so that I am ignorant of an infinitely large number of things that God cannot do, without ceasing because of that to be omnipotent. I do not know what is possible or what is impossible. In my lifetime, I have studied only proportionality; I believe only in proportionality; it is the mark, the voice, the speech of intelligence, and, since it is everywhere, I see it everywhere.

But let us leave the atheists, who fortunately are very few in number in the world, and take issue again with theism. I want to show myself just as obliging to the theist as I have been to the atheist, so he will not take it amiss if I start by asking him what an injustice is. If he does not concede to me that it is an act that violates a law, the word no longer has any meaning; and if he does not concede to me that law is the will of a legislator, manifested to his subjects to be their rule of conduct, I will understand the word law no better than the word injustice. Now I can understand how a human law can be unjust when it violates a divine or revealed or innate law. But the legislator of the universe is God. What, then, is an injustice of God in regard to men? Is there by any chance some common legislator above God who prescribes to him the way in which he should act toward men? And who will be the judge between this being and ourselves? If the theist believes that the idea of God does not involve the notion of a justice similar to ours, what is his complaint? He does not know what he is saying. But if, on the contrary, he believes God to be just according to our lights, while still complaining of the injustices he sees in our situation, he makes, without knowing it, a shocking contradiction, that is to say, the injustice of a just God. A certain order of things is unjust; therefore it cannot take place under the rule of a just God: this argument is only an error in the mouth of an atheist, but from a theist it is an absurdity. Once God is admitted, and once his justice is admitted as a necessary attribute of divinity, the theist cannot retrace his steps without talking nonsense, and he must say on the contrary, A certain order of things takes place under the rule of an essentially just God: thus this order of things is just for reasons of which we are ignorant, explaining the order of things by the attributes instead of foolishly condemning the attributes because of the order of things.

But I shall even accept from this imaginary theist the no less culpable and foolish proposition that there is no way of justifying the character of the Divinity.

What practical conclusion are we to draw from this? For this is the most important question. Allow me, I pray you, to set up this impressive argument: God is unjust, cruel, pitiless; God takes pleasure in the unhappiness of his creatures; therefore--here I pay attention to the grumblers--therefore apparently there is no need to pray to him. On the contrary, gentlemen, and nothing is more obvious, therefore it is necessary to pray to him and serve him with much more zeal and care than if his mercy was without bounds, as we think is the case. I should like to put a question to you. If you had lived under the rule of a prince, not, you will note, wicked, but only severe, touchy, never easy in his authority, and seeking to supervise every movement of his subjects, I am curious to know if you would have thought yourself able to take the same liberties as under the rule of another prince of a wholly opposite character, content with general liberty, always tender of individual freedom, and always fearing his own power so that no one else should fear it? Certainly not. Well, the comparison leaps to the eye and admits no reply. The more terrible God seems to us, the more we must increase our religious fear of him, the more ardent and indefatigable must be our prayers, for there is no reason for us to think that his goodness will make up for our ignoring them. Since the proof of the existence of God precedes that of his attributes, we know that he is before knowing what he is; it is even that we can never know fully what he is. Here we are then placed under an empire whose sovereign has proclaimed once for all the laws which regulate all things. These laws in general bear the stamp of a remarkable wisdom and even kindness: nevertheless some (I assume for the moment) seem hard, even unjust, if you like. That being the case, I ask all the discontented, what are we to do? To leave the empire, perhaps? Impossible; it is everywhere and all-embracing. Complain, take offense, write against the sovereign? This will result in chastisement or being put to death. There is no better course to take than that of resignation and respect, I might even say of love, for, as we start from the assumption that the master exists and that it is absolutely necessary to serve him, is it not better (whatever he is) to serve him with love than without?

I shall not go back over the arguments with which we have in our previous conversations refuted the complaints that the foolhardy have raised against Providence, but I think I should add that in these complaints there is something false and even foolish, or, as the English say, a certain non-sense that hits the eye. In fact what meaning have these sterile or culpable complaints, which do not provide man with any practical consequences, any guide capable of enlightening and improving him, complaints which on the contrary can only harm him, are useless even to the atheist since they do not touch on the basic truth and even argue against it, which are finally at once ridiculous and dangerous in the mouth of a theist, since they can end only by depriving him of love while leaving him with fear? For my own part, I do not know anything so contrary to the most elementary lessons of common sense.

But do you realize, gentlemen, the source of this flood of insolent doctrines which unceremoniously judge God and call him to account for his orders? They come to us from that great phalanx we call intellectuals and whom we have not been able in this age to keep in their place, which is a secondary one. At other times, there were very few intellectuals, and a very small minority of this very small minority were ungodly; today one sees nothing but intellectuals; it is a profession, a crowd, a nation; and among them the already unfortunate exception has become the rule. On every side they have usurped a limitless influence, and yet if there is one thing certain in this world, it is to my mind that it is not for science to guide men. Nothing necessary for this is entrusted to science. One would have to be out of one's mind to believe that God has charged the academies with teaching us what he is and what we owe to him. It rests with the prelates, the nobles, the great officers of state to be the depositaries and guardians of the saving truths, to teach nations what is bad and what good, what true and what false in the moral and spiritual order: others have no right to reason on this kind of matter. They have the natural sciences to amuse them, what are they complaining about? As for those who talk or write to deprive a people of a national belief, they should be hung like housebreakers. Rousseau himself agreed with this without dreaming of what he was demanding for himself.[Social Contract [Book iv, Chap. viii].] What folly it was to grant everyone freedom of speech This is what has ruined us. The so-called philosophers have all a certain fierce and rebellious pride which does not compromise with anything; they detest without exception every distinction they themselves do not enjoy; they find fault in every authority; they hate anything above them. If they are allowed, they will attack everything, even God, because he is master. See if it is not the same men who have attacked both kings and the God who established them ....

NINTH DIALOGUE
SENATOR: Well, Count, are you ready to take up the question you were talking about yesterday?
THE COUNT: I shall leave no stone unturned, gentlemen, to meet your wishes, according to my power; but allow me first of all to point out to you that all sciences have their mysteries and show at certain points a contradiction between the apparently most obvious theory and experience. Politics, for instance, gives a number of illustrations of this truth. Is there anything more absurd in theory than hereditary monarchy? We judge it by experience, but if government had never been heard of and it was necessary to set one up, whoever hesitated between hereditary and elective monarchy would be regarded as a madman. Yet we know from experience that, everything considered, the first is the best imaginable and the second the worst. How many arguments there are for showing that sovereignty derives from the people! Yet it is nothing of the sort. Sovereignty is always taken, never given; and a second, more profound theory then brings out that this must be so. Who would not say that the best political constitution is that which has been debated and written by statesmen thoroughly acquainted with the national character, who have foreseen all circumstances? Nevertheless nothing could be falser. The best-constituted people are those which have the fewest written constitutional laws; and every written constitution is sterile ....

We should not then be astonished if, in other branches of knowledge, particularly in metaphysics and natural history, we come across propositions which offend our reason deeply and yet which are then demonstrated by the most solid arguments.

Among the most important of these propositions must be ranged one that I was happy to put yesterday, that the righteous, suffering willingly, make amends not only for themselves but also for the culpable who, of themselves, could not expiate themselves ....

Men have never doubted that innocence can make amends for transgression and have believed, moreover, that there is an expiatory power in blood; so that life, which is blood, can atone for another life.

Look at this belief closely and you will see that if God himself had not put it into the human mind, it could never have been thought of. The big words superstition and prejudice explain nothing, for no error has ever been universal and constant. If a false opinion holds sway over a people, you will not find it among its neighbor; or if sometimes it seems to stretch, perhaps not over the whole world, but over a great number of nations, the passing of time will efface it.

But the belief I am talking about has been held at all times and in ~6 all places. Ancient and modern nations, civilized or barbaric nations, advanced or backward ages, true or false religions, there has not been one voice of disagreement in the world.

Finally, the idea of sin and that of sacrifice for sin were so closely identified in the minds of men of antiquity that the holy language expressed both by the same word. Hence that well-known Hebrew phrase, used by Saint Paul, that God made the Saviour to be sin for us[2 Corinthians 5:21.]....

Humanity professed these dogmas from the time of its fall, until the greatest of victims, raised to draw all to him, cried,

ALL THINGS ARE ACCOMPLISHED.
Then the veil of the Temple was rent in twain, the great secret of the sanctuary was known, so far as it can be known in the order of things of which we form part. We understood why men had always believed that one soul could be saved by another and why they had always sought regeneration in blood.
Without Christianity man does not know what he is because he is alone in the universe and cannot compare himself with anything; the prime service this religion renders to him is to show him his value by showing him what he has cost.

BEHOLD IT IS A GOD WHO HAS A GOD KILLED.
[Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound, 92.]
Yes, let us behold it attentively, my friends, and we shall see everything in this sacrifice: the enormity of the crime that called for such an expiation, the incredible grandeur of the being capable of committing it, the boundless value of the victim who said, Lo, I come.[Psalm 40:7; Hebrews 10:7.]

Now, it can be seen that, on the one side, this whole doctrine of antiquity was only the prophetic cry of humanity heralding salvation by blood, and that, on the other, Christianity came to justify this prophecy, substituting reality for myth, so that an innate and basic dogma continually foretold the great sacrifice which is the basis of the new revelation, and this new revelation, glittering with all the brightness of truth, proves in its turn the divine origin of the dogma which we see constantly like an oasis of light among the shadows of paganism. This agreement is one of the most stirring proofs it is possible to imagine.

But these truths are not proved by calculation or by mechanical laws. The man who has lived his life without ever tasting the divine fruits, who has narrowed his mind and dried up his heart with sterile speculations incapable either of making him better in this life or of preparing him for the next; such a man, I say, will reject this kind of proof and will not even understand it. There are truths that men can grasp only with the imagination of their hearts.[Luke 1:51] Often the upright man is shaken by seeing men whose minds he admires reject proofs which seem to him to be clear: this is a pure illusion. These men lack a sense, that is all. If the cleverest man has not the religious sense, not only can we not beat him in argument, but we lack even any means to make ourselves understood to him, which proves nothing except his misfortune ....

I should have to go into much greater detail to plumb the depths of the fascinating subject of sacrifices, but I should abuse your patience, and be afraid of going astray. It is one of those questions that require all the calm of a written discussion to be treated in depth.[See Enlightenment on Sacrifices.] I think, my good friends, that we have at least learned sufficient about it to deal with the sufferings of the just. This world is an army, an eternal battle. All those who have fought courageously in a battle are doubtless worthy of praise, but doubtless also the greatest glory belongs to those who return from it wounded .... As we have so often said, there are no wholly righteous men; but, if there was a man sufficiently righteous to merit the approval of his Creator, who could be astonished if God, ATTENTIVE TO HIS OWN WORK, takes pleasure in improving him? The father of a family can laugh at a coarse servant who curses or lies, but his tenderly severe hand punishes rigorously these same faults in an only son for whom he would freely lay down his life. If tenderness forgives nothing, it is because there is no longer anything to forgive. In visiting misfortune on the righteous man, God purifies him of his past faults, puts him on guard against future faults, and prepares him for Heaven. Without doubt he takes pleasure in seeing him escape the inevitable justice awaiting him in another world. Is there a greater joy for love than the submission that disarms it? And when one thinks, moreover, that these sufferings are not only useful to the righteous but also that they can, by a holy agreement, profit the guilty, and that in suffering thus they really sacrifice themselves for all men, one will agree that it is in fact impossible to imagine a sight more worthy of the Divinity.

One more word on the sufferings of the righteous. Do you by any chance believe that the viper is venomous only at the moment it bites and that the man afflicted with epilepsy is truly epileptic only when he is having a fit?

THE SENATOR: What is your point, my worthy friend?

THE COUNT: I am not going a long way round, as you will see. The man who knows men only by their actions calls them wicked only when he sees them commit a crime. Yet we might as well believe that the viper's venom is engendered at the moment of the bite. The event does not create wickedness; it manifests it. But God who sees all things, God who knows our most intimate inclinations and thoughts much better than men know one another through the senses, uses punishment prophylactically and strikes the man who seems to us healthy to extirpate the disease before the seizure. Often in our blind impatience we complain of the delays of Providence in punishing crimes; and, by a curious contradiction, we still blame it when with salutary speed it represses vicious inclinations before they have given rise to transgressions.

Sometimes God spares a known sinner, since punishment would be useless, whereas he chastises the hidden sinner since this chastisement will save a man. Thus the wise doctor avoids tiring an incurable patient by useless remedies and operations. "Leave him," he advises, "keep him amused; give him everything he asks for." But if the nature of things allowed him to see clearly in the body of an apparently healthy man the germ of an illness which will kill him tomorrow or in ten years, would he not advise him to submit to the most distasteful remedies and the most painful operations in order to escape death? And if a coward preferred death to pain, would not the doctor, whose eye and hand we suppose to be equally infallible, advise his friends to tie him down and save him in spite of himself for his family? Those surgical instruments whose sight sickens us--the saw, the trepan, the forceps, the cystotome--have presumably not been invented by some evil genius of humanity. Well, these instruments are in man's hand, for the cure of physical ills, what physical ills are in God's hand, for the extirpation of true ills. Can a dislocated or fractured limb be restored without pain? Can a hemorrhage or an internal complaint be cured without abstinence, without privations of all kinds, without a more or less tedious regimen? In the whole of pharmacology, how many remedies are there that do not revolt our senses? Are sufferings, even those caused immediately by illnesses, anything other than the effort of life to preserve itself? In the sensory as in the higher order, the law is the same and is as old as evil: THE REMEDY FOR DISORDER WILL BE PAIN ....

TENTH DIALOGUE
THE SENATOR: It seems to me, Count, that you have put the principle of sacrifices beyond any attack and have drawn from it a host of useful conclusions. I believe, moreover, that the theory of substitution is so natural to man that it can be regarded as an innate truth in the full meaning of the term, since it is absolutely impossible that we have learned it. But do you think that it is equally impossible to discover or at least to catch a glimpse of the reason for this universal belief?
The more one looks at the world, the more one feels oneself led to believe that evil derives from some kind of inexplicable discord and that the return to good depends on an opposite force which constantly impels us toward some kind of unity just as inexplicable. This community of deserts, this substitution that you have so well proved, can come only from this unity beyond our comprehension. Reflecting on the general beliefs and natural instincts of men, one is struck by the tendency they have to unite things that nature seems to have totally separated. For example, they are very much inclined to regard a people, a town, a corporation, and above all a family as a single moral being, having good and bad qualities, open to praise or blame and consequently open to reward and punishment. From this stems the prejudice or, more exactly, the dogma of nobility, so generally held and deeply rooted amongst men. If you submit this to the bar of reason, it will not pass the test, for, if we consult nothing but reason, there is no distinction more foreign to us than that which we owe to our ancestors: yet there is none more esteemed or even more willingly recognized except in factious times, and even then the attacks made on it are still an indirect homage and a formal recognition by those who would like to destroy it.

If glory is hereditary in the eyes of all men, so too is blame, and for the same reason. It is sometimes unthinkingly asked why the shame of a crime or a punishment should fall on the descendants of the criminal; yet those who put this question then brag about the merits of their ancestors: it is an obvious contradiction ....

Could not this same theory throw some light on the dark mystery of the punishment of sons for the crimes of their fathers? At first sight nothing is so shocking as a hereditary malediction; yet why not, since benediction is also hereditary? And notice that these ideas do not come only from the Bible, as is often imagined. This fortunate or unfortunate heredity belongs to all times and all countries: it belongs to paganism as well as to Judaism or Christianity, to the infancy as well as the old age of nations; the idea is found in theologians, philosophers, poets, in the theater and in the Church ....

The family is no doubt composed of individuals who, according to reason, have nothing in common, but, according to instinct and general persuasion, every family is one.

This unity is especially conspicuous in reigning families: the sovereign changes his name and face, but he is always, as they say in Spain, THE KING HIMSELF. You Frenchmen, Knight, have two acute maxims, truer perhaps than you think; one of civil law, The dead distrain the living; the other of constitutional law, The king does not die. Therefore a king should not be treated as a separate entity when the time comes to judge him.

People are sometimes astonished at seeing an innocent monarch perish miserably in one of those political upheavals so frequent in the world. You can well believe that I have no wish to stifle compassion in men's hearts, and you know how much recent crimes have wrung my own; nevertheless, if I stick to strict logic, what can be said? Every culprit can be innocent and even saintly on the day of his punishment. There are crimes which become obvious and are consummated only after a long interval: there are others which consist in many acts more or less excusable taken separately, but whose repetition in the end becomes highly criminal. In this sort of case, it is obvious that the penalty cannot precede the completion of the crime.

Even in instantaneous crimes, punishments are always suspended, and this must be the case. This is again one of those instances when human justice serves as an interpreter of that justice of which it is simply an image and a branch.

A thoughtless or frivolous act, a breach of some bylaw, can be countered at once, but in questions of crime properly speaking the culprit is never punished the moment he becomes one. Under the rule of Muslim law, authority punishes, even with death, the man it thinks deserves it at the very moment and place it seizes him; this brusque enforcement of the law, which has not lacked blind admirers, is nevertheless one of the many proofs of the brutalization and divine censure of these peoples. Among us, things are quite different. The culprit must be arrested, he must be charged, he must defend himself, he must above all settle his conscience and his worldly affairs, practical arrangements for his punishment must be made; finally, to take everything into account, a certain time must be left to take him to the appointed place of punishment. The scaffold is an altar: it cannot therefore be either set up in a certain place or moved except by authority. These delays, praiseworthy in their very excessiveness yet still not lacking their blind detractors, are no less a proof of our superiority.

If then it happens that, during the inevitable interval between the crime and its punishment, sovereignty changes hands, what does this matter to justice? It must take its ordinary course. Even disregarding the unity I am reflecting upon at the moment, nothing is more humanly just, for nowhere can the rightful heir avoid paying the debts of his inheritance, unless he renounces it. The sovereign is responsible for all the acts of sovereignty. All its debts, all its treaties, all its crimes bind him. If, by some dissolute act, he sows a bad seed today whose natural growth will bring about a catastrophe in a hundred years' time, the blow will fall with justice on the crown in a hundred years' time. To escape the penalty, the king would have to refuse the crown. It is not THIS king, it is THE king who is innocent or guilty ....

Having looked at man, let us look at his most wonderful characteristic, speech. Again we find the same mystery, that is to say, an inexplicable division and just as inexplicable a tendency toward some kind of unity. The two greatest dates in the spiritual calendar are without doubt that of Babel, when languages split up, and that of Pentecost, when they made a prodigious attempt to unite: on this it can be remarked in passing that the two most extraordinary wonders of which mention is made in human history are at the same time the most certain facts we possess. Anyone who contests them must lack both reason and integrity ....

Our mutual unity results from our unity in God praised by philosophy itself. Malebranche's theory of vision in God is only a superb commentary on the well-known words of Saint Paul, For in him we live, and move, and have our being.[Acts 17, 28.] The pantheism of the Stoics and that of Spinoza is a corruption of this great idea, but it is still the same principle, it is still this tendency toward unity. The first time I read in the work of the worthy Malebranche, so neglected by his unjust and blind country, that God is the locus of souls as space is the locus of bodies, I was dazzled by this flash of genius and ready to prostrate myself before it. Few sayings are as beautiful ....

Sometimes I should like to leap beyond the narrow limits of this world, to anticipate the day of revelations and lose myself in infinity. When the twofold law of human nature is annulled and man's two poles are merged, he will be ONE, for, being no longer torn by inner conflict, how could the idea of duality occur to him? But, if we consider men in their relations with one another, what will they be like when evil is destroyed and with it passion and personal interests? What will become of the EGO when all thoughts, like all desires, are common, when every mind will see itself as others see it. Who can comprehend, who can imagine this heavenly Jerusalem all of whose inhabitants, filled with the selfsame spirit, will fuse together and reflect happiness on one another? A countless number of shining specters of the same size, coming together on exactly the same spot, are no longer a countless number; they become a single, intensely shining specter. However, I am taking good care not to deal with individuality, without which immortality is nothing; but I cannot avoid being struck by the fact that everything leads us back to this mysterious unity.

Saint Paul invented a word that has passed into every Christian language; it is to edify, a word which is at first sight very surprising, for what is there in common between the construction of an edifice and good advice given to one's fellow creature.

But the root of this expression is soon unearthed. Vice separates men, just as virtue unites them. There is no act against order that is not born of an individual interest contrary to the general order; there is no pure act that does not sacrifice an individual interest to the general interest, that is to say, that does not tend to create one indivisible and steady will in place of a multitude of divergent and culpable wills. Saint Paul then started from the fundamental idea that we are all God's edifice, and that this edifice we must build is the body of the Saviour.[1 Corinthians 3:9-11.] He turned this idea to many uses. He wanted us to edify one another; that is, he wanted each man freely to take his place as a stone in the spiritual edifice and to strive with all his might to call others to the same task, so that every man edifies and is edified. Above all, he gave us the well-known saying, Knowledge puffs up but charity edifies,[1 Corinthians 8:1.] an admirable and strikingly true phrase, for knowledge left to itself divides rather than unites and all its works are only appearances, while virtue truly edifies and indeed cannot act without edifying. Saint Paul had read in the sublime testament of his master that men are one and many like God,[John 17:11, 21, 22.] so that all are brought to fulfillment and perfected in unity,[Ibid., 17:23] for until then the work is unfinished. And how could there not be some kind of unity (let it be and be called what you will) between us, since a single man ruined us by a single act? I am not here arguing in a circle, proving unity by the origin of sin and the origin of sin by unity: not at all, sin is only too well proved by its existence, being everywhere and especially in ourselves. But of all possible theories explaining its origin, none satisfies good sense, the enemy of quibbling, so much as the belief that sees it as the hereditary result of an original transgression and that has the weight of every human tradition in its support.

The fall of man can thus be numbered among the proofs of human unity and can help us to understand how, by the law of analogy that rules all divine things, salvation likewise came from a single man ... [Romans 5:17.]

Following this train of thought, Count, do you think it completely impossible to form some idea of this joint responsibility between men (if you will allow this legal term), from which flows the reversibility of deserts that explains everything?

THE COUNT: It would be impossible, my good friend, to tell you, however imperfectly, how much pleasure your discourse has given me, but I confess with a frankness your worth demands that this pleasure is mixed with a certain fear. The path you have taken can only too easily lead you astray, more especially as you have not, like me, a light to guide you at all times and over any distance. Is it not foolhardy to want to understand things so far above us? Men have always been attracted to unusual ideas that flatter the pride: it is so pleasant to walk along out-of-the-way paths previously untrodden by human feet! But what is the point? Does man become better by it? For that is the important question. Why should we place our trust in these beautiful theories if they cannot lead us very far or in the right direction? I admit that there were some very profound insights in everything you have just said, but, to repeat myself, are we not running two grave risks--of going astray in a fatal manner and of losing in vain speculation precious time that could be better spent in useful study and perhaps even discoveries?

THE SENATOR: Precisely the opposite is true, my dear Count. No studies are more useful than those that have the intellectual world for their subject, and they form the best road to discoveries. Everything that can be known in theoretical philosophy is to be found in a passage of Saint Paul; this is it:

THIS WORLD IS A SYSTEM OF INVISIBLE THINGS VISIBLY MANIFESTED ....
If you consider that everything has been made by and for intelligence; that all motion is an effect, so that properly speaking the cause of a movement cannot be a movement; that the words cause and matter are as mutually exclusive as circle and triangle; and that everything in this world we see is related to another world we do not see; then you will accept easily that we do indeed live in a system of invisible things visibly manifested. Run your eye over the sciences and you will see that they all start from a mystery ....
There is therefore no law of the natural world that has not behind it (if you will allow this ridiculous phrase) a spiritual law of which the former is only a visible expression; and this is why no explanation of cause in material terms will ever satisfy a good mind. Once you leave the sphere of material and sensory experience to enter that of pure philosophy, you must leave matter and explain everything metaphysically. I mean here the true metaphysics, and not that which has been cultivated so ardently for the last century by men who are seriously called metaphysicians. Splendid metaphysicians, who have spent their lives proving that there is no such thing as metaphysics, famous ruffians in whom genius was brutalized!

Thus, my worthy friend, it is absolutely certain that one cannot succeed except by those out-of-the-way paths you fear so much. But if I am not successful, either because I lack the ability or because authority has raised barriers along my route, is not the knowledge that I am on the right road an important point in itself? Every inventor, every man of originality has been religious and even fanatically so. Perverted by irreligious skepticism, the human mind is like waste land that produces nothing or is covered with weeds useless to man. At such a time even its natural fertility is an evil, for these weeds harden the soil by tangling and intertwining their roots and moreover create a barrier between the sky and the earth. Break up these accursed clods; destroy these fatally hardy weeds; call on every human aid; drive in the plow; dig deep to bring into contact the powers of the earth and the powers of the sky.

Here, gentlemen, is the natural analogy to the human intelligence opened or closed to divine knowledge.

The natural sciences themselves are subject to the general law. Genius does not rely much on the slow crawl of logic. Its gait is free, its manner derives from inspiration; one can see its success, but no one has seen its progress .... Let no one appeal to enlightenment and to mysticism. These words mean nothing, and yet it is with this nothing that genius is intimidated and its way to discoveries barred. Certain philosophers in this age have taken it into their heads to talk of causes, but when will it be understood that there cannot be causes in the material order, for they must all be sought in another sphere?

Now, if this is the rule, even in the natural sciences, why, in sciences of a preternatural kind, should we not devote ourselves to researches that we can also call preternatural? I am surprised, Count, to find prejudices in you from which the independence of your mind should have been able to escape easily.

THE COUNT: I assure you, my dear friend, that there might well have been a misunderstanding between us, as happens in most discussions. God preserve me from ever intending to deny that religion is the mother of knowledge. Theory and experience join forces to announce this truth. The scepter of science belongs to Europe only because it is Christian. It has reached this high point of civilization and knowledge only because it has started from theology, because its universities were in the beginning nothing but theological schools, and because all the sciences, grafted onto this divine subject, have shown their divine sap by their long vegetation. The indispensable necessity for this lengthy development of the European genius is a basic truth that has totally escaped modern thinkers. Bacon himself, whom you have rightly criticized, was as mistaken about this as lesser men. His treatment of the subject is extremely amusing, especially when he flares up about scholasticism and theology. It must be agreed that this famous man appeared completely to disregard the preparations necessary if science is not to be a great evil. Teach young people physics and chemistry before having steeped them in religion and morality, or send scientists before missionaries to a new nation, and you will see the result. I believe it can even be proved conclusively that there is in science, if it is not entirely subordinated to the national creed, some hidden element that tends to degrade man and above all to make him a useless or bad citizen. Properly worked out, this principle would provide a clear and decisive solution to the difficult problem of the utility of the sciences, a problem that Rousseau greatly confused in the middle of the last century by his treacherous mind and his half-knowledge.

Why are intellectuals almost always bad statesmen and in general inept in administration?

What is the reason that, on the contrary, priests (I repeat PRIESTS) are statesmen by nature? In other words, why does the sacerdotal order produce more of them in proportion than all the other orders of society? Why especially does it produce more of those natural statesmen, if I can use the phrase, who throw themselves into government and succeed without preparation, such as for instance those whom Charles V and his son employed a great deal and who played such a striking role in history?

Why has the noblest, strongest, and most powerful of monarchies been literally made by BISHOPS (this is Gibbon's confession) as a hive is made by bees?

I could go on endlessly about this great subject; but, my dear Senator, for the very benefit of this religion and the respect due to it, let us remember that it commends nothing to us so strongly as simplicity and obedience. Who knows our clay better than God? I dare say that what we ought to be ignorant of is more important for us than what we ought to know. If he has put certain subjects outside our range of vision, it is doubtless because it would be dangerous for us to perceive them clearly. I wholeheartedly accept and admire your simile of the earth open or closed to the influences of the sky; yet take care not to draw a false conclusion from an obvious principle. That religion and even piety are the best preparations for the human mind, that they incline it, as far as individual capacity allows, to every kind of knowledge, and that they set the mind on the road to discoveries, these are matters beyond dispute for every man who has even moistened his lips on the cup of true philosophy. But what conclusion should we draw from these truths? That we must make every effort to penetrate the mysteries of this religion? Not at all; allow me to say that this is sheer sophistry. The legitimate conclusion is that we must subordinate our learning to religion, hold firmly that we study by praying, and above all, when we are concerned with pure philosophy, never forget that every metaphysical proposition that does not issue from a Christian dogma is and can be nothing but a culpable extravagance. This is sufficient for our practical life, and what does all the rest matter?

I have followed with keen interest everything you have told us about this incomprehensible unity, the necessary basis for substitution which would explain all things if they could be explained. I applaud your learning and the way in which you are able to draw it together: yet what advantage does it give you over me? I believe in substitution just like you, as I believe in Peking just as much as the missionary we dined with the other day who has returned from there. When you penetrate the reason for this dogma, you will lose the merit of faith, not only without profit but also with very grave danger to yourself, for, in this event, you will not be able to answer for the direction of your thoughts. Do you remember what we read together some time ago in a book of Saint-Martin? That the rash chemist runs the risk of adoring his own work. This is not an idle phrase: did not Malebranche say that a false belief about the efficacy of secondary causes could lead to idolatry? It is the same idea . . . We often talk with an inane surprise about the absurdity of idolatry, but I can well assure you that, if we had the learning which misled the first idolaters, we would all be idolaters or at least God could mark down for himself barely twelve thousand men in each tribe. We always start from the banal hypothesis that man has gradually raised himself from barbarism to science and civilization. This is the favorite dream, the root error, and as the school has it, the protopseudodox of our time. But if the philosophers of this unhappy age, with the horrible perversity that marks them and the obstinacy that they still persist in despite the warnings they have had, had possessed in addition some of the acquirements which the first men must have had, woe betide the world! They would have brought on humanity some catastrophe of a supernatural order. Just look at what they have achieved and have drawn on us in spite of their profound ignorance of the spiritual sciences.

I am therefore completely opposed to all inquisitive research that moves outside man's temporal sphere. Religion is the spice that prevents science becoming tainted: Bacon put this excellently and, for once, I have no wish to criticize him. I am just a little tempted to think that he did not himself take sufficient heed of his own maxim, since he worked expressly to divide the spice from science.

Again notice that religion is the greatest vehicle of science. No doubt it cannot create talent which does not exist, but it exalts it without stint wherever it finds it, especially the talent for discoveries, whereas irreligion always restrains and often stifles it. What more do we want? We are not allowed to fathom the secrets of this instrument that has been given to us to fathom secrets. It is too easy to break it or, what is worse perhaps, to make it false. I thank God for my ignorance still more than for my knowledge; for my knowledge is mine, at least in part, and in consequence I cannot be sure that it is good, but my ignorance, at least that of which I am speaking, is his, therefore I trust it fully. I shall not go and try to scale the necessary wall with which the divine wisdom has surrounded us; on this side, I am certain to stand on the grounds of truth, but who can vouch that on the other (to put it in its best light) I shall not find myself in the field of superstition?

THE KNIGHT: Between two superior combatant powers, a third, although very weak, can well come forward as a mediator, provided that it is acceptable to them and acts in good faith.

It seems to me first of all, Senator, that you have been a little too indulgent to your religious ideas. You say the explanation of causes must always be sought outside the material world, and you cite Kepler who reached his famous discoveries by some system or another of celestial harmony, about which I am wholly ignorant; but I do not see in all this a shadow of religion. It is quite possible to be a composer and work out chords without being pious. It seems to me that Kepler could very well have discovered his laws without believing in God.

THE SENATOR: You have replied to yourself, Knight, by saying outside the material world. I did not say that each discovery must issue from a dogma as the chicken comes from the egg: I said that there are no causes in matter and that consequently they should not be sought in matter. Now, my dear friend, only religious men want to or can go outside it. The others believe only in the material world and get angry if one so much as talks to them of another order of things. Our age must have a mechanistic astronomy, a mechanistic chemistry, a mechanistic gravity, a mechanistic morality, a mechanistic language, mechanistic remedies to cure mechanistic illnesses, and goodness knows what else besides--is not everything mechanistic? Now, only the religious spirit can cure this disease. We talked of Kepler, but Kepler would never have taken such a fruitful path if he had not been eminently religious ....

THE KNIGHT: All right, I am no match for you in argument, but there is one point on which I should still like to quarrel with you. Our friend has said that your taste for out-of-the-way explanations could perhaps lead you and others into very grave dangers and that moreover they have the serious disadvantage of being prejudicial to useful studies. To this you replied that precisely the opposite was true and that nothing favors the advancement of the sciences and of discoveries of every kind so much as the cast of mind that carries us continually outside the material world. Again this is a point on which I do not think myself capable of arguing with you, but what seems to me to be clear is that you have left on one side the other objection, and yet it is a serious one. I agree that mystical and extraordinary ideas can sometimes lead to important discoveries, but the drawbacks that can result from them must be put into the opposite side of the balance. Let us agree, for example, that they can inspire a Kepler; if nevertheless they necessarily produce ten thousand fools who disturb and even corrupt the world, I feel very inclined to sacrifice the great man.

Thus, if you will forgive my impertinence, I think that you have gone a little too far and that it would not be a bad thing for you to be a little more suspicious of your spiritual impulses: at least, I would never have said so much, as far as I can judge. But, as the duty of a mediator is to deny and to concede something to both parties, I must also tell you, Count, that you seem to me to push timidity to excess. I congratulate you on your religious obedience. I have seen much of the world, and, truly, I have found nothing more impressive, but I cannot easily understand how faith leads you to fear superstition. Quite the opposite should happen, it seems to me; I am more surprised that you bear so much ill-will toward this superstition which does not seem to me such a bad thing. What is superstition at bottom? . . . It is neither error nor fanaticism, nor any other monster of this kind under another name. I repeat, what is then superstition? Does not super mean beyond? Superstition will therefore be something which goes beyond a sufficient belief. Really, there is nothing in this to raise a hue and cry. I have often noticed that in this world what suffices is not sufficient; do not take this as a play on words, for he who wants to do just what is permissible will soon do what is not. We are never sure of our moral qualities except when we have been able to exalt them a little. In the political world, the constitutional powers established in free nations scarcely exist except by coming into conflict. If someone comes to knock you over, it is not enough to stand your ground; you must hit him yourself and make him retreat if you can. To jump a ditch, you must always fix your eyes well beyond the bank if you do not want to fall in. Indeed, this is a general rule; it would be very peculiar if religion was an exception to it. I do not think that a man, and still less a nation, can believe just what he should. He will always fall a little above or a little below the mark. I imagine, my good friends, that honor cannot fail to please you. Yet what is honor? It is the superstition of valor or it is nothing. In love, friendship, loyalty, sincerity, and so on, superstition is pleasing, even valuable and often necessary; why should not the same be true of piety? I am inclined to believe that the outcries against the excesses of a thing start from the enemies of the thing. Reason is no doubt good, but it is very far from the case that everything ought to be settled by reason ....

I believe that superstition is an advanced fortification of religion which must not be destroyed, for it would not be safe to allow men to come unimpeded to the foot of the wall to measure its height and set up ladders. You will use errors as an argument against me; but first, do you not think that mistakes about something divine have certain natural limits in the very nature of the case and that the disadvantages of these mistakes could never outweigh the danger of unsettling belief? To follow my metaphor, I shall add that, if an advanced fortification is too far forward, this is also a great error, for it is useful only to the enemy who will make use of it to take cover and to attack the town: is it necessary then not to set up advanced fortifications at all? With such an exaggerated fear of mistakes, one would end by no longer daring to move ....

THE COUNT: I should like to put to you an idea that might well, it seems to me, serve as a peace treaty between us. It has always appeared to me that, in higher metaphysics, there are rules of trial and error as there were formerly in arithmetic, This is how I regard all opinions which depart from express revelation and which are employed to explain in a more or less plausible way such and such a point in this same revelation. If you like, let us take as an example the idea of the preexistence of souls which has been used to explain original sin. You can see at once all that can be said against the successive creation of souls and the use that can be made of preexistence to provide a host of interesting explanations. Nevertheless I can tell you without demur that I do not claim to adopt this system as a truth, but I say (and here is my rule of trial and error), "If I, a puny mortal, have been able to find a by no means absurd solution that accounts reasonably well for a puzzling problem, how can I doubt that, if this theory is untrue, there is another solution of which I know nothing and which God has thought advisable to hide from our curiosity?" I say as much of the ingenious hypothesis that the renowned Leibnitz based on the crime of Tarquin and developed with so much wisdom in his Theodicee; I say as much of a hundred other theories and of yours in particular, my worthy friend. So long as they are not regarded as proved, are put forward modestly, are propounded to set the mind at rest, as I have just told you, and above all do not lead to pride or contempt for authority, it seems to me that criticism should keep silent in view of these precautions. Progress is slow and cautious in all the sciences; why should metaphysics, the most obscure of all, be excepted? I always come back to the point that, however little you indulge in this kind of transcendental inquiry, you show at least a certain disquiet that clearly displays the merit of faith and docility. Have we not already spent some considerable time in the clouds? And have we been improved by it? I doubt it a little. It is time to come down to earth. I must confess I am very fond of practical ideas and especially of those striking analogies that exist between Christian doctrines and the universal beliefs humanity has always held without it being possible to trace any human origin for them ....

ELEVENTH DIALOGUE
THE KNIGHT: Although you do not like excursions in the clouds much, my dear Count, I should nevertheless like to take you there again .... In our own day, men seem no longer able to live within the old sphere of the human faculties. They wish to pass beyond it; they grow restless like an eagle angry with the bars of his cage. See what they are attempting in the natural sciences! See, too, the new alliance that they have created and that they promote with so much success between physical theories and the arts. As it works wonders in the cause of science, how can this general spirit of the age not stretch itself to questions of the spiritual order? And why should it not be allowed to direct its attentions toward the subject that is most important to men, provided that it can restrain itself within the limits of a prudent and respectful moderation?
THE COUNT: First, Knight, I do not think I would be demanding too much if I asked that the human mind, free on every other subject with this one exception, should refrain from all rash inquiry into this. In the second place, this moderation of which you speak and which is so splendid in theory, is actually impossible in practice; at least, it is so rare that it must pass for impossible. Now, you will allow that when a certain inquiry is not necessary and is capable of producing countless evils, it is a duty to abstain from it. This is what has always made all these spiritual impulses of the illumines suspect and even, I confess, odious to me.

THE SENATOR: You are certainly afraid of these illumines, my dear friend! But I do not think I am asking too much on my part if I put the humble request that words be defined, and in short that someone be kind enough to tell us what an illumines is, so that we know who and what we are talking about. This name, illuminess, is given to those disgraceful men who have dared in our own time to conceive and even to organize in Germany, by the most criminal association, the frightful project of killing off Christianity and sovereignty in Europe. The same name is given to the virtuous followers of Saint-Martin, who not only profess Christianity but who work only to raise themselves to the most sublime heights of this divine law. You must admit, gentlemen, that never have men fallen into a greater confusion of ideas. I confess even that I am unable to listen calmly in society to the fools of both sexes crying out against illuminism, at the least word that passes their understanding, with a frivolity and ignorance which pushes to the limit the most practiced patience. But you, my dear Roman friend, you, who are such a strong defender of authority, speak to me candidly. Can you read the Holy Scripture without being forced to acknowledge a host of passages which oppress your mind and tempt it to devote itself to attempting a discreet exegesis? Have not you like others been told, Search the Scriptures? In conscience tell me, I pray, do you understand the first chapter of Genesis? Do you understand the Apocalypse and the Song of Songs? Does Ecclesiastes not give you any difficulty? When you read in Genesis that the moment our first ancestors became aware of their nakedness God made them coats of skins, do you take this literally? Do you think the All-powerful spent his time killing animals, skinning them, curing their pelts, finally creating needles and thread to finish off these new costumes? Do you believe that the guilty rebels of Babel really undertook, to put their minds at rest, to build a tower whose weathercock merely reached the moon (I am not saying much, as you see!); and when the stars fall on the earth, will you not be at a loss to place them?... A thousand expressions of this kind should show you that it pleased God sometimes to let men speak at will, according to the reigning ideas of such and such an epoch, at other times to hide under apparently simple and occasionally vulgar forms high mysteries not made for all eyes. Now, given these two assumptions, what harm is there in excavating these seams of grace and divine goodness as we mine in the earth for gold or diamonds? More than ever, gentlemen, we should devote ourselves to these broad speculations, for we must hold ourselves ready for a huge event in the divine order, toward which we are moving with an increased speed that cannot fail to strike every observer. Religion no longer holds sway on earth, and humanity cannot remain in this state. Moreover, formidable prophets are foretelling that the time is here There is hardly one truly religious man in Europe (I speak of the educated class) who is not at this time awaiting some extraordinary event .... How can we make light of this general persuasion? And what right have we to condemn the men who, warned by this sign from heaven, devote themselves to holy studies.

Would you like another illustration of what is brewing? Look for it in the sciences: consider carefully the progress of chemistry and even of astronomy, and you will see where they are leading us .... Wait until the natural affinity of religion and science manifests itself in the head of one man of genius. The appearance of such a man cannot be far off, and perhaps he exists even now. He will be a monumental figure and will put an end to the eighteenth century, which still endures today; for intellectual centuries do not conform to the calendar like centuries properly speaking. Then opinions that seem to us bizarre or nonsensical today will be axioms impossible to doubt. Men will talk of the stupidity of our times as we talk of the superstition of the Middle Ages .... At the moment, European thinkers are like conspirators or initiates who have made a kind of monopoly of science and who are absolutely opposed to anyone knowing more or otherwise than they. But this science will be continually execrated by an enlightened posterity, who will justly charge today's adepts with having been unable to draw from the truths God had confided to them those conclusions most valuable to man. The whole of science will then change its face. The spirit, for long dethroned and forgotten, will take its former position. It will be shown that all the ancient traditions are true, that the whole of paganism is nothing but a system of tainted and ill-conceived truths which need only cleaning, so to speak, and restoring to their place to shine brilliantly. In a word, all ideas will be changed ....

You, my dear Count, who are so severe an apostle of unity and order, you have no doubt not forgotten all you told us at the beginning of these conversations about the many extraordinary events of the times. Everything foretells, and your own observations themselves demonstrate it, some kind of great unity toward which we are moving very rapidly. Therefore you cannot without contradicting yourself condemn those who greet this unity from afar, as you put it, and who try according to their abilities to penetrate mysteries no doubt difficult but nonetheless comforting to us ....

COUNT: That there are mysteries in the Bible is beyond doubt, but to tell you the truth it does not matter much. I am very little concerned with knowing what a coat of skins is. Do you, who have worked to discover this, know more about it than I? And would we be better men if we did know it? Once more, search as much as you please, but take care, however, not to go too far and not to mislead yourself by giving rein to your imagination. It has been well said, as you recall, Search the Scriptures, but how and why? Read the text, Search the Scriptures and you will see that they testify of me.[John 5:39.] Thus it refers to an already certain fact and not to interminable researches into a future which is none of our concern ....

[Translation by Jack Lively]

Return to Writings of Joseph de Maistre in English Translation.	



Enlightenment on Sacrifices
by Joseph de Maistre
CHAPTER I. SACRIFICES IN GENERAL
I by no means accept the blasphemous axiom, Human fear first invented the gods.[Primus in orbe deos fecit timor. This passage, whose true author is unknown, is to be found amongst the fragments of Petronius. It is quite at home there.]
On the contrary, I am happy to notice that men, by giving God names expressing greatness, power, and goodness, by calling him Lord, Master, Father, and so on, show clearly enough that the idea of divinity cannot be born of fear. It can be seen also that music, poetry, dance, in a word all the pleasing arts, have been called on in religious ceremonies and that the idea of rejoicing was always so closely involved in the idea of festival that the last became everywhere synonymous with the first.

Far be it from me, moreover, to believe that the idea of God could have started with humanity or, in other words, that humanity can be older than the idea.

It must, however, be confessed, after having made sure that this is orthodox, that history shows man to be convinced at all times of this terrible truth, that he lives under the hand of an angry power and that this power can be appeased only by sacrifice.

At first sight, it is not at all easy to reconcile so apparently contradictory ideas, but, if they are studied closely, it can easily be understood how they agree and why the feeling of terror has always existed side by side with that of joy without the one ever having been able to destroy the other.

"The gods are good, and we are indebted to them for all the good things we enjoy: we owe them praise and thanks. But the gods are just and we are guilty. They must be appeased and we must expiate our sins; and, to do this, the most effective means is sacrifice."

Such was the ancient belief and such is still, in different forms, the belief of the whole world. Primitive men, from whom the whole of humanity has received its fundamental opinions, believed themselves culpable. All social institutions have been founded on this dogma, so that men of every age have continually admitted original and universal degradation and said like us, if less explicitly, our Mothers conceived us in sin; for there is no Christian dogma that is not rooted in man's inner nature and in a tradition as old as humanity.

But the root of this debasement, or this reification of man, resides in sensibility, in life, in short in the soul, so carefully distinguished by the ancients from the spirit or intelligence.

Animals have received only a soul; we have been given both soul and spirit....

The idea of two distinct powers is very ancient, even in the Church. "Those who have adopted it," said Origen, "do not think that the words of the apostle the flesh lusteth against the spirit (Galatians 5:17), should be taken to mean the flesh literally, but to refer to that soul which is really the soul of the flesh: for, they say, we have two souls, one good and celestial, the other inferior and terrestrial: it is of the latter that it has been said its works are manifest (ibid., 19), and we believe that this soul of the flesh resides in the blood."[Origen, De Principiis, Book iii, Chap. iv. 8.]

For the rest, Origen, who was at once the most daring and the most modest of men in his opinions, did not persist in this problem. The reader, he said, will form his own opinions. It is, however, obvious that he had no other explanation for two diametrically opposed impulses within a single individual.

Indeed, what is this power that opposes the man or, to put it better, his conscience? What is this power which is not he, or all of him? Is it material like stone or wood? In this case, it neither thinks nor feels and consequently cannot be capable of disturbing the spirit in its workings. I listen with respect and dread to all the threats made by the flesh, but I want to know what it is ....

Fundamentally, it appears that on this point Holy Scripture is in complete agreement with ancient and modern philosophy, since it teaches us "that man is double in his ways[James 1:8.] and that the word of God is a living sword that pierces to the division of the soul and the spirit and discerns the thoughts of the heart."[Hebrews 4:12.]

And Saint Augustine, confessing to God the sway that old visions brought back by dreams still had over his soul, cried out with the most pleasing simplicity, "Then, Lord, am I myself?"[Confessions, X, xxx.]

No, without doubt, he was not HIMSELF, and no one knew this better than he, who tells us in the same passage, How much difference there is between MYSELF and MYSELF; he who so well distinguished the two powers in man when he cried out again to God: Oh, thou mystic bread of my soul, spouse of my intelligence, I could not love you.[Ibid., I, xiii.]

Milton has put some beautiful lines into the mouth of Satan, who howls of his appalling degradation.* Man also could suitably and wisely speak them ....

[* "O foul descent! that I who erst contended
With gods to sit the highest, am now constrain'd
Into a beast; and, mix'd with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the height of deity aspired!" - Paradise Lost, ix, 163-167.]
I am aware that the doctrine of the two souls was condemned in ancient times but I do not know if this was by a competent tribunal: besides, it is enough to understand it. That man is a being resulting from the union of two souls, that is to say, of two intelligent constituents of the same nature, one good and the other bad, this is, I believe, the opinion which should have been condemned and which I also wholeheartedly condemn. But that the intelligence is the same as sensation, or that this element, which is also called the vital principle and which is life, can be something material, completely devoid of understanding and consciousness, is what I will never believe, unless I happen to be warned that I am mistaken by the only power with a legitimate authority over human belief. In this case, I should not hesitate a moment, and whereas now I have only the certainty that I am right, then I would have the faith that I am wrong. If I were to profess other opinions, I would directly contradict the principles which have dictated the work I am publishing and which are no less sacred to me.
Whatever view is taken about the duality of man, it is on the animal power, on life, on the soul (for all these words meant the same thing in the ancient language), that the malediction acknowledged by the whole world falls....

Man being thus guilty through his sensuous principle, through his flesh, through his life, the curse fell on his blood, for blood was the principle of life, or rather blood was life.[Genesis 9:4-5; Leviticus 17:11; Deuteronomy 12:23-24.] And it is a remarkable fact that old Eastern traditions such as these, which had long been forgotten, have been revived in our own day and upheld by the most distinguished physiologists. Let us accept the vitality of blood, or rather the identity of blood and life, as a fact which antiquity never doubted and which has been acknowledged again today; another opinion as old as the world itself was that heaven grew angry with the flesh, and blood could be appeased only by blood. No nation doubted that there was an expiatory virtue in the spilling of blood. Now neither reason nor folly could have invented this idea, still less get it generally accepted. It is rooted in the furthest depths of human nature, and on this point the whole of history does not show a single dissenting voice. The entire theory rests on the dogma of substitution. It was believed (as was and always will be the case) that the innocent could pay for the guilty; from which it was concluded that, life being guilty, a less precious life could be offered and accepted in place of another. Thus the blood of animals was offered, and this soul, offered for a soul, the ancients called antipsychon, vicariam animam, as you might say a soul for a soul OR substitute soul....

It should be noticed that, in sacrifices properly speaking, carnivorous or nonintelligent or nondomestic animals like deer, snakes, fish, birds of prey, and so on, were not slaughtered. A]ways, among the animals, the most valuable for their utility, the gentlest, the most innocent, those nearest to man by instinct and habit were chosen. Since in the end man could not be slaughtered to save man, the most human, if I can put it like that, in the animal world were chosen as victims; and the victim was always burned wholly or in part, to bear witness that the natural penalty for crime is the stake and that the substitute flesh was burned in place of the guilty flesh....

The roots of so extraordinary and so general a belief must go very deep. If there was nothing true or enigmatic about it, why should God himself have retained it in the Mosaic law? Where could the ancients have found the idea of a spiritual regeneration through blood? And why, at all times and in all places, have men chosen to honor, supplicate, and placate God by means of a ceremony that reason points out to all and that feeling rejects? It is absolutely necessary to appeal to some hidden and very powerful cause.

CHAPTER II. HUMAN SACRIFICES
The doctrine of substitution being universally accepted, it was thought equally certain that the effectiveness of sacrifices was proportionate to the consequence of the victims; and this double belief, at bottom just but vitiated by the force that vitiates all things, gave birth on all sides to the horrible superstition of human sacrifices. In vain did reason tell men that they had no rights over their fellows and that they even testified to this themselves by offering the blood of animals to atone for that of man; in vain did gentle humanity and natural compassion reinforce the arguments of reason: in face of this compulsive dogma, reason remained as powerless as feeling.
One would like to be able to contradict history when it shows us this abominable custom practiced throughout the world, but, to the shame of humanity, nothing is more incontestable.... Once again, where did men take their opinion from? And what truth had they corrupted to reach their frightful error? It is quite clear, I think, that it all results from the dogma of substitution, whose truth is beyond dispute and is ever innate in man (for how could he have acquired it?), but which he has abused in a deplorable manner: for, accurately speaking, man cannot take up an error. He can only be ignorant of or abuse the truth, that is to say, extend it by false induction to a case which is irrelevant to it.

It seems that two false arguments lead men astray; first, the importance of the subjects which are to be freed from anathema. It is said, To save an army, a town, even a great sovereign, what is one man? The particular characteristics of the two kinds of human victim already sacrificed under civil law are also considered, and it is said, What is the life of a criminal or an enemy?

It is very likely that the first human victims were criminals condemned by the laws, for every nation believed what the Druids believed according to Caesar,[De bello gallico, vi, 16.] that the punishment of criminals was highly pleasing to the Divinity. The ancients believed that every capital crime committed in the state bound the nation and that the criminal was sacred or consecrated to the gods till, by the spilling of his blood, he had unbound both himself and the nation....

Unfortunately, once men were possessed with the principle that the effectiveness of sacrifices was proportionate to the consequence of the victims, it was only a short step from the criminal to the enemy. Every enemy was a criminal, and unfortunately again every foreigner was an enemy when victims were needed....

It seems that this fatal chain of reasoning explains completely the universality of so detestable a practice, that it explains it very well, I insist, in human terms: for I by no means intend to deny (and how could good sense, however slightly informed, deny it?) the effect of evil that had corrupted everything.

Evil would have no effect at all on men if it involved them in an isolated error. This is not even possible, for error is nothing. If every previous idea was left out of account, and a man proposed to slaughter another in order to propitiate the gods, the only response would be to put him to death or lock him up as a madman. Thus it is always necessary to start from a truth to propagate an error. This is especially striking if one thinks about paganism which shines with truths, but all distorted and out of place in such a way that I entirely agree with that contemporary theosophist who said that idolatry was a putrefaction. If the subject is examined closely, it can be seen that, among the most foolish, indecent, and atrocious opinions, among the most monstrous practices and those most shameful to mankind, there is not one that we cannot deliver from evil (since we have been granted the knowledge now to ask for this favor), to show then the residue of truth, which is divine.

It was thus from the incontestable truths of the degradation of man and his original unity, from the necessity of reparation, from the transferability of merits and the substitution of expiatory sufferings that men were led to the dreadful error of human sufferings....

But we, who blanch with horror at the very idea of human sacrifices and cannibalism, how can we be at the same time so blind and ungrateful as not to recognize that we owe these feelings only to the law of love which watched over our cradle? Not long ago a famous nation, which had reached the peak of civilization and refinement, dared formally to suspend this law in a fit of madness of which history gives no other example: what happened? - in a flash, the mores of the Iroquois and the Algonquin; the holy laws of humanity crushed underfoot; innocent blood covering the scaffolds which covered France; men powdering and curling bloodstained heads; the very mouths of women stained with human blood.

Here is the natural man! It is not that he does not bear within him the indestructible seeds of truth and virtue: his birthrights are imprescriptible; but without divine nurture these seeds will never germinate or will yield only damaged and unwholesome fruits.

It is time to draw from the most undeniable historical facts a conclusion which is no less undeniable.

From four centuries' experience, we know that wherever the true God is not known and served by virtue of an explicit revelation, man will slaughter man and often eat him.

Lucretius, having told us of the sacrifice of Iphigenia (as a true story, that is understood, since he had need of it), exclaimed in a triumphant tone, How many evils can religion spawn!

Alas, he saw only the abuses, just like all his successors, who are much less excusable than he. He was unaware that the scourge of human sacrifice, however outrageous it was, was nothing compared to the evils produced by absolute godlessness. He was unaware or he did not wish to see that there is not and even cannot be an entirely false religion, that the religion of all civilized nations, such as it was in the age when he wrote, was no less the cement of the political structure, and that, by undermining it, Epicurean doctrines were about to undermine by the same stroke the old Roman constitution and substitute for it an atrocious and endless tyranny.

For us, happy possessors of the truth, let us not commit the crime of disregarding it....

CHAPTER III. THE CHRISTIAN THEORY OF SACRIFICES
What truth is not to be found in paganism?...
How then can we fail to recognize that paganism could not be mistaken about an idea so universal and fundamental as that of sacrifice, that is to say, of redemption by blood? Humanity could not guess at the amount of blood it needed. What man, left to himself, could suspect the immensity of the fall and the immensity of the restoring love? Yet every people, by admitting this fall more or less clearly, has admitted also the need and the nature of the remedy.

This has been the constant belief of all men. It has been modified in practice, according to the characteristics of peoples and religions, but the principle always remains the same. In particular, all nations are agreed on the wonderful effectiveness of the voluntary sacrifice of the innocent who dedicates himself to God like a propitiatory victim. Men have always attached a boundless value to the submission of the just to sufferings....

As has been said in the Dialogues, the idea of redemption is universal. At all times and in all places, men have believed that the innocent could atone for the guilty, but Christianity has corrected this idea as well as a thousand others which, even in their unreformed state, had in advance borne the clearest witness to it. Under the sway of this divine law, the just man (who never believes himself to be such) still tries to draw near to his model through suffering....

[Translation by Jack Lively]

Return to Writings of Joseph de Maistre in English Translation.	

Study on Sovereignty
by Joseph de Maistre
BOOK ONE
ON THE ORIGINS OF SOVEREIGNTY
CHAPTER I. THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE PEOPLE
It is said that the people are sovereign; but over whom? - over themselves, apparently. The people are thus subject. There is surely something equivocal if not erroneous here, for the people which command are not the people which obey. It is enough, then, to put the general proposition, "The people are sovereign," to feel that it needs an exegesis.
This exegesis will not be long in coming, at least in the French system. The people, it will be said, exercise their sovereignty by means of their representatives. This begins to make sense. The people are a sovereign which cannot exercise sovereignty....

There has been much heated discussion on whether sovereignty comes from God or from men, but I do not know if anyone has noticed that both propositions can be true.

It is certainly true, in an inferior and crude sense, that sovereignty is based on human consent. For, if any people decided suddenly not to obey, sovereignty would disappear; and it is impossible to imagine the establishment of a sovereignty without imagining a people which consents to obey. If then the opponents of the divine origin of sovereignty want to claim only this, they are right, and it would be quite useless to dispute it. Since God has not thought it appropriate to use supernatural agents in the establishment of states, it is certain that all developments have come about through human agencies. But saying that sovereignty does not derive from God because he has made use of men to establish it is like saying that he is not the creator of man because we all have a father and a mother.

Every theist would no doubt agree that whoever breaks the laws sets his face against the divine will and renders himself guilty before God, although he is breaking only human ordinances, for it is God who has made man sociable; and since he has willed society, he has willed also the sovereignty and laws without which there would be no society.

Thus laws come from God in the sense that he wills that there should be laws and that they should be obeyed. Yet these laws come also from men in that they are made by men.

In the same way, sovereignty comes from God, since he is the author of all things except evil, and is in particular the author of society, which could not exist without sovereignty.

However, this same sovereignty comes also from men in a certain sense, that is to say insofar as particular forms of government are established and declared by human consent.

The partisans of divine authority cannot therefore deny that the human will plays some part in the establishment of governments; and their opponents cannot in their turn deny that God is preeminently the author of these same governments.

It appears then that the two propositions, Sovereignty comes from God and Sovereignty comes from men, are not absolutely contradictory, any more than the other two, Laws come from God and Laws come from men....

CHAPTER II. ORIGINS OF SOCIETY
It is one of man's curious idiosyncrasies to create difficulties for the pleasure of resolving them. The mysteries that surround him on all sides are not sufficient for him; he still rejects clear ideas and reduces everything to a problem by some inexplicable twist of pride, which makes him regard it as below him to believe what everyone believes. So, for example, there have long been disputes on the origin of society; and in place of the quite simple solutions that naturally present themselves to the mind, all sorts of metaphysical theories have been put forward to support airy hypotheses rejected by common sense and experience.
If the causes of the origins of society are posed as a problem, it is obviously assumed that there was a human era before society; but this is precisely what needs to be proved.

Doubtless it will not be denied that the earth as a whole is intended for man's habitation; now, as the multiplication of man is part of the Creator's intentions, it follows that the nature of man is to be united in great societies over the whole surface of the globe. For the nature of a being is to exist as the Creator has willed it. And this will is made perfectly plain by the facts.

The isolated man is therefore by no means the man of nature. When a handful of men were scattered over vast territories, humanity was not what it was to become. At that time, there were only families, and these scattered families, either individually or by their subsequent union, were nothing but embryonic peoples.

And so, long after the formation of the great societies, some small desert tribes still show us the spectacle of humanity in its infancy. There are still infant nations that are not yet what they are to become.

What would one think of a naturalist who said that man is an animal thirty to thirty-five inches high, without strength or intelligence, and giving voice only to inarticulate cries? Yet this naturalist, in sketching man's physical and moral nature in terms of an infant's characteristics, would be no more ridiculous than the philosopher who seeks the political nature of this same being in the rudiments of society.

Every question about the nature of man must be resolved by history. The philosopher who wants to show us by a priori reasoning what man must be does not deserve an audience. He is substituting expediency for experience and his own decisions for the Creator's will.

Let me assume that someone manages to prove that an American savage is happier and less vicious than a civilized man. Could it be concluded from this that the latter is a degraded being or, if you like, further from nature than the former? Not at all. This is just like saying that the nature of the individual man is to remain a child because at that age he is free from the vices and misfortunes that will beset him in his maturity. History continually shows us men joined together in more or less numerous societies, ruled by different sovereignties. Once they have multiplied beyond a certain point, they cannot exist in any other fashion.

Thus, properly speaking, there has never been a time previous to society for man, because, before the formations of political societies, man was not a complete man, and because it is ridiculous to seek the characteristics of any being whatever in the embryo of that being.

Thus society is not the work of man, but the immediate result of the will of the Creator who has willed that man should be what he has always and everywhere been.

Rousseau and all the thinkers of his stamp imagine or try to imagine a people in the state of nature (this is their expression), deliberating formally on the advantages and disadvantages of the social state and finally deciding to pass from one to the other. But there is not a grain of common sense in this idea. What were these men like before the national convention in which they finally decided to find themselves a sovereign? Apparently they lived without laws and government; but for how long?

It is a basic mistake to represent the social state as an optional state based on human consent, on deliberation and on an original contract, something which is an impossibility. To talk of a state of nature in opposition to the social state is to talk nonsense voluntarily. The word nature is one of those general terms which, like all abstract terms, are open to abuse. In its most extensive sense, this word really signifies only the totality of all the laws, power, and springs of action that make up the world, and the particular nature of such and such a being is the totality of all the qualities which make it what it is and without which it would be some other thing and could no longer fulfill the intentions of its creator. Thus the combination of all the parts which make up a machine intended to tell the time forms the nature or the essence of a watch; and the nature or essence of the balance wheel is to have such and such a form, dimensions, and position, otherwise it would no longer be a balance wheel and could not fulfill its functions. The nature of a viper is to crawl, to have a scaly skin, hollow and movable fangs which exude poisonous venom; and the nature of man is to be a cognitive, religious, and sociable animal. All experience teaches us this; and, to my knowledge, nothing has contradicted this experience. If someone wants to prove that the nature of the viper is to have wings and a sweet voice, and that of a beaver is to live alone at the top of the highest mountains, it is up to him to prove it. In the meantime, we will believe that what is must be and has always been.

"The social order," says Rousseau, "is a sacred right which is the basis of all others. Yet this right does not come from nature: it is therefore founded on convention."[Social Contract, Book i, Chap. i.]

What is nature? What is a right? And how is an order a right? But let us leave these difficulties: such questions are endless with a man who misuses every term and defines none. One has the right at least to ask him to prove the big assertion that the social order does not come from nature. "I must," he says himself, "establish what I have just advanced." This is indeed what should be done, but the way in which he goes about it is truly curious. He spends three chapters in proving that the social order does not derive from family society or from force or from slavery (chapters 2, 3, 4) and concludes (chapter 5) that we must always go back to a first convention. This method of proof is very useful: it lacked only the majestic formula of the geometers, "which was to be proved."

It is also curious that Rousseau has not even tried to prove the one thing that it was necessary to prove; for if the social order derives from nature, there is no social compact.

"Before examining," he says, "the act by which a people chooses a king, it would be as well to examine the act by which a people is a people: for this act, being necessarily previous to the other, is the true foundation of society" (Chapter 5). This same Rousseau says elsewhere, "It is the inveterate habit of philosophers to deny what is and to explain what is not."[Nouvelle Heloise, Part 4.] Let us on our side add that it is the inveterate habit of Rousseau to mock the philosopher without suspecting that he also was a philosopher in all the force he gave to the word; so, for example, the Social Contract denies from beginning to end the nature of man, which is, in order to explain the social compact, which does not exist.

This is how one reasons when one separates man from the Divinity. Rather than tiring oneself out in the search of error, it would take little effort to turn one's eyes to the source of all creation; but so simple, sure, and consoling a method of philosophizing is not to the taste of writers of this unhappy age whose true illness is an aversion to good sense.

Might it not be said that man, this property of the Divinity, was cast on this earth by a blind cause, that he could be either this or that, and that it is as a consequence of his choice that he is what he is? Surely God intended some sort of end in creating man: the question can thus be reduced to whether man has become a political animal, as Aristotle put it, through or against the divine will. Although this question stated explicitly is a real sign of folly, it is nevertheless put indirectly in a host of writings, and fairly often the authors even decide that the latter is the case. The word nature has given rise to a multitude of errors. Let me repeat that the nature of any being is the sum of the qualities attributed to it by the Creator. With immeasurable profundity, Burke said that art is man's nature. This is beyond doubt; man with all his affections, all his knowledge, all his arts is the true natural man, and the weaver's cloth is as natural as the spider's web.

Man's natural state is therefore to be what he is today and what he has always been, that is to say, sociable. All human records attest to this truth....

CHAPTER III. SOVEREIGNTY IN GENERAL
If sovereignty is not anterior to the people, at least these two ideas are collateral, since a sovereign is necessary to make a people. It is as impossible to imagine a human society, a people, without a sovereign as a hive and bees without a queen: for, by virtue of the eternal laws of nature, a swarm of bees exists in this way or it does not exist at all. Society and sovereignty are thus born together; it is impossible to separate these two ideas. Imagine an isolated man: there is no question of laws or government, since he is not a whole man and society does not yet exist. Put this man in contact with his fellowmen: from this moment you suppose a sovereign. The first man was king over his children; each isolated family was governed in the same way. But once these families joined, a sovereign was needed, and this sovereign made a people of them by giving them laws, since society exists only through the sovereign. Everyone knows the famous line,
The first king was a fortunate soldier.
This is perhaps one of the falsest claims that has ever been made. Quite the opposite could be said, that
The first soldier was paid by a king.
There was a people, some sort of civilization, and a sovereign as soon as men came into contact. The word people is a relative term that has no meaning divorced from the idea of sovereignty: for the idea of a people involves that of an aggregation around a common center, and without sovereignty there can be no political unity or cohesion....
CHAPTER IV. PARTICULAR SOVEREIGNTIES AND NATIONS
The same power that has decreed social order and sovereignty has also decreed different modifications of sovereignty according to the different character of nations.
Nations are born and die like individuals. Nations have fathers, in a very literal sense, and teachers commonly more famous than their fathers, although the greatest merit of these teachers is to penetrate the character of the infant nation and to create for it circumstances in which it can develop all its capacities.

Nations have a general soul and a true moral unity which makes them what they are. This unity is evidenced above all by language.

The Creator has traced on the globe the limits of nations.... These boundaries are obvious and each nation can still be seen straining to fill entirely one of the areas within these boundaries. Sometimes invincible circumstances thrust two nations together and force them to mingle. Then their constituent principles penetrate each other and produce a hybrid nation which can be either more or less powerful and famous than if it was a pure race.

But several national elements thrown together into the same receptacle can be harmful. These seeds squeeze and stifle each other. The men who compose them, condemned to a certain moral and political mediocrity, will never attract the eyes of the world in spite of a large number of individual virtues, until some great shock, starting one of these seeds growing, allows it to engulf the other and to assimilate them into its own substance. Italiam! Italiam!

Sometimes a nation lives in the midst of another much more numerous, refuses to integrate because there is not sufficient affinity between them, and preserves its moral unity....

When one talks of the spirit of a nation, the expression is not so metaphorical as is believed.

From these different national characteristics are born the different modifications of governments. One can say that each government has its separate character, for even those which belong to the same group and carry the same name reveal subtle differences to the observer.

The same laws cannot suit different provinces which have different customs, live in opposite climates, and cannot accept the same form of government.

The general objects of every good institution must be modified in each country by the relationships which spring as much from the local situation as from the character of the inhabitants. It is on the basis of these relationships that each people should be assigned a particular institutional system, which is the best, not perhaps in itself, but for the state for which it is intended.

There is only one good government for a particular state; yet not only can different governments be suitable for different peoples; they can also be suitable for the same people at different times, since a thousand events can change the inner relationships of a people.

There has always been a great deal of discussion on the best form of government without consideration of the fact that each can be the best in some instances and the worst in others!

Therefore it should not be said that every form of government is appropriate to every country: for example, liberty, since it will not grow under every climate, is not open to every nation. The more one thinks about this principle laid down by Montesquieu, the more one feels its force. The more it is contested, the more strongly it is established by new proofs.

Thus the absolute question, What is the best form of government? is as insoluble as it is indefinite; or, to put it another way, it has as many correct solutions as there are possible combinations in the relative and absolute positions of nations.

From these incontestable principles springs a no less incontestable consequence, that the social contract is a chimera. For, if there are as many different governments as there are different peoples, if the forms of these governments are laid down absolutely by the power that has given to each nation its particular moral, physical, geographical, and economic features, it is no longer permissible to talk of a compact. Each method of exercising sovereignty is the immediate result of the will of the Creator, like sovereignty in general. For one nation, despotism is as natural and as legitimate as democracy for another. If a man himself worked out these unshakable principles[Social Contract, Book ii, Chap. ix; Book iii, Chaps. i, iii, viii.] in a book designed to establish that "it is always necessary to go back to a convention,"[Ibid., Book i, Chap. v.] if he wrote in one chapter that "man was born free"[Ibid., Book i, Chap. i.] and in another that "liberty, since it will not grow under every climate, is not open to every nation,"[Ibid., Book iii, Chap. viii.] his utter folly could not be contested.

As no nation has been able to give itself the character and position that fit it to a particular government, all have been agreed not only in accepting this truth in the abstract but also in believing that the Divinity had intervened directly in the institution of their particular sovereignties....

These are fables, it will be said. In truth, I do not know; but the fables of every nation, even modern nations, cover many realities.... It is complete folly to imagine that this universal prejudice is the work of sovereigns. Individual interest might well make bad use of a general belief, but it cannot create it. If that which I am talking about had not been based on the previous consent of nations, not only could a sovereign not have made them accept it; he would have been unable to conceive such a fraud. In general, every universal idea is natural.

CHAPTER V. AN EXAMINATION OF SOME IDEAS OF ROUSSEAU ON THE LEGISLATOR
Rousseau wrote a chapter on the legislator in which all the ideas are confused in an intolerable way. In the first place, this word legislator can have two different meanings: usage allows us to apply it to the extraordinary men who promulgate constitutional laws, and also to the less remarkable men who pass civil laws. It seems that Rousseau understood the word in the first sense, since he talks of the man "who dares to undertake to institute a people and who constitutes the Republic." But soon after he says that "the legislator is in all respects an extraordinary man IN THE STATE." Then there already is a state; the people is then constituted; it is thus no longer a question of instituting a people but, more or less, of reforming it....
Rousseau confuses all these ideas, and states in general that the legislator is neither an official nor a sovereign. "His task," he says, "is a superior function that has nothing in common with human rule."[Ibid., Book ii, Chap. vii.] If Rousseau means that a private individual can be consulted by a sovereign and can propose good laws which might be accepted, this is one of those truths so trivial and sterile that it is useless to bother with them. If he intends to hold that a sovereign cannot make civil laws,... this is a discovery of which he has all the honor, no one ever having suspected it. If he means to prove that a sovereign cannot be a legislator in the strongest sense of the term, and give truly constituent laws to a people, by creating or perfecting their constitutional system, I appeal to the whole history of the world....

CHAPTER VII. THE FOUNDERS AND THE POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF NATIONS
Thinking about the moral unity of nations, there can be no doubt that it is the result of a single cause. What the wise Bonnet said about the animal body in answer to a fancy of Buffon can be said about the body politic: every seed is necessarily one; and it is always from a single man that each nation takes its dominant trait and its distinctive character.
To know, then, why and how a man literally engenders a nation, and how he passes on to them the moral temperament, the character, the general soul which must, over the course of centuries and an infinite number of generations, exist perceptibly and distinguish one nation from all others, this is a mystery like so many others on which it is fruitful to dwell....

The government of a nation is no more its own work than its language. Just as in nature the seeds of an infinite number of plants are destined to perish unless the wind or the hand of man puts them where they can germinate, so also there are in nations certain qualities and powers which are ineffective until they get a stimulus from circumstances either alone or used by a skillful hand.

The founder of a nation is precisely this skillful hand. Gifted with an extraordinary penetration or, what is more probable, with an infallible instinct (for often personal genius does not realize what it is achieving, which is what distinguishes it above all from intelligence), he divines those hidden powers and qualities which shape a nation's character, the means of bringing them to life, putting them into action, and making the greatest possible use of them. He is never to be seen writing or debating; his mode of acting derives from inspiration; and if sometimes he takes up a pen, it is not to argue but to command.

One of the greatest errors of this age is to believe that the political constitution o nations is the work of man alone and that a constitution can be made as a watchmaker makes a watch. This is quite false; but still more false is the belief that this great work can be executed by an assembly of men. The author of all things has only two ways of giving a government to a people. Most often he reserves to himself its formation more directly by making it grow, as it were, imperceptibly like a plant, through the conjunction of a multitude of those circumstances we call fortuitous. But when he wants to lay quickly the foundations of a political structure and to show the world a creation of this kind, he confides his power to rare men, the true Elect. Scattered thinly over the centuries, they rise like obelisks on time's path, and, as humanity grows older, they appear the less. To fit them for these unusual tasks, God invests them with unusual power, often unknown to their contemporaries and perhaps to themselves. Bousseau himself has spoken the truth when he said that the work of the founder of a nation was a MISSION.... If the founders of nations, who were all prodigious men, were to come before our eyes and we were to recognize their genius and their power, instead of talking nonsensically of usurpation, fraud, and fanaticism, we would fall on our knees and our sterility would disappear before the sacred sign shining from their brows....

What is certain is that the constitution of a nation is never the product of deliberation.

Almost all the great legislators have been kings, and even those nations destined to be republics have been constituted by kings. They are the men who preside at the political establishment of nations and draw up their first fundamental laws....

Look at every one of the world's constitutions, ancient and modern: you will see that now and again long experience has been able to point out some institutions capable of improving governments on the basis of their original constitution or of preventing abuses capable of altering their nature. It is possible to name the date and authors of these institutions, but you will notice that the real roots of government have remained the same and that it is impossible to show their origin, for the very simple reason that they are as old as the nations and that, not being the result of an agreement, there can be no trace of a convention which never existed.

No important and truly constitutional reform ever establishes anything new; it simply declares and defends previously existing rights. This is why the constitution of a country can never be known from its written constitutional laws, because these laws are made at different periods only to lay down forgotten or contested rights, and because there are always a host of things which are not written....

The different forms and degrees of sovereignty have given rise to the belief that it is the work of nations which have modified it at will. Nothing could be further from the truth. Every nation has the government suited to it, and none has chosen it. The remarkable thing is that, nearly every time a nation tries to give itself a government, or more accurately every time too great a section of the people set out with such an aim, the attempt works to its misfortune; for in this fatal confusion, it is too easy for a nation to mistake its real interests, to chase desperately after what cannot be suitable for it, and at the same time reject what is best for it: and we all know how harmful errors in this field are. This is what made Tacitus say, with his simple profundity, that "it is much better for a people to accept a sovereign than to seek him."[Tacitus, History I, 56.]

Besides, as every exaggerated proposition is false, I by no means intend to deny the possibility of political improvements brought about by a few wise men. I might as well deny the power of moral and physical education to improve men's morality and physique; but this truth confirms rather than shakes my general argument by proving that human power can create nothing and that everything depends on the original aptitudes of nations and of individuals.

It follows from this that a free constitution is stable only when the different parts of the political system come into being together and side by side, so to speak. Men never respect what they have made. This is why an elective king never possesses the moral force of a hereditary sovereign because he is not sufficiently noble, that is to say, he does not possess that kind of grandeur independent of men which is the work of time....

The mass of men play no part in political events. They even respect government only because it is not their work. This feeling is written indelibly on their hearts. They submit to sovereignty because they feel that it is something sacred that they can neither create nor destroy. If, through corruption and treacherous suggestions, they reach the point of effacing in themselves this preserving sentiment, if they have the misfortune to think that they are called as a body to reform the state, everything is lost. This is why, even in free states, it is extremely important for rulers to be separated from the mass of the people by that personal respect which stems from birth and wealth; for if opinion does not put a barrier between itself and authority, if power is not outside its scope, if the governed many can think themselves the equals of the governing few, government will collapse. Thus the aristocracy is a sovereign or ruling class by nature, and the principle of the French Revolution runs directly contrary to the eternal laws of nature.

CHAPTER VIII. THE WEAKNESS OF HUMAN POWER
In all political or religious works, whatever their aim or importance, it is a general rule that there is never any proportion between cause and effect. The effect is always immense in relation to the cause, so that man may know that he is only an instrument and that alone he can create nothing....
The more human reason trusts in itself and tries to rely on its own resources, the more absurd it is and the more it reveals its lack of power. This is why the world's greatest scourge has always been, in every age, what is called philosophy, for philosophy is nothing but the human reason acting alone, and the human reason reduced to its own resources is nothing but a brute whose power is restricted to destroying....

Far from being a theological exaggeration, it was a simple, rigorously expressed truth that one of our prelates (who died happily for his own sake while he was still able to believe in a new turn in affairs) spoke when he said, "In its pride, philosophy has said, To me belongs wisdom, knowledge and power; to me belongs the conduct of men, since it is I who enlighten. In order to punish and disgrace it, God needs only to condemn it to rule for a moment."

In fact, it has ruled over one of the most powerful nations of the world; it rules and no doubt will rule long enough for it not to be able to complain that it had not sufficient time. There has never been a more disgraceful example of the complete futility of human reason when left to its own resources. What lessons have the French legislators taught us? Aided by the whole of human knowledge, the teachings of all the philosophers both ancient and modern, and the whole of historical experience, masters of opinion, disposing of immense wealth, having allies everywhere, in a word backed by every kind of human power, they have spoken with full authority. The world has seen the result. Never has human pride disposed of so many resources and, forgetting its crimes for a moment, never has it been more ridiculous.

Our contemporaries will believe it as they will, but posterity will have no doubt that the most insane of men were those who gathered around a table and said, "We will separate the French people from their ancient constitution and give them another" (this one or that one, it does not matter). Although this folly is common to all the parties who have desolated France, yet the Jacobins spring first to mind as destroyers rather than as builders, and leave in the imagination a certain impression of grandeur resulting from the immensity of their successes. There is even some doubt whether they have seriously planned to organize France into a Republic, for the Republican Constitution they have fabricated is no more than a kind of comedy put on before the people as a moment's distraction, and I cannot think that even the least enlightened of its authors have been taken in by it for a moment.

But the men who held the stage in the first days of the Constituent Assembly really believed themselves to be legislators. Completely seriously and very obviously, they aimed at giving France a political constitution, and believed that an assembly could decree, by majority vote, that this or that nation should no longer have this or that government but some other. Now, this idea is the height of extravagance, and nothing to equal it has ever come out of all the Bedlams in this world. So these men give the impression only of feebleness, ignorance, and disappointment. No feeling of admiration or horror can equal the kind of angry pity that the constituent Bedlam inspires. The laurels of villainy belong of right to the Jacobins, but posterity will award those for folly to the Constitutionals.

The legislators have all felt that human reason could not stand alone and that no purely human institution could last. This is why they have, so to speak, interlaced politics and religion, so that human weakness, strengthened by a supernatural support, could be overcome....

The excellence and durability of great political institutions are proportionate to the closeness of the union of politics and religion within them ....

CHAPTER IX. CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT
In his evil book on the rights of man, Paine said that a constitution is antecedent to government; that it is to government what laws are to the courts; that it is visible and material, article by article, or else it does not exist: so that the English people has no constitution, its government being the product of conquest and not of the will of the people.
It would be difficult to get more errors into fewer lines. Not only can a people not give itself a constitution, but no assembly, a small number of men in relation to the total population, can ever carry through such a task....

There has never been, there will never be, there cannot be a nation constituted a priori. Reason and experience join to prove this great truth. What eye is capable of comprehending all the circumstances that must fit a nation to a particular constitution? How especially can a number of men be capable of this effort of intelligence? Unless they refuse to see the truth, they must agree that this is impossible; and history which should decide all these questions again supports theory. A small number of free nations have shone in history, but not one of them has been constituted in Paine's manner. Every particular form of government is a divine construction, just like sovereignty in general. A constitution in the philosophic sense is thus only the political way of life bestowed on each nation by a power above it; and, in an inferior sense, a constitution is only the assemblage of those more or less numerous laws which declare this way of life. It is not at all necessary for these laws to be written. On the contrary, it is particularly to constitutional laws that the maxim of Tacitus, pessimae republicae plurimae leges, can be applied. The wiser and more public-spirited a nation is, and the more excellent its constitution, the fewer written constitutional laws it has, for these laws are only props, and a building has no need of props except when it has slipped out of vertical or been violently shaken by some external force....

What Paine and so many others regard as a fault is therefore a law of nature. The natural. constitution of a nation is always anterior to its written constitution and can dispense with it. There has never been and can never be a written constitution made all at once, particularly by an assembly, and the very fact that it is written all at once proves it false and impractical. Every constitution is properly speaking a creation in the full meaning of the word, and all creation is beyond men's powers. A written law is only the declaration of an anterior and unwritten law. Man cannot bestow rights on himself; he can only defend those which have been granted to him by a superior power; and these rights are good customs, good because they are not written and because no beginning or author can be assigned to them....

CHAPTER X. THE NATIONAL SOUL
Human reason left to its own resources is completely incapable not only of creating but also of conserving any religious or political association, because it can only give rise to disputes and because, to conduct himself well, man needs beliefs, not problems. His cradle should be surrounded by dogmas; and, when his reason awakes, all his opinions should be given, at least all those relating to his conduct. Nothing is more vital to him than prejudices. Let us not take this word in bad part. It does not necessarily signify false ideas, but only, in the strict sense of the word, any opinions adopted without examination. Now, these kinds of opinion are essential to man; they are the real basis of his happiness and the palladium of empires. Without them, there can be neither religion, morality, nor government. There should be a state religion just as there is a state political system; or rather, religion and political dogmas, mingled and merged together, should together form a general or national mind sufficiently strong to repress the aberrations of the individual reason which is, of its nature, the mortal enemy of any association whatever because it gives birth only to divergent opinions.
All known nations have been happy and powerful to the degree that they have faithfully obeyed this national mind, which is nothing other than the destruction of individual dogmas and the absolute and general rule of national dogmas, that is to say, useful prejudices. Once let everyone rely on his individual reason in religion, and you will see immediately the rise of anarchy of belief or the annihilation of religious sovereignty. Likewise, if each man makes himself the judge of the principles of government you will see immediately the rise of civil anarchy or the annihilation of political sovereignty. Government is a true religion; it has its dogmas, its mysteries, its priests; to submit it to individual discussion is to destroy it; it has life only through the national mind, that is to say, political faith, which is a creed. Man's primary need is that his nascent reason should be curbed under a double yoke; it should be frustrated, and it should lose itself in the national mind, so that it changes its individual existence for another communal existence, just as a river which flows into the ocean still exists in the mass of water, but without name and distinct reality.

What is patriotism? It is this national mind of which I am speaking; it is individual abnegation. Faith and patriotism are the two great thaumaturges of the world. Both are divine. All their actions are miracles. Do not talk to them of scrutiny, choice, discussion, for they will say that you blaspheme. They know only two words, submission and belief; with these two levers, they raise the world. Their very errors are sublime. These two infants of Heaven prove their origin to all by creating and conserving; and if they unite, join their forces and together take possession of a nation, they exalt it, make it divine and increase its power a hundredfold....

But can you, insignificant man, light this sacred fire that inflames nations? Can you give a common soul to several million men? Unite them under your laws? Range them closely around a common center? Shape the mind of men yet unborn? Make future generations obey you and create those age-old customs, those conserving prejudices, which are the father of the laws and stronger than them? What nonsense!...

CHAPTER XlI. APPLICATION OF THE PRECEDING PRINCIPLES TO A PARTICULAR CASE - CONTINUATION
There is no doubt that, in a certain sense, reason is good for nothing. We have the scientific knowledge necessary for the maintenance of society; we have made conquests in mathematics and what is called natural science; but, once we leave the circle of our needs, our knowledge becomes either useless or doubtful. The human mind, ever restless, proliferates constantly succeeding theories. They are born, flourish, wither, and fall like leaves from the trees; the only difference is that their year is longer.
And in the whole of the moral and political world, what do we know, and what are we able to do? We know the morality handed down to us by our fathers, as a collection of dogmas or useful prejudices adopted by the national mind. But on this point we owe nothing to any man's individual reason. On the contrary, every time this reason has interfered, it has perverted morality.

In politics, we know that it is necessary to respect those powers established we know not how or by whom. When time leads to abuses capable of altering the root principle of a government, we know that it is necessary to remove these abuses, but without touching the principle itself, an act of delicate surgery; and we are able to carry through these salutary reforms until the time when the principle of life is totally vitiated and the death of the body politic is inevitable....

Wherever the individual reason dominates, there can be nothing great, for everything great rests on a belief, and the clash of individual opinions left to themselves produces only skepticism which is destructive of everything. General and individual morality, religion, laws, revered customs, useful prejudices, nothing is left standing, everything falls before it; it is the universal dissolvent.

Let us return again to basic ideas. Any institution is only a political edifice. In the physical and the moral order, the laws are the same; you cannot build a great edifice on narrow foundations or a durable one on a moving or transient base. Likewise, in the political order, to build high and to build for centuries, it is necessary to rely on an opinion or a belief broad and deep: for if the opinion does not hold the majority of minds and is not deeply rooted, it will provide only a narrow and transient base.

Now, if you seek the great and solid bases of all possible institutions of the first and second order, you will always find religion and patriotism.

And if you reflect still further, you will find that these two things are identical, for there is no true patriotism without religion. You will see it shine out only in the ages of belief, and it always fades and dies with it. Once man divorces himself from the divinity, he corrupts himself and everything he touches. His actions are misguided and end only in destruction. As this powerful binding force weakens in the state, so all the conserving virtues weaken in proportion. Men's characters become degraded, and even good actions are paltry. A murderous selfishness relentlessly presses on public spirit and makes it fall back before it, like those enormous glaciers of the high Alps that can be seen advancing slowly but frighteningly on the area of living things and crushing the useful vegetation in their path.

But once the idea of the divinity is the source of human action, this action is fruitful, creative, and invincible. An unknown force makes itself felt on all sides, and animates, warms, vivifies all things. However much human ignorance and corruption have soiled this great idea with errors and crimes, it no less preserves its incredible influence....

CHAPTER XIII. A NECESSARY EXPLANATION
I must forestall an objection. In reproaching philosophy for the harm it has done to us, does one not run the risk of going too far and of being unjust in regard to it by swinging to an opposite extreme?
No doubt it is necessary to guard against enthusiasm, but it seems that in this respect there is one sure rule for judging philosophy. It is useful when it does not leave its own domain, that is, the sphere of the natural sciences. Here all its efforts are useful and merit our gratitude. But, once it sets its foot inside the moral sphere, it should remember that it is no longer on its own ground. It is the general mind that holds sway in this sphere, and philosophy, that is to say, the individual mind, becomes noxious and thus culpable if it dares to contradict or bring into question the sacred laws of their sovereign, that is to say, the national dogmas. Therefore, when it enters the domain of this sovereign, its duty is to act in concert with it. This distinction, whose accuracy I do not think can be contested, shows us the confines of philosophy. It is good when it remains within its own domain or when it enters a sphere higher than its own only as an ally or even as a subject; it is hateful when it enters as a rival or an enemy....

I know that philosophy, ashamed of its dreadful successes, has decided to disavow loudly the excesses which we are witnessing, but it cannot escape the criticisms of the wise like this. Happily for humanity, the same men seldom possess both fatal theories and the power to put them into practice. But what does it matter to me that Spinoza lived peacefully in a Dutch village? What does it matter to me that the weak, timid, and reticent Rousseau never had the wish or the power to stir up revolt? What does it matter to me that Voltaire defended Calas to get his name in the papers? What does it matter to me that, during the appalling tyranny that has fallen on France, the philosophers, frightened for their heads, have withdrawn into prudent seclusion? Once they put forward maxims capable of spawning every crime, these crimes are their work, since the criminals are their disciples....

The tiger that rips men open is following his nature; the real criminal is the man who unmuzzles him and launches him on society....
BOOK TWO
ON THE NATURE OF SOVEREIGNTY
CHAPTER I. THE NATURE OF SOVEREIGNTY IN GENERAL
Every species of sovereignty is absolute of its nature, however the powers are organized, whether vested in one pair of hands or divided. In the last analysis, it will always be an absolute power which is able to commit evil with impunity, which is thus from this point of view despotic in the full force of the term and against which there is no defense other than rebellion.
Wherever sovereign powers are divided, the conflicts of these different powers can be looked at as the deliberations of a single sovereign, whose reason weighs up the pros and the cons. But once a decision is made, the situation is the same in both cases and the will of any sovereign whatever is always invincible.

However sovereignty is defined and vested, it is always one, unviolable and absolute. Take, for example, the English government: the kind of political trinity which makes it up does not stop sovereignty from being one, there as elsewhere. The powers balance each other, but, once they are in agreement, there is then only one will which cannot be thwarted by any other legal will, and Blackstone was right to claim that the English king and Parliament together can do anything.

The sovereign cannot therefore be judged: if he could be, the power possessing this right would be sovereign and there would be two sovereigns, which implies contradiction. The sovereign can no more modify than alienate itself: to limit it is to destroy it. It is absurd and contradictory for the sovereign to recognize a superior....[Social Contract, Book iii, Chap. xvi.]

The real problem, then, is not to prevent the sovereign from willing without restriction, which is contradictory, but of preventing him from willing unjustly.... While I might be forced to agree that one has the right to murder Nero, I would never accept that one has the right to judge him; for the law by virtue of which he would be judged would have been made either by himself or by some other person, which would suppose either a law made by a sovereign against himself or a sovereign above the sovereign, two equally inadmissible suppositions.

When considering governments in which the powers are divided, it is easy to believe that the sovereign can be judged, because of the activity of each power which acts on the others and, increasing its activity on certain unusual occasions, brings about secondary insurrections which are much less dangerous than insurrections properly speaking, in other words, "popular." But it is necessary to guard against a fallacy into which it is easy to fall if one looks at only one of the powers. It is necessary to envisage them in their entirety and to ask oneself if the sovereign will resulting from their joint wills can be impeded, thwarted, or punished.

One will find in the first place that every sovereign is despotic and that, with regard to them, only two courses can be taken, obedience or insurrection. It is possible to maintain, as a matter of fact, that although all sovereign wills are equally absolute, they are not equally blind or vicious, and that republican or mixed governments are superior to monarchies precisely because in them the decisions of the sovereign are generally wiser and more enlightened. This is in fact one of the principal ideas which should serve as a basis for the important examination of the superiority of one form of government over the other.

One will find in the second place that it is just the same to be subject to one sovereign as to another.

CHAPTER II. MONARCHY
It can be said in general that all men are born for monarchy. This form of government is the most ancient and the most universal.... Monarchical government is so natural that, without realizing it, men identify it with sovereignty. They seem tacitly to agree that, wherever there is no king, there is no real sovereign....
This is particularly striking in everything that has been said on both sides of the question that formed the subject of the first book of this work. The adversaries of divine origin always hold a grudge against kings and talk only of kings. They do not want to accept that the authority of kings comes from God: but it is not a question of royalty in particular but of sovereignty in general. Yes, all sovereignty derives from God; whatever form it takes, it is not the work of man. It is one, absolute and inviolable of its nature. Why, then, lay the blame on royalty, as though the inconveniences which are relied on to attack this system are not the same in any form of government? Once again, it is because royalty is the natural government and because in common discourse men confuse it with sovereignty by disregarding other governments, just as they neglect the exception when enunciating the general rule....

Man must always be brought back to history, which is the first and indeed the only teacher in politics. Whoever says that man is born for liberty is speaking nonsense. If a being of a superior order undertook the natural history of man, surely he would seek his directions in the history of facts. When he knew what man is and has always been, what he does and has always done, he would write; and doubtless he would reject as foolish the notion that man is not what he should be and that his condition is contrary to the laws of creation. The very expression of this proposition is sufficient to refute it.

History is experimental politics; and just as, in the physical sciences, a hundred books of speculative theories disappear before a single experiment, in the same way in political science no theory can be allowed if it is not the more or less probable corollary of well-attested facts. If the question is asked, "What is the most natural government to man," history will reply, It is monarchy.

This government no doubt has its drawbacks, like every other, but all the declamations that fill the books of the day on these kinds of abuses can only rouse pity for their authors. It is pride and not reason which gives rise to them. Once it is rigorously established that nations are not made for the same government, that each nation has that which is best for it, above all that "liberty is not open to every nation, and that the more we ponder on this principle laid down by Montesquieu, the more apparent its truth appears,"[Ibid., Book iii, Chap. viii.] we can no longer understand what the diatribes against the vices of monarchical government are about. If their aim is to make the unfortunate people who are destined to bear the disadvantages feel them more sharply, it is a most barbaric pastime; if their aim is to urge men to revolt against a government made for them, it is a crime beyond description.

But the subjects of monarchies are by no means reduced to taking refuge from despair in philosophic meditations; they have something better to do, which is to gain full knowledge of the excellence of their government and to learn not to envy others....

Let us go on to examine the principal characteristics of monarchical government....

Monarchy is a centralized aristocracy. At all times and in all places, aristocracy dominates. Whatever form is given to governments, birth and wealth always take the first rank, and nowhere is their rule more harsh than where it is not founded on the law. But in a monarchy the king is the center of this aristocracy: the latter, here as elsewhere, still rules, but it rules in the name of the king, or, if you like, the king is guided by the understanding of the aristocracy....

Avoiding all exaggeration, it is certain that the government of a single man is that in which the vices of the sovereign have the least effect upon the governed.

A very remarkable truth was spoken recently at the opening of the republican Lycee in Paris. "In absolute governments, the faults of the ruler can scarcely ruin everything at the same time, because his single will cannot do everything; but a republican government is obliged to be essentially reasonable and just, because the general will, once it goes astray, carries everything with it."[Speech given at the opening of the republican Lycee, December 31, 1794, by M. de la Harpe (Journal de Paris, 1795, No. 1l4, p. 461).]

This observation is most just: it is far from true that the will of the king does everything in a monarchy. It is supposed to do everything, and that is the great advantage of this government: but, in fact, its utility is almost wholly in centralizing advice and knowledge. Religion, laws, customs, opinion, class, and corporate privileges restrict the sovereign and prevent him from abusing his power; it is striking that kings have even been much more often accused of lacking will than of overexerting it. It is always the king's council that rules. But the pyramidal aristocracy that administers the state in monarchies has particular characteristics which deserve our attention.

In every country and under every possible government, the great officers always belong to the aristocracy, that is, to nobility and wealth, most often united. In saying that this must be so, Aristotle put forward a political axiom which simple good sense and the experience of the whole of history cannot allow us to doubt. This privilege of aristocracy is really a natural law.

Now, it is one of the greatest advantages of monarchical government that in it the aristocracy loses, as much as the nature of things allows, all those features offensive to the lower classes. It is important to understand the reasons for this.

1. This kind of aristocracy is legal; it is an integral part of government, everyone knows this, and it does not waken in anyone's mind the idea of usurpation and injustice. In republics, on the other hand, the distinction between persons exists as much as in monarchies, but it is harder and more offensive because it is not the work of the law and because popular opinion regards it as a continual rebellion against the principle of equality admitted by the constitution....

2. Once the influence of a hereditary aristocracy becomes inevitable (and the experience of every age leaves no doubt on this point), the best course to deprive this influence of the elements that rub against the pride of the lower classes is to remove all insurmountable barriers between the families within the state and to allow none of them to be humiliated by a distinction that they can never enjoy.

Now this is precisely the case in a monarchy resting on good laws. There is no family that the merit of its head cannot raise from the second to the first rank....

3. And this order of things appears still more perfect when it is remembered that the aristocracy of birth and office, already softened by the right belonging to every family to enjoy the same distinctions in its turn, is stripped of everything possibly offensive to the lower orders by the universal supremacy of the monarch, before whom no citizen is more powerful than another; the man in the street, who is insignificant when he measures himself against a great lord, measures the lord against the sovereign, and the title of subject which brings both of them under the same power and the same justice is a kind of equality that stills the inevitable pangs of self-esteem....

In the government of several, sovereignty is by no means A UNITY; and although the parts making it up form A UNITY, it is far from the case that they make the same impression on the mind. The human imagination does not grasp a unity that is only a metaphysical abstraction; on the contrary, it delights in separating each element of the general unity, and the subject has less respect for a sovereignty whose separate parts are not sufficiently above him. It follows that, in these kinds of government, sovereignty has not the same intensity or, in consequence, the same moral force....

Let us abandon all prejudice and party spirit, renounce exaggerated ideas and all the theoretical dreams fostered by the French fever, and European good sense will agree on the following propositions:

1. The king is sovereign; no one can share sovereignty with him, and all powers emanate from him.

z. His person is inviolable; no one has the right to depose or judge him.

3. He has not the right to condemn to death, or even impose any corporal punishment. The power that punishes derives from him, and that is sufficient.

4. If he imposes exile or imprisonment in cases in which reason of state prevents a judicial hearing, he should not be too secretive or act too much without the advice of an enlightened council.

5. The king cannot judge in civil cases; only the judges, in the name of the sovereign, can pronounce on property and contracts.

6. Subjects have the right, by means of certain differently composed bodies, councils, or assemblies, to denounce abuses to him and legally to communicate to him their grievances and their very humble remonstrances.

It is in these sacred laws, the more truly constitutional since they are written only in men's hearts, and more particularly in the paternal relationship between prince and subjects, that can be found the true character of European monarchy.

Whatever the intense and blind pride of the eighteenth century says about it, this is all we need. These elements, combined in different ways, produce all sorts of nuances in monarchical government. It can be seen, for example, that the men charged with carrying to the foot of the throne the representations and grievances of subjects can form bodies or assemblies; that the members who compose these assemblies or bodies can vary in number, in rank, in the nature and extent of their powers; that the method of election, the frequency and length of sessions, and so on, alter the number of these combinations: facies non omnibus una; but always you will find the same general character: that is, chosen men carrying legally to the father the complaints and the views of the family: nec diversa tamen....

How many faults power has committed! And how steadfastly it ignores the means of conserving itself! Man is insatiable for power; he is infinite in his desires and, always discontented with what he has, loves only what he has not. People complain of the despotism of princes; they ought to complain of the despotism of man. We are all born despots, from the most absolute monarch of Asia to the infant who smothers a bird with its hand for the pleasure of seeing that there exists in the world a being weaker than itself. There is not a man who does not abuse power, and experience shows that the most abominable despots, if they manage to seize the scepter, are precisely those who rant against despotism. But the Author of nature has set bounds to the abuse of power: He has willed that it destroys itself once it goes beyond its natural limits. Everywhere He has written this law; in the physical as in the moral world, it surrounds us and makes itself constantly heard. Look at this gun: up to a certain point, the longer you make it, the more effective it will be; but once you go at all beyond this limit, its effectiveness will be reduced. Look at this telescope; up to a certain point, the bigger you make it, the more powerful it will be; but go beyond that, and invincible nature will turn all your efforts to perfect the instrument against you. This is a crude image of power. To conserve itself, it must restrain itself, and it must always keep away from that point at which its most extreme effort leads to its own death.

Certainly I do not like popular assemblies any more than the next man; but French folly ought not to turn us aside from the truth and wisdom of the happy mean. If there is any indisputable maxim, it is that, in all mutinies, insurrections, and revolutions the people always start by being right and always end by being wrong. It is not true that every nation should have its national assembly in the French sense; it is not true that every individual is eligible for the national council; it is not even true that everyone can be an elector without any distinction of rank or fortune; it is not true that this council should be colegislative; finally it is not true that it ought to be composed the same way in different countries. But because these exaggerated claims are false, does it follow that no one has the right to speak for the common good in the name of the community and that we are prevented from acting wisely because the French have acted so foolishly? I do not understand this conclusion....

CHAPTER III. ON ARISTOCRACY
Aristocratic government is a monarchy in which the throne is vacant. Sovereignty there is in regency.
The regents who administer sovereignty being hereditary, it is totally separated from the people, and in this, aristocratic government approaches monarchy. It cannot, however, reach it in vigor; but from the point of view of wisdom, it has no equal. It can be said in general that all nonmonarchic governments are aristocratic, for democracy is only elective aristocracy....

Leaving aside the natural aristocracy that results from physical strength and talent, which it is unprofitable to discuss, there are only two sorts of aristocracy, elective and hereditary.... But, since elective monarchy is the weakest and most unstable of governments, and since experience has shown us clearly the superiority of hereditary monarchy, it follows by an indisputable analogy that hereditary aristocracy is preferable to elective....

All in all, hereditary aristocratic government is perhaps the most advantageous to what is called the people. Sovereignty is sufficiently concentrated to inspire respect in them; but, as it has fewer needs and less splendor, it asks less of them. If sometimes it is timid, this is because it is never imprudent....

CHAPTER IV. DEMOCRACY
Pure democracy does not exist any more than absolute despotism. "If you use the strict meaning of the term," says Rousseau admirably, "a true democracy has never existed and will never exist. It is against the natural order for the majority to govern and the minority to be governed."[Social Contract, Book iii, Chap. iv.]
The idea of a whole people being sovereign and legislative is so contrary to good sense that the Greek political writers, who should know a little about liberty, never talked about democracy as a legitimate government, at least when they meant to express themselves exactly. Aristotle especially defines democracy as the excess of the republic, just as despotism is file excess of monarchy.

If there is no such thing as a democracy, properly speaking, the same can be said of a perfect despotism, which is equally a hypothetical model. "It is wrong to think that there has ever been a single authority despotic in every respect; there has never been nor will there ever be such a system. The widest power is still bounded by some limits."[Montesquieu, Grandeur et decadence des Romains, Chap. xxii.]

But nothing stops us, in order to clarify our ideas, from considering these two forms of government as two theoretical extremes which every possible government resembles to a greater or lesser degree.

In this strict sense, I believe I can define democracy as an association of men without sovereignty. "When the whole people," says Rousseau, "decides for the whole people, it considers only itself.... Then the matter on which a decision is made is general, like the will which makes it; it is this act that I call a LAW."[Social Contract, Book ii, Chap. vi.]

What Rousseau calls eminently law is precisely what is incapable of bearing the name....

As a nation, like an individual, cannot possess coercive power over itself, it is clear that, if a democracy in its theoretical purity were to exist, there would be no sovereignty within this state: for it is impossible to understand by this word anything other than a repressive power that acts on the subject and that is external to him. It follows that this word subject, which is a relative term, is alien to republics, because there is no sovereign, properly speaking, in a republic and because there cannot be a subject without a sovereign, just as there cannot be a son without a father.

Even in aristocratic governments, in which sovereignty is much more palpable than in democracies, the word subject is nevertheless avoided, and other, less rigid, terms, which involve no exaggeration, are found.

In every country there are voluntary associations of men who have united for some self-interested or charitable purpose. These men have voluntarily submitted themselves to certain rules which they observe as long as they find it advantageous. They even submit themselves to certain punishments imposed when they have broken the regulations of the association. But these regulations have no authority other than the will itself of those who have drawn them up, and, when there are dissidents, there is no coercive force among them to restrain these dissidents.

A just idea of a true democracy can be gained by magnifying the idea of such corporations. The ordinances emanating from a people constituted in such a way would be rules, and not laws. Law is so little the will of all that the more it is the will of all, the less it is law: so that it would cease to be law if it was the work of all those who ought to obey it, without exception.

But a purely voluntary state of association exists no more than does a pure democracy. One only starts from this theoretical power in order to understand; and it is in this sense that one can claim that sovereignty is born the moment when the sovereign begins not to be the whole people and that it grows stronger to the degree that it becomes less the whole people.

The spirit of voluntary association is the constitutive principle of republics, and has necessarily a prime cause; it is divine, and no one can produce it. The degree to which it is mixed in sovereignty, the common base of all governments, determines the physiognomy of non-monarchical governments.

The observer, and particularly the foreign observer who lives in a republican country, can distinguish very well the effects of these two principles. Sometimes he feels sovereignty and sometimes the communal spirit that serves as a supplement to it. Public power acts less, and above all is less apparent, than in monarchies, seeming to mistrust itself. A certain collective feeling, which is easier to feel than to define, dispenses sovereignty from acting in a host of circumstances in which it would intervene elsewhere. A thousand small things come about of their own accord, and order and agreement show themselves on all sides for no apparent reason. Communal property is respected even by the poor, and everything, even the general propriety, gives the observer food for thought.

A republican nation being thus less governed than any other, it can be seen that the acts of sovereignty must be supplemented by public spirit, so that the less a nation has wisdom to see the good and virtue to follow it of itself, the less fitted it is for a republic.

The advantages and disadvantages of this kind of government are quickly discovered. At its best, it eclipses all others, and the marvels it works seduce even the calmest and most judicious of observers. But, in the first place, it is suitable only for very small nations, for there is no need to demonstrate that the formation and maintenance of the spirit of association becomes more difficult as the number of associates grows.

In the second place, justice has not that calm and smooth action that we ordinarily see in monarchies. In democracies, justice is sometimes weak and sometimes impassioned. It is said that, under these governments, no head can resist the sword of the law. This means that, the punishment of an illustrious criminal or accused person being a real joy for the plebs who by this console themselves for the inevitable superiority of the aristocracy, public opinion strongly favors this kind of sentence; but if the criminal is obscure, or in general if the crime wounds neither the pride nor the immediate interests of the majority of individuals, this same opinion resists the action of justice and paralyzes it.

In a monarchy, the aristocracy is only a prolongation of royal authority, and thus partakes to a certain degree in the inviolability of the monarch. This immunity (always very much below that of the sovereign) is graduated so that it is held by fewer persons as it grows in extent.

In a monarchy, immunity, differently graduated, belongs to the minority, in a democracy to the majority. In the first case it shocks the plebs; in the second it pleases them. I believe it to be good in both cases, that is to say, I believe it to be a necessary element in both governments, which comes to the same thing, for what constitutes a government is always good, at least in an absolute sense.

But it is another matter when one government is compared to another. It is then a question of weighing the benefits and inconveniences to humanity of different social systems.

It is from this point of view that I believe monarchy to be superior to democracy in the administration of justice; and I am talking not only of criminal but also of civil justice. The same weakness can be observed in the one as in the other.

The magistrate is not sufficiently above the citizen; he has the air of an arbitrator rather than of a judge; and, forced to act cautiously even when he speaks in the name of the law, it is obvious that he does not believe in his own power. His strength lies only in the adherence of his equals, because there is either no sovereign or it is not strong enough....

In general, justice is always weak in democracies when it acts alone, and always cruel or irresponsible when it relies on the people.

Some political writers have maintained that one of the advantages of republican government was the ability the people possess to confide the exercise of its authority only to men worthy of it. No one, they claim, can choose better than the people: where their interests are concerned, nothing can seduce them, and merit alone decides them.

I fancy that this idea is largely delusory. Democracy could not last a moment if it was not tempered by aristocracy, and above all by hereditary aristocracy, which is perhaps more indispensable to this government than to monarchy. In a republic, the right to vote gives neither prestige nor power. When Rousseau tells us, in the introduction to the Social Contract, that, in his quality as a citizen of a free state, he is personally sovereign, even the most benevolent reader is inclined to laugh. Men count for something in a republic only to the degree that birth, marriage, and high talents give them influence; the simple citizen counts for nothing....

In times of peace, the people allow themselves to be led by their rulers: then they are wise because they act little; they choose well because the choice is made for them. When they are content with the power they derive from the constitution and, without venturing to make use of this power, rely on the understanding and wisdom of the aristocracy, when on the other side the rulers, sufficiently restrained by the fear of being deprived of the exercise of power, use it with a wisdom which justifies confidence, this is when republics shine. But when respect on the one side and fear on the other disappear, the state slides quickly toward ruin....

However, I do not want to claim that monarchical government is any less open to mistakes in its choice of men; but the eternal declamation on the errors of blind patronage are much less well founded than is commonly imagined. In the first place, if it is pride that complains, kings always choose badly, for there is not a malcontent who does not prefer himself without question to the most happy choice. Moreover, too often kings are accused when it is the people who should be accused. In periods of general degeneracy, men complain that merit does not succeed; but where is it then, this ignored merit? They are obliged to point it out before accusing the government. During the last two French reigns, it is true that very mediocre men have been vested with high responsibilities; but to which men of merit were they preferred? Now that the most complete revolution the world has seen has broken all the chains which could bind the talents captive, where are they? You might perhaps find them, but they will be joined to profound immorality; but it is the sensible spirit of self-preservation of states that has barred talents of this kind from high offices. Moreover, as the Scriptures put it, there is a certain cleverness that works only for ill. This is the talent that has devastated France for five years. If you look carefully, you will find no or very little real political talent among even the most prominent men who have appeared on this bloody and tearful stage. They have been very good at doing evil; this is the only praise that can be bestowed on them. Happily the most famous of them have been writers; and, when all passions have been buried in the grave, posterity will discover from their indiscreet pages that the most monstrous errors dominated these pride-ridden men and that the previous government which rejected, curbed, and punished them was, without knowing it, fighting for its own life.

It is therefore because France was degenerating, because she was deficient in talents, that the kings seemed to welcome too much the mediocrity brought forward by intrigue. There is a very gross error, into which we nevertheless fall every day without realizing it. Although we recognize the hidden hand which guides all things, yet so important does the action of secondary causes seem to us that we fairly commonly reason as if this hand did not exist. When we contemplate the play of intrigue around thrones, words like chance, good luck, bad luck, fortune naturally present themselves, and we say them a little too quickly without perceiving that they make no sense.

Without doubt, man is free; he can make mistakes, but not sufficiently to derange general plans. We are all bound to the throne of God by a pliant chain which reconciles the self-propulsion of free agents with divine supremacy. Unquestionably, a certain king might in a certain age prevent a real talent from occupying a position made for it, and this unfortunate capacity can be more or less extensive. But, in general, there is a secret power that carries each individual to his place; otherwise the state could not continue. We recognize in a plant some unknown power, some single form-giving force which creates and conserves, which moves unwaveringly toward its end, which appropriates what is useful to it and rejects that which would harm it, which carries even to the last fibril of the last leaf the sap that it needs, and fights with all its might against the diseases of the vegetable world. This force is still more obvious and more wonderful in the animal kingdom. How blind we are! How can we deny that the body politic has also its law, its soul, its form-giving force, and believe that everything is dependent on the whims of human ignorance? If the moral mechanism of states were revealed to us, we would be freed of a host of errors: we would see, for instance, that the man who appears to us to be fitted for a certain position is a disease which the life force pushes to the surface, while we deplore the misfortune that stops him from invading the sources of life. We are misled every day by the words talent and genius; often these qualities are absent where we think we see them, and often also they belong to dangerous men....

To hear these defenders of democracy talk, one would think that the people deliberate like a committee of wise men, whereas in truth judicial murders, foolhardy undertakings, wild choices, and above all foolish and disastrous wars are eminently the prerogatives of this form of government.

But who has ever said worse of democracy than Rousseau, for he declares point-blank that it is made only for a society of Gods.[Ibid., Book iii, Chap. iv.] It remains to be seen how a government which is made only for gods can yet be proposed to men as the only legitimate government, for if this is not the meaning of the social contract, the social contract has no meaning.

But this is not all: "How many things," he says, "difficult to bring together are required by this government. First, a very small state, in which the people can easily assemble, and where each citizen can easily know all the others; second, great simplicity of manners to prevent a multiplicity of problems and difficult discussions; then a high degree of equality in rank and fortune without which equality in rights and authority would not last for long; finally, little or no luxury."[Ibid.]

At this point, I shall consider only the first of these conditions. If democracy is suitable only for very small states, how can this form of government be put forward as the only legitimate form of government and as, so to speak, a formula capable of resolving all political problems?...

I do not know why Rousseau was willing to admit that democracy involves some small disadvantages, but he had a very simple way of justifying it, which is to judge it only by its theoretical perfection and to regard its disadvantages as small and insignificant anomalies which do not deserve careful attention.

"The general will," he says, "is always right and always tends to the public utility, but the deliberations of the people have not always the same rightness.... The people are never corrupted, but they are often misled, and it is only then that they appear to will what is evil."[Ibid., Book ii, Chap. iii.] Drink, Socrates, drink; and console yourself with these distinctions: the good people of Athens only appear to will what is evil....

CHAPTER V. THE BEST SPECIES OF GOVERNMENT
Rousseau saw quite correctly that no one should ask what is the best form of government in general, since none is suitable for every nation. Each nation has its own, as it has its own language and character, and this government is the best for it. The consequence of which is obviously that all theories of social contract are pipedreams.... Since none of the varying circumstances depend on men, it follows that the consent of the people plays no part in the formation of governments.... The question is not to know what is the best form of government but which nation is best governed according to the principles of its government....
CHAPTER VI. CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT
The best government for each nation is that which, in the territory occupied by this nation, is capable of producing the greatest possible sum of happiness and strength, for the greatest possible number of men, during the longest possible time. I venture to believe that the justice of this definition cannot be denied and that it is by following it that comparison between states from the point of view of their governments becomes possible. In fact, although it is impossible to ask What is the best form of government? nothing stops us asking, Which nation is relatively the most numerous, the strongest, and the happiest, over the greatest period of time, through the influence of the government suitable to it?
What peculiarity of mind prevents us from using in the study of politics the same methods of reasoning and the same general hypotheses which guide us in the study of other sciences?

In physical research, if there is a problem of estimating a variable force, we take the average quantity. In astronomy in particular we always talk of average distance and average time. To judge the merit of a government, the same method should be used.

Any government is a variable force that produces effects as variable as itself, within certain limits. To judge it, it should not be examined at a given moment, but over the whole of its existence. Then to judge the French monarchy properly, a sum of the virtues and vices of all the French kings should be made, and divided by sixty-six: the result is an average king; and the same is true of other monarchies.

Democracy has one brilliant moment, but it is a moment and it must pay dearly for it. The great days of Athens might, I agree, inspire desires in the subject of a monarchy, languishing in such and such a period under an inept or wicked king. Nevertheless, we would be greatly mistaken if we claimed to establish the superiority of democracy over monarchy by comparing moment for moment, because, in this way of judging, we neglect among other things the consideration of duration, which is a necessary element of these sorts of calculation.

In general, all democratic governments are only transitory meteors, whose brilliance excludes duration....

In discussing the different kinds of government, the general happiness is not sufficiently considered, although it should be our sole criterion. We should have the courage to face a glaring truth which would cool our enthusiasm for free constitutions a little; this is that, in every republic over a certain size, what is called liberty is only the total sacrifice of a great number of men for the independence and pride of a small number....

Properly speaking, all governments are monarchies which differ only in whether the monarch is for life or for a term of years, hereditary or elective, individual or corporate; or, if you will (for it is the same idea in other terms), all governments are aristocratic, composed of a greater or smaller number of rulers, from democracy, in which this aristocracy is composed of as many men as the nature of things permits, to monarchy, in which the aristocracy, inevitable under every government, is headed by a single man topping the pyramid and which undoubtedly constitutes the most natural government for man.

But of all monarchies, the hardest, most despotic, and most intolerable is King People. Again history testifies to the great truth that the liberty of the minority is founded only on the slavery of the masses and that republics have never been anything but multimember sovereigns, whose despotism, always harder and more capricious than that of kings, increases in intensity as the number of subjects grows....

CHAPTER VII. REFLECTIONS ON THIS SUBJECT
What do all these philosophers want, since nothing that exists or has existed can please them? They do not want any government, since there is no government which does not lay claim to obedience. It is not this or that authority which they detest, but authority itself; they cannot endure any....
It is enough to recall the excellent phrase of Rousseau, who was always right when he spoke against himself: "If I consult philosophers, each has only his own voice." Deadly enemies of every kind of association, possessed of a repellent and solitary pride, they agree on only one point, the fury of destruction. Since each wishes to replace what displeases him by his own visions which are agreeable to him alone, the result is that all their power is negative and that all their efforts to build are ineffective and ridiculous. Misguided man, learn once for all to recognize these dangerous tricksters; leave them to admire themselves on their own and rally to the national reason which is never mistaken. Remember that every nation has, in its laws and ancient customs, everything it needs to be happy as far as it can be and that by using these ancient laws as the basis for all your reconstruction you can reveal all your perfectibility without giving way to fatal innovations.

Raise your mind again to higher thoughts. The eternal reason has spoken, and its infallible oracles have shown us in pride "the beginning of all evils." This terrible principle is rampant throughout Europe, since these same philosophers have relieved you of your father's faith. Hatred of authority is the scourge of our day: there is no remedy for this ill except in the sacred maxims you have been made to forget. Archimedes knew well that, to raise the world, you need a fulcrum outside the world.

To overthrow the moral world, the enemies of all order have hit on this fulcrum. Atheism and immorality stir up revolt and insurrection....

In general, we know almost nothing about the unity of things, and in this we are to be excused, but we cannot be excused for being ignorant that this unity exists. The imaginary world of Descartes represents fairly well the reality of the political world. Every nation is a particular vortex at once impelling and impelled; the whole is nothing but the totality of these vortices, and nations are between themselves just like the individuals who compose them. Each member of these great families we call nations has received a character, faculties, and a mission peculiar to himself. Some are destined to slip in silence along the path of life without their passage being noted. Others herald their progress, and nearly always they are rewarded by fame rather than happiness. Individual talents are infinitely diversified with a divine magnificence, and the most brilliant are not the most useful; but every one has some use, every one is in its place; all play a part in the general organization, all move unswervingly toward the end of the association....

It is the same of nations as of individuals. All have a character and a mission that they fulfill without realizing it. Some are learned and others are conquerors; and again there is an infinite diversity of general characteristics. Among conquering nations, some are purely destructive whilst others seem to destroy only to make room for creations of a new kind....

No nation owes its character to its government, any more than its language. On the contrary, it owes its government to its character, which in fact is always reinforced and perfected subsequently by political institutions. If you see a nation decline, this is not because its government is bad; it is because this government, which is the best for that nation, dies like all human works, or rather it is because the national character is worn out. Then nations must undergo a political rebirth, or perish....

Translation by Jack Lively]

Return to Writings of Joseph de Maistre in English Translation.	



LETTERS TO A RUSSIAN GENTLEMAN
LETTER I.

SIR, - I have already had the pleasure to interest, and even astonish you, in speaking to you of the Inquisition. This celebrated institution having been the subject of several conversations between us, you expressed a desire that the divers reflections I made in regard to it, should be suitably arranged and committed to writing for your use, I hasten to comply with your wish; and I shall avail myself of this occasion to collect and place before you a certain number of authorities which could not have been quoted in a simple conversation. I begin, without preface, by the history of the tribunal.

I recollect having told you in general terms that the most honourable monument of the Inquisition was precisely the official report, in virtue of which this tribunal was suppressed, in the year 1812, by those Cortes, of philosophic memory, who, in the transient exercise of their absolute power, succeeded only in giving satisfaction to themselves. (1)

If you consider the spirit of this assembly, and in particular that of the committee charged to speak on the occasion, you will agree that an avowal favourable to the Inquisition, proceeding from such an authority, is not open to any reasonable objection.

Some modern unbelievers, echoes of Protestant opinion, would have it that St. Dominic was the author of the Inquisition, and they failed not accordingly to declaim furiously against him. It is matter of fact, nevertheless, that St. Dominic never acted the part of an inquisitor, and that the Inquisition, the origin of which traces to the Council of Verona, held in 1184, (2) was only confided to the Dominicans in 1233; that is, twelve years after the death of St. Dominic.

The Manichean heresy, better known in modern times as that of the Albigenses, threatening alike the Church and the State in the twelfth century, ecclesiastical commissioners were sent to seek out the guilty, and hence they were called Inquisitors. Innocent III gave his approbation to the institution in 1204. The Dominicans acted at first as delegates of the Pope, and of his legates. The Inquisition being only, as regarded them, an appendage to their preaching, they derived from their principal function the designation of Brothers Preachers, which they still retain. Like all institutions intended to produce great results, the Inquisition did not begin by what it afterwards became. All such institutions are established nobody knows how. Called into existence by circumstances, they are favoured at first by public opinion; and afterwards, authority, understanding what advantage it may derive from them, sanctions them and gives them a form. (3) Hence it is not easy to assign a fixed epoch to the Inquisition, which, at first weak and inconsiderable, advanced afterwards gradually to its just dimensions, like everything that is destined to have any duration; but it may be most confidently affirmed that the Inquisition properly so called, was only established legally with its character and attributions by virtue of the Bull Ille humani generis of Gregory IX, addressed to the Provincial of Toulouse on the 24th April of the above-mentioned year 1233. It is, moreover, fully proved that the first Inquisitors, and St. Dominic in particular, never opposed to heresy any other arms than prayer, patience, and instruction. (4)

You will be pleased to observe here, in passing, that we must never confound the character, and, if it may be so expressed, the primitive genius of any institution whatever, with the variations which the wants or the passions of men oblige it to undergo in the course of ages. The Inquisition is of its nature good, mild, and conservative: such is the universal and indelible character of every ecclesiastical institution: this you see at Rome, and you will witness the same wherever the church shall have authority. But if the civil power, adopting this institution, thinks proper, for its own safety, to render it more severe, the church is no longer answerable for it.

Towards the end of the fifteenth century, Judaism had struck such deep roots in Spain, that it threatened to suffocate entirely the national plant. The riches of its followers, their influence, their alliances with the most illustrious families of the monarchy, rendered them infinitely formidable; they were in reality a nation enclosed within a nation. (5)

Mahometanism prodigiously increased the danger; the tree had been overthrown in Spain, but the roots still lived. There was question of the very existence of the Spanish nation; whether its rich provinces should become the prey of Judaism and Islamism; whether superstition, despotism, and barbarism should yet enjoy a dismal victory over the human race? The Jews were almost masters of Spain; mutual hatred was carried to excess; the Cortes required that severe measures should be adopted against them. In 1301, they rebelled, and great numbers of them were slain. The danger increasing everyday, Ferdinand the Catholic conceived that there was nothing better calculated to save Spain than the Inquisition. Isabella was at first opposed to it; but at last her husband overcame her opposition; and Sixtus IV expedited the bulls of inquisition in the year 1478. (6)

Permit me, Sir, before preceeding farther, to present to your consideration an important remark: Never could great political evils, never especially could violent attacks against the body of the state, be prevented or repelled, except by means equally violent. This is one of the most incontestable of political axioms. In all imaginable dangers, everything is resolved in the Roman formula: Videant consules, ne respublica detrimentum capiat(7) If you remember the severities of Torquemada, without taking into consideration all that they prevented, you cease to reason.

Let us constantly call to mind, therefore, this fundamental truth: that the Inquisition was, originally, an institution required and established by the kings of Spain, in difficult and extraordinary circumstances. (8) The committee of the Cortes expressly acknowledged this fact; they confine themselves to saying that circumstances having changed, the Inquisition is become useless. (9)

We are astonished to find the inquisitors harassing an accused person with questions, in order to discover whether there were in his genealogy a drop of Jewish or Mahometan blood. What mattered that? the superficial will not fail to inquire; of what consequence was it to know who was the grandfather or the great-grandfather of an accused party? It was of great consequence at that time, because these two proscribed races, having still a great many connections of relationship in the state, must necessarily have trembled themselves, or made other men tremble. (10)

It was necessary, therefore, to alarm the imagination by showing always the anathema attached to the mere suspicion of Judaism and Mahometanism. It is a great error to suppose that, in order to get rid of a powerful enemy, it is sufficient to check him; nothing is done, until he be compelled to give way.

With the exception of a very small number of well-informed men, you can scarcely speak of the Inquisition, without finding everywhere three capital errors planted, and, as it were, riveted in the mind, and to such a degree, that they hardly yield to the clearest demonstrations.

It is believed that the Inquisition is a purely ecclesiastical tribunal; this is false. It is believed that the ecclesiastics, who sit in this tribunal, condemn certain accused parties to the punishment of death; this is false. It is believed that men are condemned simply for opinions; this is false.

The tribunal of the Inquisition is entirely a royal institution: the king appoints the inquisitor-general, who in his turn, names the other inquisitors, with the consent of the king. The constitutive regulation of this tribunal was published in the year 1484, by the Cardinal Torquemada, in concert with the king. (11)

The inferior inquisitors could do nothing without the approbation of the chief inquisitor; nor could the latter act without the concurrence of the supreme council. This council not being established by a bull of the Pope, when the office of inquisitor-general becomes vacant, the members of the tribunal proceed alone, not as ecclesiastical, but as royal judges. (12)

The inquisitor, by virtue of the bulls of the sovereign Pontiff, and the king by virtue of his royal prerogative, constitute the authority which regulates, and has always regulated, the tribunals of the inquisition; tribunals which are, at the same time, both royal and ecclesiastical; so that if either of the two powers happened to withdraw, the action of the tribunal would necessarily be suspended. (13)

The committee is pleased to present to us these two powers in equilibrium in the tribunals of the Inquisition; but, Sir, you must be well aware that nobody can be the dupe of this pretended equilibrium; the Inquisition is an instrument wholly royal; it is completely in the hands of the king, and it can never inflict injury except through the fault of the ministers of the prince.

If the procedure be not regular, the proofs not sufficiently clear, the counsellors of the king, whenever there is question of capital punishments, can, by a single word, quash the process. Religion and the priesthood have nothing to do with the business. If any accused party were unfortunately punished without being guilty, it would be the fault, as you shall presently see, of the king of Spain, whose laws would have unjustly ordered the punishment; or that of his great magistrates, who would have unjustly inflicted it.

I pray you to observe, Sir, that among the innumerable declamations published against the Inquisition in the course of last century, you will not find a word on the distinguishing characteristic of this tribunal. It was well worth while, however, that it should be remarked. Voltaire has depicted a hundred times over in his works: -
 

That bloody tribunal,
That awful monument of monkish power,
Spain has received, but which Spain itself abhors:
Which avenges, but dishonours the altar;
Which, all covered with blood, with flames surrounded,
Slaughters poor mortals with a holy sword. (14)
 

The tribunal thus described in such odious colours belongs, nevertheless, to a nation renowned for its wisdom and exalted feeling; a tribunal purely royal, consisting of the most learned and most distinguished of the clerical order; judging real crimes in virtue of preexisting and public laws; judging with wisdom, perhaps unparalleled, and never condemning to death. What name can be given to the shameless poet who has dared to travesty it in so infamous a manner? But, the author of Joan of Arc had his reasons for detesting an authority which would have known how to prevent this malignant writer from corrupting or destroying Spain if he had happened to be born there.

His wicked fooleries provoke the "inextinguishable laughter" of wise men, (15) but the multitude is easily caught by them, and by degrees the Inquisition comes to be looked upon as a club of stupid and ferocious monks, who cause men to be roasted for their diversion. The error gains upon sensible persons, even, and creeps into works generally devoted to the defence of sound principles, to such a degree, that in the Journal de l'Empire it was in our power to read, not long ago, this strange passage: - "It is true, whatever may have been said of it, that the inquisitors had retained, until 1783, the somewhat severe habit of solemnly burning people who believed only in God: this was their old trick, but with this exception, they were of admirable composition." (16)

Assuredly the author of this article bestowed very little thought on what he was writing. Where, in all the world, is the tribunal that never condemned to death? And what crime does the civil tribunal commit which sentences to death an accused party, by virtue of a law of the state appointing this punishment for the offence of which such accused party is convicted? And in what Spanish code of laws do we read that Deists shall be punished with death? It would be difficult to impose more completely on the credulity of a superficial reader.

Among the errors without number which the eighteenth century propagated and rooted in the minds of men with such deplorable success, none, I must own, ever surprised me so much as that which supposed, maintained, and made it to be believed by the ignorant multitude, that priests could condemn a man to death. It is allow able to be ignorant of the religion of Po, of Buddha, of Samonocondom (17); but what European be entitled to be ignorant of Catholic Christianity? What eye has not beheld this great light, for more than eighteen hundred years suspended between heaven and earth? Where is the ear that has not heard the eternal axiom of this religion, The church abhors blood? Who is not aware that the priest is forbidden to be a surgeon, lest his consecrated hand should shed the blood of man even in attempting to heal him? Who does not know that in the countries of the obedience of the Church, the priest is dispensed from deposing as a witness in capital trial, and that in the countries where it has been thought proper to deny him this condescension, he is at least permitted to enter his protest, to the effect that he depones only because justice requires it, and that he will ask for nothing but mercy. Never did the priest erect a scaffold; he ascends it only as a martyr, or to offer consolation: he preaches only mercy and clemency, and, in no region of the globe did he ever shed any blood save his own.

"The Church, that holy spouse of the Son of God, understands full well, according to the example of her heavenly bridegroom, to shed her own blood for other men, but not how to spill men's blood for her own sake. Her horror of murder is particularly great, and in proportion to the special light which God has imparted to her, she considers men not only as men, but as the images of the God whom she adores. Towards each of them she bears a holy respect, which renders them all venerable in her eyes, as being redeemed at an infinite price in order to become the temples of the living God; and thus she believes that the death of a man who is killed without the order of his God, is not only a murder, but a sacrilege, which deprives her of one of her members, since whether he be faithful or otherwise, she considers him as one of her children, or as capable of becoming so.

"Every one knows that individuals are never allowed to ask the death of any person, so that it has been necessary to appoint public officers who should demand it in the name of the King, or rather on the part of God himself; and therefore, in order to not as faithful dispensers of this divine power, to take away the life of men, the magistrates are not allowed to judge except according to the depositions of witnesses; ... hence they cannot, in conscience, pronounce otherwise than according to the laws, nor judge deserving of death others than those whom the laws condemn to this penalty. Consequently, if the order of God obliges them to give up to punishment the bodies of such wretched men, the same order of God requires that they should take care of their guilty souls ... All this is quite pure and innocent. Nevertheless, to such a degree does the Church abhor blood, that she considers incapable of the ministry of her altars those who should have been present at a sentence of death, although attended by circumstances so much in accordance with religion." (18)

This I think you will admit, Sir, is an unimpeachable theory; but would you know, moreover, from experience, the real spirit of the priesthood on this essential point? Study it in the countries where the priest has held sway, or in those where he still rules. Extraordinary circumstances had established in Germany a multitude of ecclesiastical sovereignties. In order to form an opinion of them as regards their justice and their mildness, it would suffice to call to mind the old German proverb: - It is good to live under the crosier. (19) Proverbs, which are the fruit of the experience of nations, never lead astray. I appeal, therefore to this evidence, sustained as it is, besides, by that of all who have not lost their judgment and their memory. Never, under those pacific governments, was there question of persecutions, nor of capital sentences against the spiritual enemies of the power that reigned.

But Sir, what shall we say of Rome? It is undoubtedly under the government of the Pontiffs that the true spirit of the priesthood must appear in the least equivocal manner. Now, it is a fact universally known, that this government was never blamed for anything but mildness. Nowhere will be found a more paternal regimen, a more equal distribution of justice, a system of taxation at once more humane and wise, more perfect toleration. Rome is, perhaps, the only place in Europe where the Jew is neither mistreated nor humbled. Undoubtedly, at any rate, it is the spot where he enjoys most happiness; for another proverbial expression has styled Rome, from time immemorial, the paradise of the Jews.

Open history: what sovereignty has been less severe than that of modern Rome, against anti-religious delinquencies of every kind? Even in those times which we call the ages of ignorance and fanaticism, never did this disposition vary. Permit me to adduce merely one instance, Clement IV literally scolding the king of France (who, nevertheless, was Saint Louis) on account of laws too severe, in the judgment of the Pontiff, which this great prince had enacted against blasphemers; (20) earnestly beseeching him, in his bull of 12th July, 1268, to mitigate these laws; and saying, also in a bull of the same date to the king of Navarre: "It is not at all proper to imitate our most dear son in Jesus Christ, the illustrious king of the French, in regard to the too vigorous laws he has promulgated against these sorts of crimes." (21)

Voltaire, at those moments when the exquisite sense he possessed was not obfuscated by the anti-religious fever, not unfrequently bore honourable testimony to the government of the Pontiffs. I shall present you with one very remarkable instance. It is taken from his poem, called La Loi naturelle, in which we should certainly not think of looking for such a passage, if our attention were not directed to it: -

Marc Aurelius and Trajan blended in the field of Mars,
The Pontiff's cap and the diadem of the Caesars.
The universe at rest under their happy genius,
Was a stranger to the mania of scholastic wars;
These great legislators, filled with a holy zeal,
Fought not for their sacred chickens.
Rome, even to-day true to these maxims,
Unites the throne and the altar by legitimate ties.
Her citizens in peace, wisely governed,
Are no longer conquerors, but are more fortunate. (22)

Am I not entitled now to ask how it is possible that a general character, established on such evidence, should belie itself on one point of the globe? Mild, tolerant, charitable, the bearer of consolation in every country of the world, by what species of magic could it be cruel in Spain, in the midst of a nation eminently noble and generous? This is of the highest importance; in the examination of all possible questions, there is nothing so essential as to avoid confusion of ideas. When discussing the Inquisition, therefore, let us separate and distinguish most exactly the part of the civil government from that of the church. All the severity and terror this tribunal exhibits, and the punishment of death particularly, belong to the government; they lie with it, they concern it only, and it alone must be called to account. All the clemency, on the contrary, which plays so important a part in the tribunal of the Inquisition, proceeds from the church, which interferes with punishments only in order to suppress or modify them. This indelible character has never varied; at this age of the world, it is more than an error, it is a crime to maintain, to imagine even, that priests can pronounce sentences of death.

There is a great fact in the history of France which is not sufficiently observed; I allude to the Templars. These unfortunate men, whether guilty or not (this is not the point in question), expressly demanded to be judged by the tribunal of the Inquisition; for they knew well, historians say, that if they obtained such judges, they could not be condemned to death.

But the king of France, who had taken his resolution, and who perceived the inevitable consequence of the Templars having recourse to the Inquisition, shut himself up alone with his council of state, and abruptly condemned them to death. This fact is not, as appears to me, sufficiently known.

At the beginning, even, and when there was most need of severity, the inquisitors in Spain did not pronounce any punishment more severe than that of the confiscation of property; and even this was remitted in favour of every guilty person who abjured his errors within the term called The period of grace. (Rapport, p. 33.)

It is not very clearly seen, from the report which I am quoting, at what epoch the tribunal of the Inquisition began to pronounce sentence of death; but as regards the matter we are discussing, this is of little consequence: it is sufficient for us to know, and this is incontestable, that it could only acquire this right by becoming a royal institution, and that every sentence of death remains essentially foreign to the priesthood.

In our days there is no longer uncertainty on this point. It is known that, for every sentence of importance, (23) and even for the simple seizure of the person, nothing is done without the advice of the supreme council, and this already supposes all imaginable prudence and circumspection; but in fine, if the accused party be declared heretical, the tribunal, after having decreed the confiscation of his property, remits him for legal punishment to the secular arm, that is, to the Council of Castile, which it is sufficient to name, since there is nothing more wise, more learned, or more impartial in the universe. But, if the proofs are not clear, or if the guilty are not obstinate, they are obliged only to make an abjuration, which takes place in the church with the prescribed ceremonies. There results, indeed, a certain dishonour as regards the family of the party found guilty, and he becomes incapable of exercising any public employment (ibid. p. 65); but I am quite sure that these last dispositions are only a stratagem to which clemency has recourse in order to save even the most guilty. Certain facts which I have ascertained, and especially the character of the tribunal, leave me no room to doubt of this.

The tribunal of the Inquisition is composed of a supreme chief, called grand inquisitor, who is always an archbishop or a bishop; of eight ecclesiastical councillors, of whom six are always seculars and two regulars. Of these last, one is always a Dominican by virtue of a privilege accorded by King Philip III. The other belongs to the other religious orders, in regular rotation, according to a disposition of Charles III. The youngest of the clerical councillors performs the functions of fiscal, and in certain cases, of which I do not possess in exact knowledge, the attendance of two councillors of Castile is required. I understand, nevertheless, that they are convoked as often as there is question of capital punishments. (24)

This simple exposition causes to disappear, as you see, the two phantoms of Voltaire, and of so many other imaginations: the monkish power, and the bloody tribunal. Two monks among eleven or thirteen judges cannot be considered of much consequence; and as to those poor Dominicans, on whom our prejudices poured all the odium of the Inquisition, we are absolutely obliged to acquit them.

Let this tribunal he considered under every aspect, it would scarcely be possible to imagine one, the composition of which is more calculated to remove all suspicion of cruelty, and even, I would venture to say, of simple severity. Every man who knows the spirit of the Catholic priesthood, will be convinced, before having made inquiry, that in such a tribunal, mercy must necessarily hold away.

I must particularly call your attention to the fact that, independently of the favourable presumptions arising from the mere composition of the tribunal, it supposes, moreover, an infinity of specially lenient usages, which practice alone makes known, and which all redound to the advantage of the accused.

Without dwelling longer on this subject, I shall lay before you a sentence of the Inquisition of the severest kind; that which, without ordering (which is not possible), nevertheless entails death, when there is a question of a crime which the law visits with the last punishment.

"We have declared and declare the accused N. N. convicted of being an apostate heretic; (25) a supporter and harbourer of heretics, who falsely pretends to confess (26) the truth and impenitently relapses; by which crimes he has incurred the penalties of the greater excommunication and confiscation of his goods to the profit of the chamber royal and of his majesty's fisc. (27) We declare, moreover, that the accused ought to be given up, as we give him up, to the justice of the secular arm, which we pray and charge most earnestly, and in the best and strongest manner we are able, to act in his regard with goodness and commiseration."

The Spanish author of the Inquisition Unveiled, to whom I am indebted for these details, pretends, indeed, that this merciful clause is a mere formality which produces no result, and he cites Van Espen, according to whom the protestation made by the tribunal, is only a kind of external formula, which is, nevertheless, dear to the church. (28)

This objection does not disturb the general thesis, that the Inquisition never condemns to death, and that the name of a Catholic priest will never be found appended to a capital sentence.

The Spanish law ordaining the punishment of death against such or such a crime, temporal justice cannot oppose this law; and if the Inquisition, as always happens, condemns only on incontrovertible evidence, its judgments in capital cases will always be followed by death, but without this tribunal taking any part in the matter, and it always remains true that it does not condemn to death; that secular authority is perfectly at liberty to act as it understands the case, and, if in virtue of that clause, dear to the church, the royal judges suffered an innocent person to undergo capital punishment, they would be the first culprits.

Hence the expression, so often repeated, of bloody tribunal, is mere nonsense. There is not, there cannot be, a tribunal in the world, that is not, unfortunately, in a position to condemn to death, and that is not irreproachable in this respect, whenever, on undoubted grounds, it puts the law in execution, and that would not be culpable if it did not. (29)

The tribunal of the Inquisition, besides, does not condemn to the punishment of death ordained by the law; this, notwithstanding some appearances to the contrary, is an affair purely and essentially civil.

What, then, will be said?

The committee of the Cortes is fully agreed on this point with the author of "The Inquisition Unveiled," whom I have just quoted.

"Philip II," says he, "the most absurd of princes, was the real founder of the Inquisition: it was his deep policy that carried it to the highpoint it attained. The kings always repelled the counsels aud suspicions that were addressed to them against this tribunal, because they are in all cases absolute masters to name, to suspend, or to dismiss the inquisitors, and that besides, they have nothing to fear from the Inquisition, which is terrible only to their subjects." (30)

I avail myself of this formal avowal of the Committee to render the question absolutely foreign to the priesthood; and, if anything were wanting to the acknowledgment I have just called to mind, you might read in another part of the same report, a remarkable passage in which the reporter of the committee observes, that it will not be found in any bull of the Popes that the supreme council has a right to expedite matters in the absence of the great Inquisitor, which it does, nevertheless, without any difficulty; whence the reporter concluded very justly, that the councillors act in this case, not as ecclesiastical, but as royal judges. (p. 35)

Besides, of what consequence is it to pursue this question farther, when once it is admitted that today, as in former times, no ordinance of the Inquisition could be, I say not, put in execution, but even published without the previous consent of the king? (31)

Hence the kings of Spain have always strongly held to the Inquisition; hence Charles V, among others, having been requested by the states of Arragon and Castile to render the proceedings of the Inquisition a little less severe, this prince who was certainly no tyro in the art of government, replied in ambiguous terms, which appeared to concede everything, and, in reality, conceded nothing. (Ibid. p. 50.) The historian least open to suspicion in matters of this kind, had good reason, therefore, to acknowledge frankly, that the religious Inquisition was, in reality, nothing else than a political Inquisition. (32)

It is very remarkable that in the year 1519, the Arragonese had obtained of Pope Leo X all that they desired on this point: nothing could give a better idea of the spirit of the church in general, and of the character of the Sovereign Pontiffs. But Charles V opposed the execution of these bulls, and the Pope, who was not inclined to alienate the King, issued the bull of 1520, by which he approved all that Charles V had done. (Ibid. p. 52.)

After this, the reporter may well be permitted to tell us that the establishment of the Inquisition in Spain is null, because it was not approved of by the Cortes (ibid. p. 52), and especially that the tribunal is incompatible with the sovereignty of the nation. (Ibid. p. 65.) I leave to the good Spaniards the care of treating at leisure the question of the sovereignty of the people, with their king, by the grace of God, Ferdinand III; let them not fail particularly to say to him with the reporter of the committee : In what manner does the nation exercise its sovereignty in the judgments of the Inquisition? In no way whatever. (33) Such precious trifling will not fail to make a great impression on the mind of the monarch.

What shall I say of that magnificent passage, quite worthy to be written in verse, in which the eloquent reporter represents the terrible tribunal tearing the husband, at dead of night, from arms of his wife? etc. Nobody can be less inclined than I am to frighten women, parparticularly at night. Nevertheless, I must acknowledge that in all the works on politics and jurisprudence I have perused in my lifetime, I do not recollect having read that a criminal ought only to be arrested in broad daylight, lest his wife should be alarmed, and that justice, before seizing him, ought scrupulously to ascertain whether he be married or single, a good or a faithless husband.

How flimsy such rhetoric appears when things are considered as they are in reality! Having made you listen to revolutionary imaginations, permit me now to copy for you a gazette.

"On the 14th of April last, the King, our Lord (whom God preserve), was pleased to honour with his august presence, about nine o'clock in the morning, the hotel of the holy office of the Court Inquisition. (34) His Majesty visited the offices, and even the prisons, informing himself of everything in the greatest detail, and condescending do justice in the most flattering manner to the enlightened zeal with which the ministers of this tribunal serve the two Majesties (35). During this visit, which lasted nearly three hours, the King was constantly accompanied by his Excellency the Inquisitor-General, (36) who had hastened to the spot, in order to have the honour of following his Majesty, and of answering all his questions; and when the King was about to take his departure, this superior magistrate addressed to him the following discourse: -

"Sire, - God, who, by his just and inscrutable judgments willed that the tribunal of the faith should drink, even to the dregs, the cup of bitterness, has delivered your Majesty from captivity, and restored you to the throne of your ancestors, to be the restorer, the consoler, and the protector of the Inquisition. Your Majesty having visited the supreme council, has been pleased also to honour with your Presence the court tribunal and to examine all its dependencies. Well, Sire, has your Majesty seen those subterraneous prisons, those dismal dungeons, those instruments of torture, which the enemies of the throne and of the altar have talked of so loudly in their delirium? Have you seen the ministers of the God of peace changed into Neros and Diocletians, kindling piles and permitting themselves the greatest atrocities that cruelty and barbarism can devise? Your Majesty has seen that the prisons are decent, commodious even, and that the ministers of the Holy Office understand how to unite justice with mildness and mercy. Would to God the visit of your Majesty may tend to undeceive men who have abandoned the path of truth ! ...The court tribunal, full of gratitude towards you, will constantly pray the Father of light that he would deign to enable you always happily to see what measures are most suitable in such difficult times, and the consolation to reign alone (37) over subjects truly Catholic and worthy of the Spanish name."

I doubt whether the President of the Star Chamber (chambre toile) ever addressed to his august master a discourse of this colour; but this address even, and all the other evidences, are necessary only for those who have not sufficiently reflected on the real nature of the institution itself, which can well do without proofs, and which even forestalls them.

These characters of the Inquisition cannot be too much insisted on, because of the innumerable calumnies that have been heaped upon it without any knowledge of the case; and if you desire to know what influence prejudice and party spirit exercise over men, in other respects the wisest and most enlightened (for I would avoid giving offence to any one), listen, I pray you, to this new charge of the committee of the Cortes.

"Philip II," say they, "forbade appeal as on account of abuse (l'appel comme d'abus) from the sentences of this tribunal, so that it is independent of all civil authority (page 61), and that the Great Inquisitor is a sovereign in the midst of a sovereign nation; or, side by side with a sovereign prince. It condemns Spaniards as a civil court, whilst the secular power nowise interferes with it." (page 66)

And we have just been told, nevertheless, "that the Inquisition is a royal authority - that the inquisitor is a royal instrument; that all his ordinances are null, unless the royal consent render them valid; that the royal power names, suspends, revokes at will, all the members of this same tribunal; and that at the moment the royal authority should be withdrawn, the tribunal would disappear together with it."

And what, Sir, shall we say of Philip II, that good-natured man, as every one knows, who understands so little how to command, that for the relief of his conscience, he places a second sovereign beside him on his throne?

You will, perhaps, be tempted to say that one must be quite at variance with reason to write these fine things: not so, alas! It is only necessary, although endowed with wit and good sense, to sit in the midst of a deliberative assembly, and at a moment of effervescence.

Let us always be ready, therefore, to pardon such aberrations as these; but without permitting ourselves to be led astray. Indulgence is allowed only until the moment when it becomes complicity.

I have the honour to be, etc.

Moscow, June 13, 1815.

Return to Letters on the Spanish Inquisition.

End Notes



1. Informe sobre el tribunal de la Inquisicion con el projecto de decreto acera de los tribunales protectores de la religion, presentado a las Cortes generales y extraordinarias por la comision de constitucion; mandalo imprimir de orden de S.M. (This is not clear) - Cadiz, 1812

2. Fleury, Histoire ecclsiastique, Livre 73, No. LIV.

3. Thus, for instance, were established the academies of sciences of Paris and London. Those which were originated by decrees of state were by no means so legitimate, and never gave presage of the same success.

4. No opuseron (los inquisitores) a los hereges ottras armas que la oracion, la paciencia, y la instruction; entro ellos, S. Domingo, como la asseguran los Bolandos, y los padres Echard et Touron. (Vie de saint Dominique, page 20.) Vide the Encylopdie Mthodique, article "Dominicans," and article "Inquisiteurs," translated here word for word by the reporter of the committee; and the Dictionnaire historique of Feller, article "St. Dominique," etc., etc. It appears that the reporter is mistaken here in placing St. Dominic among the inquisitors; but even according to his own showing, this is of little consequence.

5. Por la rigueza y poder, que gozaban, y por sus enlaces con las familias mas ilustres y distinguidas de la monarquia era verdadamente un pueblo includio in otro pueblo, etc. (Vie de saint Dominique, page 33.)

6. Ibid. p. 27.

7. Let the consuls look to the safety of the state: words which at once invested them with unlimited powers. As to the means, the best (crime always excepted) is that which succeeds.

8. Hallandose in circumstancias tan difficiles y extraordinarias. - (Rapport, page 37.)

9. Mas no existendo estas causas, en los tiempos presentes, etc. (Ibid.) Hence there did exist causes which justified the institution.

10. Porque sus enlaces con familias judias o moriscas les hacen suspechosas, habiendo sida instituida principalement la Inquisicion contra la heregia llamada del Judasmo. (Ibid., page 67.) It should have been added, and according to the report itself, and against Mahometanism. I observe besides, with the permission of the committee, that the expression, the heresy of Judaism, is false and ridiculously so.

11. De acuerdo con el rey. (Ibid., page 32.)

12. Rapport, pages 34, 35.

13. El inquisitor, en virtud de las bulas de S.S., y el rey, en razon de las que le competen por el poder real, constituyen la autoridad que arregla y ha arreglado los tribunales de la Inquisicion; tribunales, que a un mismo tiempo son ecclesiasticos y reales: cualquer poder de los dos que no concurra interrompe necessariamente el curso de su expedicion. (Ibid., page 36.)

14. Ce monument affreux du pouvoir monacal,
Que l'Espagne a reu, mais qu'elle-mme abhorre;
Qui venge les autels, mais qui les dshonore;
Qui, tout couvert de sang, de flammes entour,
Egorge les mortels avec un fer sacr.

Avec un fer sacr, belongs, as is well known, to Molire. (Tartuffe, Act I, Scene VI.)Comedians hold everything in common.

15. [Homer, in the French text.]

16. Journal de l'Empire, 19 avril 1809.

17. And these even, he who should undertake to calumniate them would be obliged to know something about.

18. Pascal, XIV Lettre provincial. - Erat quod tollere velles.

19. Unterm Krummstabbe ist gut wohnen.

20. See Du Cange, in his notes on Joinville. Collection des Mmoires concernant l'Histoire de France, tome ii, p. 258, note 3. St. Louis had ordained that blasphemers should have their tongues pierced, and that, if I mistake not, with a red-hot iron. This was certainly a terrible punishment. It is proper to observe, however, that in modern nations which are very wisely governed, decided blasphemy is punished with death.

21. Sed fatemur quod in pnis hujusmodi tam acerbis ... charissimum in Christo filium nostrum regem Francorum illustrem non deceat imitari. (Bull of the same day. Ibid, p. 259.)

22. Marc-Aurle et Trajan mlaient, au champ de Mars,
Le bonnet du Pontife au bandeau des Csars
L'univers reposant sous leur heureux gnie,
Des guerres de l'cole ignorait la manie;
Ce grand lgislateurs, d'un saint zle anims,
Ne combattirent point pour leurs poulets sacrs.
Rome, encore aujourd'hui, conservant ces maximes,
Joint le trne  l'autel par des noeuds lgitimes.
Ses citoyens, en paix, sagement gouverns,
Ne sont plus conqurants et sont plus fortuns.

Pom de la Religion Naturelle, IVe partie.

It is rather curious to find that Voltaire, so just and reasonable in all that he says here about the government of modem Rome, should completely lose his judgment in the preceding lines. How and with whom could the Romans have fought for their sacred chickens? Did any nation come in arms, to take or kill these chickens? If any new god made his appearance at Rome, he entered, with the permission of the senate, like a saint newly canonized (I beg pardon for using such a comparison), entering our churches. This cannot be called toleration; but if any one had only ventured to touch the foundations of the national religion, Voltaire might have seen in the history of the Bacchanals, so well related in Titus Livius (xxxix. 9, seqq.) how he would have been treated. As soon as Christianity appeared, these great legislators persecuted it with unheard of ferocity. It has been very appropriately remarked, that monsters such as Tiberius, Caligula, Commodus, etc., meddled not with the new religion, whilst the philosopher Trajan, the philosopher Antonius, the philosopher Marcus Aurelius, the philosopher Julian, were all persecutors. (Feller, Dictionnaire Historique,"article "Marc-Aurelius.") It is therefore quite true that the Christian sovereign pontiffs never were persecutors; but Voltaire is very much in the wrong when he compares them to the pagan sovereign pontiffs, Marcus Aurelius and Trajan. (And both these were sovereign pontiffs.) The eternal panegyrist of Roman toleration ought really to remember at least one passage in this same Titus Livius, already quoted. "The Ediles have charge to see that no god be received at Rome unless he be Roman, and worshipped after the manner of the Romans." (iv. 30.)

23. De entitad. (Ibid., page 64.).

24. La Inquisicion sin mascara, o disertacion en que se prueba hasta la evidencia los vicios de este tribunal, y la necessitad de que se suprime. Por Matanal Jomtob (This appears to be an anagram.) Cadiz, Niel, 1811. 8vo.

I quote as far as is possible only works that are opposed to the Inquisition, in order to make sure that I am not mistaken in whatever escapes them favourable to this tribunal.

25. There is no question here, then, of a person who is merely and simply a heretic, but of the apostate heretic, that is, of the Spanish subject convicted of having apostatized, and of having given external proofs of his apostasy, without which there would be no process.

26. This is for a relapse, and we here see that the guilty party who confesses his crime, who says, I have transgressed, I repent of my transgression, is always absolved in the tribunal of the Inquisition (which is without example in any other tribunal in the world). If he return to the same errors after having been pardoned, he is declared to have made a false and pretended profession, to be relapsed and impenitent.

27. Thus the tribunal is purely royal, notwithstanding the ecclesiastical fiction, and all the fine phrases about sacerdotal avidity fall to the ground.

28. I think I ought here to give the original of the Spanish formula: Declaramos al dicho N.N. haber sido: y ser herege apostata, fautor y encubridor de hereges. (Quando es relapso) ficto y simulado confidente, impenitente relapso, y por ello haber caido y incurrido en sentencia de excommunicacion mayor ... y en confiscacion y perdmiento de todos sus bienes, los quales mandamos applicar y applicamos alla camara y fisco real de S. M. ... y que debemos de relaxar y relaxamo la persona del dicho N.N. a la justicia y brazo secular ... a los quales (the secular judges) regamos y encargamos muy affectuosamente como de derecho mejor podemos, se hayan benigna y piedosamente con el. (Ibid. pages 180, 181.)

Van-Espen, Jus. Ecclesiast. Univ. Pari II, Tit. x., Cap. iv, No. 22.

29. It is proper to remark a favourite expression of all the writers who have spoken of the Inquisition, and in regard to which they appear to have had an understanding. This expression consists in calling all the guilty persons condemned by this tribunal, victims of the Inquisition. They are, nevertheless, like all other culprits who undergo punishment by virtue of a legal judgment. It must also be added, that the Inquisition only hands over to the secular arm in capital cases, at the last extremity; for there is nothing so true and so well known to all who have a mind to know, as what has been said by an anonymous Italian, who wrote, same twenty years ago, on the same subject. Il tribunale del Santo Officio non abbandona (a most correct expression) all' ultimo supplicio che gente di perduta coscienza e rei delle pi orribili impiet. (Della Punizioni degli eretici, e del tribunale della santa Inquisizione. Roma, 1795, 4vo, page 133.)

30. Porque son (los reys), en todo caso, los arbitros de suspender, nombrar y revocar a los inquisitores, etc., (page 69).

31. Hoy mismos ... los edictos de la Inquisicion no podian publicarse sin haber antes obtenido el consentimiento del rey. (page 89).

32. Garnier, Histoire de Charlemagne, t. ii, ch. iii. p. 481.

33. De que modo exerce la nacion la soberania en los juicios de la Inquisicion? - De Ninguno. p. 66. Here, to be sure, the reporter cannot fail to be right; he only forgets (but merely from distraction) that the reproach may be addressed alike to all tribunals.

34. El tribunal del santo officio de la Inquisicion de corte. (Gazetta de Madrid, abril 1815.) This expression ought not to pass unobserved; it is obvious that it relates to the royal power.

35. En obsequio de ambas magestades. Perfectly well said! What truth and what exquisite sense are there not in this expression. Monarchy, unity, independence on either side; and, nevertheless, perfect union. Bossuct spoke in the same sense of the two sovereignties.

36. This title, and that which distinguishes the three inquisitors named immediately after in the same sheet, proves that none of the four was a monk.

37. Reynar solo. This word will not be found very inapplicable.

Return to Spanish Inquisition Page

Wayback Machine
  
http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/Letter-Two.html
AUG	SEP	NOV
Previous capture	06	Next capture
2003	2004	2006
3 captures
6 Sep 2004 - 19 Oct 2006
 About this capture

[Letters on the Spanish Inquisition]
LETTER II
Sir, - After having supposed that the Inquisition is a purely ecclesiastical tribune, and that priests can condemn a man to death, there was only wanting, in order to complete this ridiculous chimera of ignorant malevolence, to imagine also that the Inquisition condemned to death on account of mere opinions, and that a Jew, for instance, was burned purely and simply for no other reason than that he was a Jew; and this calumny has been so perseveringly repeated, that it has at length come to be believed.

I regret to find in the ranks of the least excusable calumniators Montesquieu himself, whom we behold unfortunately braving, with rare intrepidity, the hardest epithet it is possible to apply, in the pretended remonstrance of a pretended Jewess of which a chapter in his "Spirit of Leslations." (1)

A young and innocent person, burned in a great capital of Europe, for, no other crime than that of believing in her religion, would be so horrible a national crime, that it would suffice to brand a people, and, perhaps, an entire age. Happily, this supposition is an absurd calumny, disgraceful only to him who has indulged in it.

At what time did it become allowable to calumniate nations? How long has it been permitted to insult the authorities they have established for their own good government? to attribute to these authorities acts of the most atrocious tyranny, not only without being in a position to support such accusations by any evidence, but also in the face of the clearest notoriety? (2)

In Spain and Portugal, as elsewhere, every man who remains quiet is left undisturbed; as to the imprudent man who dogmatizes or interferes with public order, he has no reason to complain of any but himself. You will not find a single nation - I say not a Christian, I say not a Catholic, but merely a civilized nation - that has not decreed capital punishments against deadly blows struck at its religion. What matters the name of that tribunal which punishes the guilty? They are punished everywhere, and they ought to be so. (3)

Nobody is entitled to ask the kings of Spain why they have thought proper to ordain this or that species of punishment; for such and such crimes they know what they ought to do among their own people; they know their enemies, and they repel them as they understand; the great point, the only and incontestable point, is, that for the crimes of which I speak, none are punished except in virtue of a universal and well-known law, according to invariable forms, and by legitimate judges, who have no power except through the king, and who can do nothing against the king. This being the case, all declamations fall to the ground, and no person is entitled to complain. Man justly abhors being judged by his fellow-man, for he knows himself and understands what he is capable of when passion blinds or powerfully influences him; but, in presence of the law, every man ought to be submissive and tranquil; for there is nothing better adapted to human nature than the general will, as expressed by an enlightened and disinterested legislature, substituted everywhere in the place of the ignorant and impassioned will of individual man.

If, therefore, the Spanish law, written and known to all bears the punishment of exile, of imprisonment, of death even, against a declared and public enemy of a Spanish dogma, none are entitled to pity the guilty party who shall have incurred these punishments, and he himself has no right to complain, as he possessed a very simple means of avoiding them - he could have held his tongue.

In regard to the Jews particularly, none are ignorant - at least none ought to be ignorant, that the Inquisition in reality pursued only the Christian who became a Jew, the relapsed Jew; that is, the Jew who returned to Judaism after having solemnly adopted the Christian religion, and the preacher of Judaism. The Christian, or the converted Jew who wished to embrace the Jewish religion, were quite at liberty to leave Spain, and in remaining there, they knew to what they exposed themselves, no less than the Jew who dared to attempt leading a Christian astray. None have a right to complain of the law that is made for all.

Much noise has been made in Europe about torture being employed in the tribunals of the Inquisition, and about the punishment of fire being inflicted for crimes against religion. The sonorous voice of French writers has been unceasingly heard on a subject which lends so much to the pathos of philosophism; but all these declamations disappear in a twinkling when subjected to the severe test of sound logic. The inquisitors ordered torture in virtue of the laws of Spain, and because all Spanish tribunals were accustomed to order it. The Greek and Roman laws had adopted it; Athens, which knew something of liberty, subjected to it even freemen. All modern nations had employed this terrible means of discovering truth; and this is not the place for inquiring whether all those who speak of it know quite exactly what there is question of, and whether there were not in ancient times, as good reason for employing it as there may be for suppressing it nowadays. However this may be, as long as torture belongs not more to the Inquisition than to all other tribunals, none are entitled to reproach it with this usage. Let the Protestant burin of Bernard Picart exert itself as it will in tracing to us hideous representations of real or imaginary tortures inflicted by the judges of the Inquisition, it signifies nothing, or can only be addressed to the king of Spain.

And here, by the way, it must be observed that, according to the report of the committee of the Cortes, not only were the inquisitors required to be present at the infliction of torture, but the bishop even was called to it, although he caused his place to be taken by a delegate (ibid. p. 63); which obviously supposes great attention, and all the charity judges can be allowed to exercise.

And as every decree of any importance, and that even for the simple seizure of the person, cannot be executed without the declaration of the supreme council (ibid. p. 61), it is quite certain that the preliminary sentence, which appoints torture, was subject to the same formality. Thus, it must be granted, that, in the tribunals of the Inquisition, torture was surrounded by all the precautions the nature of things admitted of.

If, indeed, the king of Spain should think proper to abolish questioning by torture in his states, as it has been abolished in England, in France, in Piedmont, etc., he would do well, as these powers have done, and, undoubtedly, the inquisitors would be the first to applaud him; but, it is the height of injustice and absurdity, to reproach them with a practice admitted until our day, in every age and place. (4)

As to the punishment of fire, it is still, or it was, universally in use. Without adverting to the Roman laws which sanctioned this punishment, it may be remarked that every nation has decreed it against those great crimes which violate the most sacred laws. In all Europe, burning was the punishment of sacrilege, of parricide, and especially of lse-majesty; and as in the principles of criminal jurisprudence this crime was held to be twofold, - divine and human, every crime, at least every enormous crime, against religion, was considered an act of divine lse-majesty, which could not, consequently, be less severely punished than the other. Hence the universal custom of burning heresiarchs and obstinate heretics. There are, in all ages, certain general ideas which entirely influence men, and are never called in question. We must either lay them to the charge of the whole human race, or make them matter of reproach to none.

I shall not here, lest I should wander from my subject, enter into the great question of crimes and punishments: I shall not inquire whether the punishment of death be useful and just; whether it be proper to increase the intensity of punishments according to the atrocity of crimes, and what are the limits of this terrible right; all these questions are foreign to that which I am examining. It suffices to render the Inquisition irreproachable, that it judges as other tribunals, do, that it condemns to death only great criminals, and that it never is anything else than the instrument of the legislative and written will of the sovereign.

Meanwhile, I believe I should add that the heresiarch, the obstinate heretic, and the propagator of heresy, ought to be classed among the greatest criminals. What deceives us on this point is, that we cannot avoid judging, according to the indifference of our age, in matters of religion, whilst we ought to take for the rule of our opinion the zeal of ancient times, which, as the mere expression alters not in the least the nature of the thing expressed, philosophers are quite at liberty to call fanaticism. The modern sophist, who discusses at his ease in his cabinet, is not much embarrassed by the consideration that the arguments of Luther produced the thirty years' war; but ancient legislatures, appreciating well what these fatal doctrines were calculated to cost mankind, most justly visited with the last punishment, a crime that was capable of shaking society to its foundations, and of bathing it in blood.

The time is come, no doubt, when there is less occasion for alarm; nevertheless when we reflect that the tribunal of the Inquisition would certainly have prevented the French revolution, we cannot make too sure that the sovereign, who should deprive himself, without restriction, of this instrument would not deal a fatal blow against humanity.

The Abb de Vayrac is, I believe, the first Frenchman who has spoken sense in regard to the Inquisition, in his journey to Spain and Italy; (5) but, so early as in 1731, he despaired of being able to make himself heard in the midst of the clamours of prejudice. "I maintain," says he, "that if those who storm against the tribunal of the Inquisition considered the persons who compose it, they would speak of it in a different manner. But the most deplorable thing, is that I despair in some sort of being able to make my fellow-countrymen admit that circumspection, wisdom, justice, integrity, are the virtues which characterize the inquisitors ... One must be very wicked, or very wrong-headed, indeed, in order to draw down upon himself a reprimand from this tribunal."

Every sensible man might himself divine what has just been read, if he would only reflect a moment on the quality of the judges. In the first place, there is nothing so just, so learned, so incorruptible as the great Spanish tribunals; and if to this general character be added also that of the Catholic priesthood, we shall be convinced, previously to all experience, that there is nothing in the world more calm, more circumspect, or in its nature more humane, than the tribunal of the Inquisition.

In this tribunal, established for the purpose of inspiring awe, and which must necessarily have been surrounded with mysterious and severe forms, in order to produce the effect the legislator had in view, the religious principle, nevertheless, always retains its indelible character. In the midst even of all the preparations for punishment, it is mild and merciful; and by reason that the priesthood is connected with this tribunal, it ought not to resemble any other. And, indeed, it bears upon its banners the device, necessarily unknown to every other tribunal in the world, misericordia et justitia. Everywhere else, justice alone belongs to tribunals, whilst mercy is only the prerogative of sovereigns. Judges would be rebels if they presumed to grant pardon; they would arrogate to themselves the rights of sovereignty. Mercy takes its seat, therefore, with justice, and even precedes it: the party arraigned before this tribunal is free to confess his fault, to ask forgiveness, and to submit to religious expiation. From this moment the crime assumes the character of a sin, and the punishment is changed into penance. The guilty person fasts, prays, practises self-denial. Instead of proceeding to the gibbet, he recites psalms, confesses his sins, hears mass; and thus, after a course of religious exercises, is absolved, and restored to his family and society. If the crime be enormous, if the guilty party obstinately persist, if blood must be shed, the priest withdraws, and reappears only to comfort the victim on the scaffold.

It is singular that this distinguishing character of the Inquisition has been recognized in the most solemn manner by a minister of the French republic, (6) and it is curious to see how his work has been reviewed in that same journal from which I extracted the remarkable passage quoted at above. Here, as you shall see, a man of more reflection wields the pen.

"Where, nevertheless," exclaims the estimable journalist, "where in all Europe is the tribunal besides the Inquisition, that absolves the guilty party when he repents, and confesses his repentance? Where is the individual holding anti-religious views, affecting irreligious conduct, and professing principles contrary to those which the laws have established for maintaining public order, where is the individual who has not been twice admonished by the members of this tribunal? If he relapses; if, notwithstanding the advice which is given him, he persist in his conduct, he is arrested; and if he repents he is set at liberty. M. Bourgoing, whose religious opinions could not be suspected when he wrote his picture of modern Spain, in speaking of the holy office, says: "I will acknowledge, for the sake of doing homage to the truth, that the Inquisition might be quoted in our days, as a pattern of equity." What an avowal! and how would it be received if it were ourselves that made it? But M. Bourgoing only saw in the tribunal of the Inquisition, what it is in reality, a means of high police."

As to the forms, hard or terrifying, for which the tribunal of the Inquisition has been so much blamed, I have not the good fortune quite to believe in them; at all events, I would require to be in the country in order to form a correct opinion of them. However this may be, if the change which has taken place in manners and opinions admits of certain mitigations in this respect, the king has authority to command them, and the inquisitors will readily adopt them. Nothing human can be perfect; and there is not an institution that does not involve some abuses. You will do me the justice to believe that no man is farther than I am from justifying useless severities; I would only have you observe that the religious Inquisition of Spain might be very like the public Inquisition of Venice, which reigned over the imaginations of men by I know not what mitigated terror, wholly composed of fantastical recollections, which had no other effect than to maintain order, whist it spared the effusion of blood.

It is false, besides, that even in Portugal the slightest denunciation appeared sufficient to cause an accused party to be committed to prison; that he was allowed to remain ignorant of the charges against him, and of the accusers; that he was denied advocates to plead his cause; (7) and that the informers were never allowed to go unpunished if they had been guilty of calumny. The tribunal never pronounces as to the temporal punishment; it only declares the culprit attainted and convicted; it belongs to the secular judges to fix the punishment, precisely as we have seen in regard to Spain. Confiscations are appropriated to the royal treasury, and the diocesan bishops have a right to take cognizance of the transgression conjointly with the inquisitors. (8)

I would, moreover, observe, in regard to forms more or less severe, that there is not an enlightened power in the world that has not, for great and just motives, established from time to time, certain extraordinary tribunals which were almost entirely beyond the control of accustomed forms. I shall adduce, as a case in point, the ancient Provost's Courts of France. The kings of France were possessed with the mania of desiring that the highways in their country should be perfectly safe. Every traveller was placed under their special protection, and the least attempt against his safety was a species of lse-majesty which the law punished in the most terrible manner with the celerity of lightning. The wretch who extorted a crown from you on the highway was seized by the gendarmerie, delivered up to the great provost sitting in judgment with two assessors, and broken on the wheel within four and twenty hours, under the eyes of the parliament, which did not interfere.

This jurisprudence, doubtless, was not over tender; but every Frenchman was manifestly at liberty not to commit robbery on the highways, and the king desired that people should travel by them in all directions, and even commit themselves to sleep on them with impunity: to every man his own idea.

You see, Sir, how many errors modern sophists had accumulated to the charge of the Inquisition. They had represented it as a purely ecclesiastical tribunal, and I have shown you, from the most incontestable authorities, what it really is. They had made us believe that priests condemned to death, and merely for opinions. I have shown you that this is not the case. They represented to us the Inquisition as an invention of the Popes, and the Popes only conceded it at the earnest solicitations of sovereigns, frequently even with reluctance, as far, at least, as regarded certain attributions which appeared to them too severe. If they desired only to attack it on the score of ecclesiastical discipline, by maintaining that it weakened the jurisdiction of bishops, unfortunately for modern reformers, they had against them the episcopal body of Spain, one of the most respectable in the Catholic world, who had just declared expressly that they had ever found it only a faithful ally always ready to assist in the preservation of religion; but you are aware that party spirit is never embarrassed about anything, and never gives ground. The committee of the Cortes contrived to disinter, I know not what anecdote, true or false, of I know not what grand inquisitor, who having, in the year 1622, persecuted, it is not known how or wherefore, I know not what bishop of Carthagena, was, on account of this great misdeed, disapproved by, I know not what consultation of the council of Castile, and on this authority so luminous, so decisive, and of such recent date especially, the committee magniloquently exclaims: "How, after that, do the reverend bishops presume, in the face of the testimony of their brethren, and against the authority of the nation, to represent to your Majesty (that is to the Cortes), that they are aided by the inquisitors, in the episcopal functions that relate to the preservation of religion ?" (9)

An isolated fact, a fact more than doubtful and by no means properly detailed, - a fact of 1622, - opposed to the solemn declaration of the episcopal body, presents one of those prodigious absurdities which distinguish, more or less, all popular assemblies.

With equal felicity does the committee reproach the Inquisition with its benighting influence on the human mind. "Is it possible," say they, "that a nation should become illustrious when the minds of men should be reduced to such degrading bondage? The moment the Inquisition arose, writers disappeared." (10)

The committee, assuredly, cannot be in earnest. Who does not know that the great age of literature was the age of Philip II, and that all the authors, who have done honour to Spain, never printed their books, without the permission of the holy office? Mathematics, astronomy, chemistry, all the natural sciences, philology, history, antiquities, etc., are pretty extensive fields, which the human mind is quite at liberty to traverse in every direction, without the slightest interference on the part of the reverend father inquisitor. In vain is it repeated that genius is chained up, because it is forbidden to attack the national creed; never will repetition give to error the force of truth.

I have the honour to be, etc.

Moscow, June 20 (July 2), 1615.

End notes, Second Letter
1. Esprit des lois, Livre xxv, chap.13.

2. One very remarkable thing in this reprehensible piece, is the avowal the power of truth extorts from Montesquieu, whilst he does not in the least perceive it. He makes his little Jewess say, "Would you have us tell you frankly what we think? You look upon us rather as your own enemies than as the enemies of your religion."- (Ibid. liv. xxv. ch. 13.) Here lies the truth. speak to us, therefore, no more of religion; direct your attacks against the civil authority.

3. It has never been suspected in Europe that China had a tribunal of Inquisition to maintain the purity of the doctrine of the belief and of the morality of the empire. It is, nevertheless, very ancient, very rigorous, and has made more blood to flow than all those of Europe together. Many persons who set up China as a pattern of toleration, would not have lived long there, or would have held their peace. (Mmoire sur les Chinois, tome i. p. 476, note xxvii.) All Nations are agreed on this point.

4. I ought to add, that having had occasion, in the month of January, 1808, to converse on the subject of the Inquisition with two Spaniards of distinguished rank, who were so favourably situated as to be perfectly well informed, when I came to speak of torture, they looked at each other with astonishment, and agreed in expressly assuring me, that they had never heard speak of torture in procedures instituted by the Inquisition, which supposes, without the least doubt, either that there was no question of torture in this tribunal, or that it had become extremely rare.

5. Amsterdam, 1731, tome i, p. 9; tome vi. p. 50; tome vii, p. 151; quoted in the Journal Historique et Littraire, February 1, 1777, p. 197.

6. Nouveau Voyage en Espagne, par M. Bourgoing. (Journal de l'Empire, September 17, 1805.)

7. I am particularly informed, as regards Spain (and I have no reason to doubt that matters are the same in Portugal), that the counsel for the accused who are in prison have the most free and confidential access to them; and that the judges even take great pains to ascertain whether the advocates do their duty in this respect.

8. See "Les Anecdotes du Ministre du Marquis de Pombal." Warsaw, 1784, liv. viii. No. lxxxvii.

9. Como pueden pues decir los R.R. obispos que han representado a V.M. que los ayudan (los inquisitores) en la conservacion de la fe contra los testimonious de sus cohermanos, y autoritad del preimer tribunal de la nacion? (Rapport, page 56.)

10. Es possible que se ilustre una nacion en la qual se esclavizan tan groseramente los entendimientos? Ces de escriberse deste que se establici la Inquisicion. (Ibid. page 75.)



	Wayback Machine
  
http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/LetterThree.html
FEB	MAR	SEP
Previous capture	18	Next capture
2002	2003	2004
5 captures
18 Mar 2003 - 16 May 2008
 About this capture

LETTER III


Sir, - In speaking to you of the origin of the Inquisition, in pointing out to you its distinguishing characteristics, I relied almost exclusively on the report made by the committee of the Cortes for the suppression of this celebrated institution. I could not have given you a clearer proof of my strict impartiality. When, in defending an accused party, the counsel for the defence takes his arguments from no other source than the act of accusation, the accuser, I should think, has no right to complain. Now, Sir, in order that you may know the proceedings of the Inquisition, I shall quote to you an authority as little open to suspicion; - that of a Protestant, an Englishman, a member of the Anglican church, who travelled in Spain, during the years 1786 and 1787. It is easily conceived that, in speaking of the Inquisition, he has shown it no favour; it is, therefore, useful to bear him, and weigh all his words. (1)

"Not far from Seville there is an edifice, with the form of which he was struck. After several questions, a person of distinction, who accompanied him, told him that this edifice, the appearance of which was so singular, was called el Quemadero, (2) begging, at the same time, he would be so good as not tell any one of whom he had this information. He made haste to remove to a distance from a building which his imagination represented to him as surrounded with flames of blood. A man, invested with the office of judge, told him, on the following day, that this edifice was made use of for burning heretics, and that it was not more than four years since a woman had undergone this punishment. She was a religious, guilty of divers infamous actions and systems."

How many absurdities at the very outset ! In the first place, what is an edifice for burning heretics ? An edifice with such a destination, would be burned itself the first time it was used, and could only be used once. An edifice which serves as a pile for burning is something so ridiculous, that nothing can be imagined more so. The recommendation to the English traveller to observe secrecy, is egregiously ludicrous. The secret of a public place intended for the execution of sentences of death by means of fire! But, such are the tales with which Europe was amused. Besides, I do not doubt for a moment, that Spanish gravity was making game, on this occasion, of Protestant credulity. Do you see this edifice? will have remarked some wit of Seville, it is there heretics are burned in great secrecy; but, for God's sake, say nothing about it, you would ruin me.

It is also rather absurd to bear our traveller talk of the Quemadero as of a coffee-toaster that is in use every day. His imagination (here, at any rate, he speaks truth) represents to him this place as surrounded with flames of blood. You would say there was a question of a butchery established in the midst of a permanent burning pile. Nevertheless, it was four years since this place had witnessed an execution ; and after all, who was the victim? A religious, guilty of divers infamous acts and theories.

And in what country does not justice strike such culprits? The good clergyman has not thought proper to enter into any detail; but the expressions of which he makes use, leave a strange latitude, and it is rather amusing to bear him begin by affirming that this place was destined for burning heretics, and immediately afterwards urge, as his proof, the execution, not of a heretic, but of a monster.

In certain countries of Europe, distinguished by their wisdom, their good police, and superior administration, the incendiary who fires an inhabited house is himself burned alive, whilst every one says, "He well deserved his fate." Do you believe, Sir, that a man guilty of several infamies in theory and practice, such as your imagination may figure to itself, is less guilty than an incendiary?

I do not see, besides, why the name of the last punishment, given to a place of execution, should be more terrible than the ordinary name of such a place; nor why, for instance it would have been discreditable for ancient France to have called the Place de Grve, the place for breaking on the wheel.

Let us listen now to the history of a fearful auto-da-f, which was performed only a short time before the travels I am quoting.

"A beggar, by name Ignatio Rodriguez, was arraigned before the tribunal of the Inquisition for having distributed amorous filters, of which the ingredients were such that decency forbids to name them. In administering this ridiculous remedy, (3) he pronounced certain words of necromancy; (4) it was well proved that the powder had been administered to persons of every rank. Rodriguez had two accomplices, who were likewise brought before the tribunal (Juliana Lopez and Angela Barrios). One of these, begging for her life, received for answer that it was not the custom of the Holy office to condemn to death. (5)

"Rodriguez was condemned to be conducted through the streets of Madrid, mounted on an ass, and to be flogged. Some practices of religion were also imposed on him, and banishment from the capital for five years. The reading of the sentence was frequently interrupted by loud peals of laughter, in which the mendicant himself joined. "The culprit was, in pursuance of the sentence, taken through the streets, but not flogged; (6) in the course of the promenade he was offered wine and biscuits for refreshment." (7)

I do not believe it possible to imagine anything more mild, anything more humane. If the tribunal could have been blamed for anything, it would have been for an excess of leniency; for, if the words of the traveller be well weighed, it will be found that the ingredients of Rodriquez might very well have brought him, in any other country, to the pillory, the galleys, or even the gibbet.

Nevertheless the English observer is not satisfied. "This transgression," he says, " was far beneath the dignity of such a tribunal. It would have been better to hae punished this wretch in secret, by the hands of the lowest executioner."

It is quite possible, no doubt, that Mr. Townsend may have been, or may even still be, a man of much sense; but, against national, and especially religious prejudice, good sense avails not. It is strange to find a man censuring so bitterly the criminal jurisprudence of an illustrious nation, and as the same time recommending secret punishments. If the Inquisition had even once once caused a whip to be applied in secret, the traveller would not have failed to write a severe denunciation of this atrocity, and he would have enriched his book with a beautiful engraving, in which would have figured two brawny executioners, whipping to pieces, in a dismal dungeon, some wretched culprit in presence only of a few Dominican Friars.

And how does it belong to a foreign traveller to decide, without any knowledge of the state of things, as to what a great tribunal of Spain ought to conceal or punish, according to the nature of the crimes and the degree of publicity which human wickedness has given them? In Spain, as elsewhere, it is apparently well known what ought to be concealed and what shown to the public.

The other reproaches this writer addresses to the tribunal of the Inquisition are even less well founded. "It may," says he, "make all whom it thinks proper to summon appear before it, surprise them in their beds in the middle of the night," etc. It the traveller means to speak of witnesses, he clearly lays himself open to the charge of being utterly ignorant of criminal jurisprudence; for, if anything can do honour to a government, can show its strength and its impartiality, it is the authority with which it invests its tribunals to bring before them any person whatsoever to bear witness. We beheld, not many years ago, in England, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, obliged to appear before a criminal tribunal in order to make his deposition; he was there assailed with questions, driven to his wit's end by the interrogatory, and not without embarrassment as to the figure he was making. (8) On that occasion, no doubt, out critic would have not failed to exclaim: "This tribunal can, at its pleasure, cause all to appear before it whom it chooses to summon. 0 admirable England! 0 sacred liberty!

But if there be question of Spain, a different principle is acted upon; the just becomes unjust, and this same man will say: "The holy office there can cause to appear before its tribunal all whom it thinks proper to call. 0 vile and unhappy Spain! 0 excess of despotism and of iniquity!

But if the author means to speak of the accused, he is still more ridiculous. Why, therefore, may not any accused person whatsoever be summoned or arrested according to circumstances ? That would be a singular privileges by which such or such a party should be exempted from the legitimate action of the tribunals. But what more than anything else vexes our ecclesiastic is that an accused person may be seized in the night, and even in bed. No atrocity of the Inquisition more powerfully excites his indignation. It is possible that in England a debtor, or a man guilty of some light crime, may not be seized in the middle of the night, and in his bed; but that the same forbearance is used in regard to a man accused of a capital crime, I by no means believe; at all events, it would suffice to reply: so much the worse for England; and I do not see why Spain should be held bound to respect, to such a degree, the sleep of criminals.

We have just seen the preparations for the dreadful auto-da-f of the 9th May, 1764, by virtue of which an infamous criminal was condemned to eat biscuits and drink wine in the streets of Madrid. It is proper we should now hear a Protestant mouth relate to us in what terms the Grand Inquisitor pronounced to an accused party the judgment which the holy office had found against him.

"My son," said the sacred executioner, "you are about to bear the recital of your crimes, and the sentence which must expiate them. We are always indulgent, and this holy office designs to correct rather than to punish. Be afflicted when you feel what your conscience reproaches you with, far more than by the punishment you an called on to undergo." (9)

The traveller adds, " that the first nobility, and all the ladies of the court, had been invited to the ceremony by the Marchioness of Cogollodo, who, after the close of the proceedings, gave a banquet to the judges and the office-bearers of the Inquisition."

After these details, one would be surprised, if it were permitted to be surprised at anything in this way, to hear the traveller-minister of the holy Gospel terminate his narrative by the following reflection: "If the king, wishing to destroy this tribunal, had intended to render it contemptible in the eyes of his subjects, he could not have set about doing so in a more effectual manner."

Thus, the admirable union of legal severity and Christian charity, the compassion of the people responding to that of the judges, the paternal address of the inquisitor, the judgment wholly directed towards the amendment of the guilty party, the punishment which advances, and which all of a sudden is changed into a feast of clemency celebrated by the higher nobility, together with the judges, a jurisprudence so mild, so remarkable, so peculiar to Spain, - none of all these things could interst a spectator whose eye is completely vitiated by national prejudices, and he sees only an object of ridicule and a motive to contempt in this same spectacle, which would have commanded the admiration of Hindoos or Mahometans as soon as they could have been made to understand it.

I have now, I trust, Sir, said enough to give an adequate idea of the origin, the nature, and the real character of the Inquisition, as well as of its mode of procedure; but it is, moreover, worthy of great attention, that this so much calumniated tribunal, had in reality become a court of equity, as necessary at least in the criminal as in the civil order.

Grofius has admirably defined equity: the remedy invented for the case in which the law is deficient on account of its universality. (10) A great man only was capable of giving this definition. It is not in man's power to make any other than general laws; and hence they are essentially unjust in some respects, by reason that they can never meet every case. The exception to the rule is therefore precisely as just as the rule itself; and wherever there can be no dispensation, exception, or mitigation, there will always necessarily be violation; because the universal conscience at first allowing the exception to be established, individual passions make haste to generalize it in order to stifle the law.

In the criminal order, this power of equity is commonly reserved to the sovereign. Hence pardons, commutations of punishment, letters of the seal, (11) instead of legal condemnations, etc. But all observers know that the intervention of sovereign power in the administration of justice is the most dangerous thing in the world. God forbid that I should wish to dispute with sovereign power the magnificent privilege of granting pardon; but it must use this privilege very moderately, under pain of occasioning great evils; and I believe that as often as there is not question of pardon, properly so called, but of a certain modification which is not too easily defined, and in the crimes especially which violate religion or public morals, the mitigating power will be much more advantageously confided to the enlightened tact of a tribunal at once royal in its nature, and sacerdotal by the quality of the judges. I venture to believe even that it is impossible to imagine anything better than thus to introduce the oil of mercy amongst the grating and lacerating machinery of criminal jurisprudence.

In this point of view, the Inquisition may render the greatest services. We may be reminded, without consulting the very oldest inhabitants of Madrid, of the history of an abominable woman, who succeeded in seducing great numbers in that capital by concealing the most refined hypocrisy under the cloak of the external appearances of heroic piety. She had as her pretended director, and real accomplice, a monk more wicked than herself. A bishop, even, was imposed upon, and the criminal ingenuity of this woman succeeded so far as that, feigning an indisposition which hindered her from quitting her bed, she obtained through the intervention of the deceived prelate, a bull of the Pope which authorized her to retain the blessed sacrament in her chamber; and it was afterwards positively ascertained that this said chamber was the scene of the most criminal commerce. The Inquisition having received notice, there was good ground for a magnificent auto-da-f against the two culprits, and especially against the sacrilegious monk; nevertheless, justice could not, even on this occasion, wholly stifle clemency. The Inquisition caused the woman to disappear without noise, chastised her accomplice without putting him to death, and saved the character of the prelate who had been so shamefully imposed upon.

The history of two ecclesiastics - the brothers Questas - is well known in Spain. Because they were so unfortunate as to displease a celebrated favorite, they were delivered up to the Inquisition, and charged with an accusation sustained with all the weight of an influence which appeared to be invincible. Nothing was forgotten that it was possible to imagine in order to destroy two men. But the Inquisitor of Valadolid unravelled the plot, and could not be shaken by the seductions or the overpowering force of authority. He suspected the proofs, unmasked them, procured new evidence, and declared the two brothers acquitted. The case having been carried by appeal to the supreme tribunal of the Inquisition at Madrid, the Grand Inquisitor grappled with the gigantic child of favour, and compelled him to succumb. One of the brothers who had been imprisoned was restored to liberty; and the other, who had fled, returned home, in peace.

Prior to this, the Grand Inquisitor Avda, having come to make a visitation of the prisoners of the Inquisition, found there some persons who were unknown to him. "Who are these men?" said he. "They are," it was replied, " parties arrested by order of the government, and sent into these prisons for such and such a cause." "All that has nothing in common with religion," said the Grand Inquisitor; and he made the doors be thrown open to them. (12)

Besides these facts, which have accidentally come to my knowledge, there are many others no doubt, which, if they were known, would likewise attest the happy influence of the Inquisition, whether it be considered as a court of equity, as a means of high police, or as a censorship. And, indeed, it is in this threefold aspect that it must be viewed; for, at one time, it deadens the blows of criminal justice, which are sometimes too rude, and not sufficiently graduated; at another it places sovereignty in a position to exercise with less inconvenience than it could otherwise do, a certain kind of justice which, in one form or another, exists in every state; sometimes, in fine, more happy than the tribunals of other nations, it represses immorality in the most salutary manner for the state, by threatening, when it becomes too bold, to efface the line which separates sin from criminal offence.

I have not the least doubt that a tribunal of this kind, modified according to time, place, and the character of nations, would be most useful in every country; neither will you, I trust, after reading my next letter, entertain the slightest doubt that it has, at any rate, done signal service to the Spaniards. and that that illustrious people owe it immortal gratitude.
 

I am, etc.

Moscow, July 15 (27) 1815.

Return to Letters on the Spanish Inquisition.
 
 

End Notes



1. Travels in Spain during the years 1786 and 1787, by Mr. Joseph Townsend, Rector of Pewsey. London, 1792, second edition, 3 vols. 8vo.

2. The Place where criminals condemned to the flames are burned, which might be called in French, la brlerie. If I am not mistaken, this name is also given in Spain, by extension of the term, to the place where condemnations to fire are pronounced.

3. Ridiculous remedy! The English preacher does not appear to be very severe.

4. We have here two crimes that are very distinct and remarkable for their enormity. The magical practices, although perfectly null in themselves, might be counted as the first. The other is a little more than ridiculous, and I doubt whether, in any other country in the world, the magician would have escaped so easily.

5. This is the tribunal which was in the habit (a somewhat severe one, to be sure) of solemnly burning people who did not believe in God. - Supra, p. 10.

6. The reader will be pleased to remark this mitigation. It is almost the punishment less the punishment, and all this without any interference on the part of the king. No other tribunal in the world enjoys or could enjoy such a privilege.

7. What an abominable people!

8. There is question here of a famous case, in which the celebrated Pitt was obliged to come to the bar to tell the truth to the judges, as little and as ill as he possibly could.

9. Mr. Townsend remarks here, that this exhortation would have been made with the same mildness, even although the guilty person had been condemned to the flames. - Ibid. What is there in this to astonish? Justice, even when isolated, is never angry. How should it not pass from being simply calm, to tenderness, when it is permitted to take counsel with mercy?

10. Correctio ejus in quo lex propter universalitatem deficit. (Grotius, in the book de Jure belli et pacis.)

11. Warrants of imprisonment which only the king could issue.

12. I learned this anecdotes from a Spanish gentleman of high character and inflexible probity, who was always found in the path of honour and of danger during the political tempests of his country. If by an chance this writing reach his hands, I beg him to recall those happy, but too brief moments, when friendship instructing friendship, as we sat together by the fireside, the hours glided past so pleasantly in this sweet exchange of thoughts and knowledge. Brought in contact for a short time, in the midst of a brilliant court, we are fated to meet no more; but I trust we will never forget one another.

Return to Spanish Inquisition Page

Wayback Machine
  
http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/LetterFour.html
FEB	MAR	SEP
Previous capture	18	Next capture
2002	2003	2004
5 captures
18 Mar 2003 - 16 May 2008
 About this capture

LETTER IV

Sir, - In natural philosophy, there is always question of mean quantities; the form of expression is always mean distance, mean motion, mean time, etc. It would be highly proper, at least, to transfer this notion to politics, and to understand that the best institutions are not those which bestow on mankind the greatest possible degree of happiness at such or such a given time, but those, on the contrary, which afford the greatest possible sum of happiness to the greatest possible number of generations. This is the mean amount of happiness; and I do not believe that in this respect there is any difficulty.

According to this principle, which cannot be contested, I would be curious to know what the most ardent enemy of the Inquisition would reply to a Spaniard who, passing over in silence what you have just read, would justify it in the following terms: -

"You are shortsighted; you see only one point. Our legislators looked from a height and saw the whole. At the commencement of the sixteenth century, they, in a manner, beheld Europe enveloped in a smoke, as if set on fire; in order to preserve it from a general conflagration, they employed the Inquisition, which is the political means they made use of for maintaining religious unity, and for preventing wars of religion. You have not fallen upon anything equal to it; let as examine its results, rejecting every judge except experience.

"Consider the thirty years' war enkindled by the arguments of Luther; the unheard-of excesses of the Anabaptists and the peasants; the civil wars of France, of England, and of Flanders; the massacres of St. Bartholomew, of Merindol and of Cevennes; the assassination of Mary Stuart, of Henry III, of Henry IV, of Charles I, of the Prince of Orange, etc. etc. A ship would float upon the blood your innovators have caused to he shed; the Inquisition would only have spilled theirs. It well becomes you, presumptuous, ignorant men, who foresaw nothing and bathed Europe in blood - it well becomes you to blame our kings, who foresaw everything. Come not then to tell us that the Inquisition has produced such or such an abuse at such or such a moment; for this is not what there is question of; the point is to inquire whether during the last three centuries there have been, through the agency of the Inquisition, more peace and more happiness in Spain, than in the other countries of Europe? (1) To sacrifice existing generations to the problematic happiness of those that are to come, may do very well as a philosophical speculation, but legislators speculate otherwise.

"And although this decisive observation should not appear to you satisfactory, the occurrences of our own times would suffice to put you to silence. The Inquisition has saved - immortalized Spain. It has preserved that public spirit, that faith, that religious patriotism which produced the miracles you have witnessed, and which, to all appearance, in saving Spain, saved Europe itself, by causing a diversion in its favour the most noble and the most persevering.

"From beyond the Pyrenees, the Inquisition struck terror into philosophism, which had good reason to hate it. Perusing with unwearied eye the books which fell from those mountains like threatening avalanches, they who, in tolerably great numbers succeeded in eluding its power and its vigilance, sufficed to give the usurper some subjects worthy of him; but the mass remained sound, and the Inquisition alone was able to restore it to its legitimate ruler in the same state as when be had the misfortune to lose it."

I do not really know what could be reasonably said in reply to these observation. But it appear to me truly extraordinary, and it is also little known, that Voltaire has written a complete apology for the Inquisition. This apology I shall just present to you as a remarkable monument of good sense which perceives facts, and of passion which blinds as to their causes.

"There were not," says he, "in Spain, during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, any of those bloody revolutions, conspiracies, and cruel punishments, which were witnessed in the other courts of Europe. Neither the duke of Lerme, nor Count Olivarez, shed the blood of their enemies on the scaffold. Kings were not assassinated there as in France, and perished not by the hands of the executioner as in England. (2) In a word, but for the horrors of the Inquisition, we should have nothing to reproach Spain with. (3)

I doubt whether it is possible to be more blinded. But for the horrors of the Inquisition, there would be nothing to reproach that nation with, has only escaped by means of the Inquisition, from the horrors by which other nations have been dishonoured! It is a real enjoyment for me to behold genius thus chastised, condemned to lower itself even to absurdity - to silliness as punishment for having prostituted itself to error. I am less delighted with its natural superiority than with the nullity it exhibits whenever it forgets its noble destination.

After the horrible events which we have beheld in Europe, what pretext is there for reproaching Spain with an institution which would have prevented them all. The holy office, with some sixty processes in a century, would have spared us the spectacle of a heap of slain that would rise higher than the Alps, and would stay the current of the Rhine and of the Po. (4) But, of all Europeans, the Frenchman would undoubtedly be the most intolerable critic of the Inquisition, considering the evils lie has caused in the world, and the still more terrible evil which he has brought upon himself. He would be inexcusable if he indulged in railleries against Spain, because of the institutions which have preserved her. Let us do justice to that illustrious nation. She is of the small number of those which, on the continent of Europe, have not at all been accomplices in the French revolution. At length, no doubt, she was its victim ; but the blood of four hundred thousand strangers has sufficiently avenged her; and now we behold her returning to her ancient maxims with an impetuosity which, notwithstanding a certain degree of exaggeration, deserves the respect of the whole world.

The committee of the Cortes, which I have already often referred to, has deeply felt the force of the argument in favour of the Inquisition, arising from the consideration of the evils which it has prevented. In order to escape from it, the reporter has fallen upon a method at once expeditious and convenient; he denies this influence. "The authority of the bishops," says he, "would have sufficed to protect Spain against the more recent heresiarchs. She is by no means indebted to the Inquisition for such protection." (5)

Pray observe, Sir, that passion never pays attention to what it says. We have seen above that the bishops have no room to complain of the inquisitors, (6) whom, on the contrary, they look upon as faithful allies, in the preservation of faith. But to concede everything to the committee, in order that it may the better refute itself, let it be supposed that the power of the bishops should hare been sufficient in Spain to repel the demon of the north, how has this same power, when usurped by The Inquisition, increased and corrected besides in a tolerably imposing manner, been of no use whatever to Spain? It is a well-known fact, that the last heresiarchs were never able to set foot in Spain; and something surely must have sufficed to prevent them. What, then, did suffice? It was not the power of the bishops, - the Inquisition had annulled that power; nor was it the Inquisition itself ; - the committee has given its word of honour that it was not. Much less can it be ascribed to the civil tribunals, the governors of provinces, etc.; for the Inquisition was invested with exclusive jurisdiction in all affairs of religion. Once more, since something must have sufficed, what did suffice? If the committee did not see the preservative, it was because they kept their eyes shut; but, to every man who chooses to observe, it will always appear certain that all the nations of Europe, having been more or less attacked and upset by the last heresiarchs, with the exception of Spain, and those which had more or less adopted the jurisdiction and forms of the Inquisition, equity and reason alike forbid us to ascribe the preservation of Spain to any other cause than the tribunal of the Inquisition, especially when no other cause can be pointed out. As it in the fourteenth century, a single nation, having escaped the black plague which desolated Europe, should afterwards have boasted of a prophylactic remedy, which it would have announced and prepared for its own preservation, a remedy of which it would have made use without interruption, and all the notoriously preservative ingredients of which it would have made known, it would be the height of absurdity to tell ,such a nation that it owed nothing to its remedy, and that other remedies would have sufficed, whilst they would have been of no service anywhere beyond its territory.

There would be wanting something important to the apology of the Inquisition, if I did not direct your attention to the influence of this institution on the Spanish character. If the nation Im retained its maxims, its unity, and that public spirit which has preserved it, it owes it entirely to the Inquisition. See what the multitude, educated in the school of modern philosophy, have done in Spain! Evil, and nothing but evil! They alone invoked tyranny, or temporized with it: they alone preached half-measures, obedience to the empire of circumstances, timidity, weakness, delays, expedients, instead of resistance to the last, and immoveable fidelity. If Spain bad been destined to perish through them, it would have perished. A great number of superficial men believe that it was saved by the Cortes; whilst on the contrary, it was saved in spite of the Cortes, who embarrassed the English more than policy allowed them to admit. The people did everything, and although there should have been, among the philosophical party, and among the enemies of the Inquisition, real Spaniards, capable of sacrificing themselves for their country, what would they bare done without the people? And what would the People in their turn have done, if they had not been guided by the national ideas, and especially by what is called Spanish superstition? Would you extinguish that enthusiasm which inspires great thoughts and great enterprises? freeze the hearts of men, and establish selfishness in the place of the most ardent love of country, deprive a people of their faith, and hand them over to philosophy.

There is not a people in the world less known and more calumniated than the Spaniards. Spanish superstition, for instance, has passed into a proverb. Nevertheless, there is nothing more erroneous. The higher classes of the nation know as much as we do. As to the people, properly so called, it is possible, for instance, that as regards the veneration of the saints, or to speak more correctly, as regards the honour paid to their representations, they fall at times into a degree of excess; but the dogma on this head being established beyond the reach of attack, and not admitting the least degree of plausible chicanery, certain trifling abuses on the part of the people are of no consequence, and even are not without advantage, as I could easily demonstrate to you, if this were the place for it Besides, the Spaniard has fewer prejudices and less superstition than those other nations which laugh at him, but have not the good sense to inquire into their own state. You are yourself acquainted, I have no doubt, with respectable persons, far above the rank of ordinary people, who believe most sincerely in amulets, apparitions, sympathetic remedies conjurers, dreams, communication with spirits, etc., etc., etc.; who will rise abruptly from table, it, by the greatest misfortune, they find they are seated together with twelve guests; who will change colour if a sacrilegious lackey happens to overturn a saltcellar; who would rather lose an inheritance than begin a journey on such or each a day of the week, etc, etc., etc.. Well, Sir, go to Spain, you will be astonished not to find there any of these degrading superstitions. (7) And why? Because the religious principle being essentially contrary to all such idle beliefs, it never fails to extirpate them wherever it can freely exercise its action. I say this, nevertheless, without pretending to deny that this principle has been powerfully favoured in Spain by the national good sense.

Spain, however, can obtain no indulgence, and last year, even, it was said at London, in fall parliament, that whatever it was possible to do by way of remonstrances and representations, in order to expose the shameful measures of the Spanish authorities and especially the re-establishment of the detestable Inquisition. was done to no purpose by the Spanish ambassadors at Madrid. (8)

I seek in vain, I must declare to you, as I call to mind all that I have just written, for anything detestable in this celebrated tribunal; I cannot discover it; but, so serious an accusation, uttered on so distinguished a theatre as the British Parliament, suggests the idea of a special discussion. I hope I shall be able to show, in the following letters, that the English have, perhaps, less right than all the other nations of Europe to reproach Spain with her Inquisition. You will presently be able to decide; meanwhile permit me to take leave of you.
 

I have the honour to be, etc.

Moscow, August 3/15 1815.

Return to Letters on the Spanish Inquisition.

End Notes


1. But at the dear rate, perhaps it will be said, of fettering the human mind. This objection is already answered at the conclusion of Letter II. (p. 46).

2. Today we must read: "Kings were not assassinated and perished not by the hands of the executioner, as in France and in England."

3. Voltaire, Essai sur l'Histoire Gnrale, tome iv, chap. clxxvii., p. 138. Oeuvres compltes, 8vo. tome xix.

4. The anonymous author of the pamphlet entitled, "Qu'importe aux Prtres!" ("What matters it to Priests?") 1797, 8vo. p. 192.

5. Porque no se debe attribuir  la Inquisicion la felicidad que ha gozada Espaa de no ser alterada por los ultimos heresiarcas. (Informe, p. 77)

6. Supra, Letter II

7. I have never travelled in Spain, but I am assured of this fact on the authority of a most estimable Spaniard. I hope he did not deceive me.

8. Sitting of the House of Commons, November 22,1814.

Return to Spanish Inquisition Page

Wayback Machine
  
http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/LetterFive.html
FEB	SEP	NOV
Previous capture	06	Next capture
2003	2004	2006
5 captures
16 Feb 2003 - 16 May 2008
 About this capture

[Letters on the Spanish Inquisition]
LETTER V
Sir, - You will undoubtedly not be astonished that the attack made on Spain in the midst of the British Parliament has appeared to me to require a special discussion. The representatives of that great nation are well entitled to be heard when they express an opinion in their national assemblies. The English people, the first, undoubtedly, among all Protestant peoples, are also the only people that have a national voice, and the right to speak as a people. I believe it way he useful therefore, to interrogate there, and ask them an account of their faith, without denying them the respect to which they are justly entitled. In considering to what lengths they have been led by what they call toleration, we shall see, perhaps, that this toleration, such as it is understood in England, cannot be allied with any positive faith whatever!

England tolerates all sects, and only proscribes religion (from which these sects have all been separated). Spain, on the contrary, admits only religion and proscribes all sects; how could two fundamental laws that are diametrically opposed be defended by the same means? There is by no means question of knowing whether it be necessary to have coercive laws for leaving to every one the freedom to do what he chooses, - this is no difficult problem. The question is, how a state may, without any laws of this kind, maintain within itself unity of belief and of worship: this problem is not quite so easy.

The English reason oddly enough; they establish, under the specious name of toleration, absolute indifference in matters of religion; starting from this point, they form their judgment of nations in whose eyes this indifference is the greatest of crimes. We thus enjoy happiness; say they; right well, if religious unity and the world to come are of no importance to them; but, founding upon the two contrary suppositions, how would their statesmen manage to satisfy this first want of legislation?

"God has spoken ; it is for us to believe. The religions which he has established is one, even as he is himself. Truth being essentially intolerant, to profess religious toleration is to profess scepticism; in other words, to exclude faith. Wo, a thousand times wo, to the stupid imprudence which accuses us of damming man! It is only God who damns; he alone has said to his messengers: Go, teach all nations! he that believes shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be condemned. Deeply persuaded of his goodness, we cannot, notwithstanding, forget any of his oracles: but, although be cannot tolerate error, we, nevertheless, know that he can pardon it. Never shall we cease to recommend it to his mercy, never shall we cease either to hope all for sincerity, whilst we tremble in thinking that God alone knows who is sincere."

Such is the profession of faith of a Spaniard, and of some other men besides. This faith necessarily supposes in those who adhere to it a zealous proselytism, an insurmountable aversion to all innovation, an eye always open to the projects and the manoeuvres of impiety, an intrepid and indefatigable arm always raised against it. The nations that profess this doctrine direct their legislation in the first place to the future world, believing that all the rest will be added unto them. Other nations, on the contrary, say carelessly: Deorum injuriae diis cura. (1) For them the future is nothing. This life, which God has granted to man, and the average duration of which is only about five and twenty years, engrosses all the care of their legislators. They think of nothing but art and science, agriculture, commerce, etc. They dare not say expressly, "Religion is no concern of ours;" but all their acts suppose it, and all their legislation is tacitly materialist, since it does nothing for the mind and for futurity. There in nothing in common, therefore, between these two systems; and the system of indifference has nothing to reproach the other with until it shall have pointed out to it a sure means of defending itself without vigilance and without rigour, which, I conceive, will not be found to be very easy.

How did England, even, which preaches toleration so loudly to other nations, show patience when she beheld her religion attacked ? Hume has upbraided it with its inquisition against the Catholics, more terrible, says he, than that of Spain, since it exercised the same tyranny without encumbering itself with the same forms. (2)

"In the reign of the ferocious Elizabeth, the Englishman who returned to the Roman church and he who had the happiness to bring over a convert to that church were declared guilty of lze-majesty. (3)

Every man above sixteen years of age, who refused, during more than a month, to frequent the Protestant service, was imprisoned. If he happened to relapse, he was banished for life; and if he returned (to see his wife, for instance, or to assist his father), he was executed as a traitor. (4)

Campion, renowned for his learning, his eloquence, and the purity of his morals, was executed under this reign, solely because he was a missionary and consoler of his brethren.

Shamefully accused of having entered into a plot that had existed against Queen Elizabeth, he was tortured with such inhumanity that the gaoler, on beholding the horrible scene, said that the poor man would soon be lengthened by half a foot. Three of his judges, terrified by such injustice, withdrew, refusing to take part in this judicial assassination. (5)

Walpole was in like manner condemned and executed. The Queen causes pardon to be offered to him on the scaffold if he would acknowledge the new supremacy. He refuses and dies. (6)

Who is not aware of the horrible cruelties practised in this reign against the Catholics of Ireland by Lord Fitzwilliam? (7) There is still preserved in the archives of Trinity College, Dublin, a manuscript letter, in which an officer named Lee, describes these cruelties without circumlocution. They are such, says he, that we should rather expect to find them in the history of a Turkish than in that of an English province. (8) And, nevertheless, adds the learned Camden, Elizabeth did not believe that the greater part of these unfortunate priests, thus put to death by the tribunals, were guilty of any crime against their country. (9) Amiable woman !

In fine, the body of laws (if it can be allowed thus to profane the name of law) enacted against Catholics, in Ireland particularly, would form a code of oppression without example in the annals of the world. (10)

Bacon, in what he calls his Natural History, speaks with more seriousness, perhaps, than he should have done, of I know not what magical ointment, the ingredients of which, amongst other fine things, were the fat of a wild bear and that of a bear, both slain in the very act of reproduction, and, moreover, a certain kind of frothy substance which is found on the cranium of a human corpse that has been left without burial. He finds that it would be rather difficult to procure the first ingredient, provable to be genuine; "but, as to the second," says be with admirable sangfroid, and without the least expression of disgust, "it is certain that it would be found in abundance in Ireland on the corpses which are there thrown in heaps to the dunghill." (11)

And observe, Sir, I pray you, that in the country which witnessed this inexorable persecution, it is still accounted certain, and has been solemnly declared in full parliament, according to the same persecuting spirit, that if the King of England should embrace any other religion than the Anglican, he would, by the very fact, be deprived of the crown. (12)

I believe, in my conscience, that the English would think of it more than once before carrying out this threat; but let us take the declaration in its literal meaning. It appears to me strange, indeed, that the British Parliament should possess the incontestable right to expel the best of kings who should decide on becoming Catholic, and that the Catholic King should not be entitled to banish the least of his subjects who should become Protestant.

Thus do nations fall at variance with themselves, and become ridiculous without perceiving it. An Englishman will prove to you learnedly that his king has not the least right over English consciences, and that if he dared to bring them back to the ancient worship, the nation would be entitled to do justice on his sacred person; but, if it be said to this same Englishman: "How, then, had Henry VIII. or Elizabeth more right over the conscience of their time than George III has over those of today (1815), and how, according to the English theory, were Englishmen of that period guilty in resisting these two sovereigns who had become tyrants in regard to them ?" he will not fail to exclaim, before he has had time to reflect: "Oh! the case is quite different!" although there be really but one incontestable difference, viz., that the opposition of that time did battle for a possession of sixteen centuries; whilst those now in possession are the offspring of yesterday.

God forbid I should wish to revive ancient quarrels: I only say, and I hope you will be of my opinion, that the English are, perhaps, the least entitled, of any people in the world, to reproach Spain with its religious legislation. When with greater means of defending themselves than were given to other nations, they had recourse, nevertheless, to the same extravagant proceedings; as they banished a legitimate king, and put another to death ; as they passed through all the convulsions of fanaticism and rebellion before subsiding at last into a state of tranquillity: how can they be so bold us to charge Spain with its delectable Inquisition? as if men could be ignorant that Spain alone, solely by means of this institution, was able to traverse two centuries of delirium and of crime with a degree of wisdom which extorted even the admiration of Voltaire!

This same Voltaire said right well, although he made a bad application of the maxim, "that those who live in glass houses ought not to throw stones at their neighbour's house."

You will say, perhaps, the convulsions of England have ceased; its actual state has cost it torrents of blood; but after all, it has risen to such greatness as to excite the envy of other nations.

I answer, in the first place, that none are bound to purchase future and uncertain happiness by great actual evils; the sovereign capable of making such a calculation is as rash as he is guilty. Consequently, the kings of Spain, who saved by means of a few drops of the most impure, torrents of the most precious blood that was on the point of being shed. made an excellent calculation, and remain irreproachable.

I answer, in the second place, that it has not only cost England torrents of blood in order to attain her present position, but her faith also, which is everything. She has only ceased to persecute in ceasing to believe; and this is certainly not a miracle of which she need boast very loudly. In this age it is customary to found always, although without acknowledging it, on the hypothesis of materialism, and the most reasonable men are in the end hurried away insensibly by the torrent. If this world be everything, and eternity nothing, men are right in exerting themselves to the utmost for the sake of the former, and in desiring nothing for the latter; but, if the contrary be the case, the contrary maxim also must be adopted.

England, no doubt, will say: "It is you who have lost your faith, whilst we have retained the truth." One need not, indeed, be very clever in order to divine this objection; but, the reply still more readily occurs, and here it is.

Prove to us that you believe in your religion, and show us how you defend it?

There is not a well-informed man who does not know what to hold to as regards these two points; for, in fact, all this toleration of which England boasts, is in reality nothing better than absolute indifference. He who believes ought to be charitable, no doubt, but he cannot be tolerant without restriction. If England tolerates everything, it does so because its creed exists only on the paper of the thirty-nine articles.

If England had a fixed system of belief, it would love the different Christian creeds in proportion to the resemblance each of them bears to its own; but this is by no means the case; and it would be a thousand times rather consent to be represented by a Socinian than by a Catholic: a certain proof that belief is of no consideration with it.

And since faith is escaping visibly and totally from England, that nation, in other respects, infinitely respectable, has lost the right to criticize the people who, accounting the loss of faith the greatest of misfortunes, takes measures to preserve it.

The more you examine the matter, the more you will have reason to be convinced that what is called religion in some countries, is nothing else than hatred of the system which excludes all others. This rage is called piety, zeal, faith, etc.; Dant nomen quod libet illi. (13)

We lately heard an English bishop advance, not in a work of erudition or polemical theology, but in a work addressed to his own diocesans, the strange thesis, that the Anglican church is not Protestant. This is curious: but, what is it then, if you please? The English prelate replies: Scriptural; (14) which, in more exact terms, means, that the Anglican church is not Protestant, but that it is Protestant; for Protestantism essentially consists in wishing to be only scriptural; that is in adopting as the rule of faith scripture alone, in place of authority.

You cannot, I am sure, Sir, have forgot that, in the year 1805, an English bishop was consulted by a lady, one of his friends, on the important and especially difficult question, whether she could, in conscience, marry her daughter to a man who was alien to the Anglican church (although neither Catholic nor Protestant).

The reply, which the principal parties interested did not keep secret, and which was communicated to me in your company, is one of the most curious things I ever read in my life. The learned bishop establishes, in the first place, the great distinction of fundamental and non-fundamental articles. He considers Christians all who are agreed as to the first. "Every one, says he, "has his conscience, and God will judge us. He himself knew a gentleman, an alumnus of Eton and Cambridge, who, after having duly examined, to the best of his ability, the grounds of the two religions, decided for that of Rome. He does not blame him, and, consequently, he believes that the tender mother may, with all safety to her conscience, marry her daughter out of the Anglican church, although the children by this marriage should be educated in the religion of her husband; especially," adds the prelates "as when they arrive at mature age, they will be at liberty to examine and judge for themselves which of all the Christian churches is most suitable to the gospel of Christ." (15)

This decision from the lips of a bishop would be petrifying. On the other hand, it does infinite honour to an Anglican bishop; and even although he, who uttered it, should not have got over his probation, and did not enjoy a widespread and well-merited reputation, nothing more would be necessary in order to conciliate for him the profound esteem of every respectable person; he must certainly be gifted with a spirit of independence, a very delicate conscience, and a rare degree of courage, in order to express so candidly the presumed equality of all systems, - in other words, the nullity of his own.

Such is the faith of the bishops in that celebrated country, which is at the head of the Protestant system: one publicly declares himself ashamed of his origin, and would fain efface from his church the indelible name which is her very essence; as her existence is nothing else than a protestation against authority, no diversity in the protestation can alter the nature of her being, and as she could not cease generally, to protest, without ceasing to be.

Another, starting from the principle of private judgment, which is the basis of the Protestant system draws from it with admirable frankness the following inevitable consequences:- "Men having no other power over one another's minds than that which logic affords (and this all alike claim as their own), it follows that, beyond the circle of the exact sciences, there is no universal truth, and especially no divine truth; appeal to a book would not only be an error, but an act of stupidity, the book appealed to being the object of discussion. If I believed with divine faith the dogmas which I teach solely by royal authority, I would be eminently guilty in advising that children should be unfortunately brought up in error, reserving to them only the liberty of returning to truth when they shall have acquired the necessary knowledge; but I do not believe in these dogmas; at least, I do not believe in them otherwise than with a human belief, as I would believe, for instance, in the system of Staalh, without hindering any other person from believing in that of Lavoisier, and without seeing any reason why a chemist of either of there two schools should refuse his daughter to a partisan of the other."

Such is the exact sense of the reply given by the learned bishop. It must be acknowledged that wisdom and probity united could not speak more to the purpose; but I may once more inquire what faith is there in a country where the first pastors hold such opinions? and what influence can they possess among the people?

I have known many Protestants, English Protestants particularly, in whose conversation I have been accustomed to study Protestantism. I have never been able to see in them anything better than theists, more or less perfected by the gospel, but wholly strangers to what is called faith, in other words, divinized belief.

The opinion which they entertain of the ministers of their religion is itself an infallible sign of that which they hold in regard to the doctrine taught by these preachers, for there is between these two things a consist and invariable relation.

An Englishman worthy of consideration, both from his rank and character, told me one day in the intimacy of a tte--tte, that he had never been able to look at the wife of a bishop without laughing. The same feeling is to be found more or less in all minds. It is known that Locke called the bench of bishops the "caput mortuum" of the House of Peers. The original name subsists, but it is no better than an airy phantom - magni nominis umbra.

As to the ministers of the second order, it is scarcely necessary to speak of them.

The preacher of faith is always considered; the preacher of doubt, on the other hand, is always ridiculous. Whenever, then, there is doubt, the minister is an object of ridicule; and reciprocally, wherever there is ridicule, there is doubt; and, consequently, no such thing as faith.

Read over the discussions which took place on occasion of the bill that was proposed for the emancipation of Catholics (who lost their cause by only a single vote), you will be surprised by the extreme disfavour which was shown in a thousand ways in the course of the debates against the order of ecclesiastics. One who gave his opinion went so far to say (I recollect it perfectly) that they ought not to interfere with discussions of this kind; this was odd enough surely, when there was question of a religious matter. In reality, however, he was right; for, from the moment that religion becomes only a political affair, its ministers, as such, have nothing more to say. Now this is precisely the case of England; the toleration there boasted of is not, and cannot be, anything else than indifference.

The public prints and the pamphlets of the day have intimated to us the death of some men of celebrity in England.

One of the most distinguished in this brilliant group, Charles Fox, said to his friends on his death-bed : - "What do you think of the soul?" He added: - "I believe that it is immortal. I would so believe, even though Christianity had never been; (16) but to know what will be its state after death, is beyond the limits of my understanding." (17)

His illustrious rival followed him at a short interval and the details of his death have likewise been made known to the public. We behold a bishop who had been his preceptor praying by his side; (18) but on the part of the dying man nothing that could edify a Christian's faith.

I have followed all these deaths of Englishmen with the greatest attention, but I have never been able to observe a single act of faith or of hope truly Christian.

We find among the letters of Madame du Deffant the profession of faith of her illustrious friend. "I believe," said he to the impertinent unbeliever, "I believe in a future life. God has done so much that is good and beautiful, that we ought to rely upon him for the rest. We must have no intention to offend him. (19) Virtue must be pleasing to him ; therefore we ought to be virtuous, but our nature is not equal to perfection. God does not require it of us, as it is not natural. This is my belief; it is very simple and very short. (20) I fear little, because I do not serve a tyrant." (21)

Every sensible Englishman may examine himself; he will find nothing more in the depths of his heart. (22)

Another proof of English indifference in matters of religion is found in the indifference of the English tribunals towards all crimes committed against the presumed faith of the country. Sometimes they have seemed to open their eyes, and do justice. Long ago, they condemned Wallaston to a fine which be could not pay - that is to perpetual imprisonment, for speaking against Jesus Christ. Only two years ago we find a Mr. Eason sentenced to the pillory for having tried to overthrow the religion of the country. (23) But we must not be led astray by such facts; these men, and some others, perhaps, whose condition I am ignorant of, were, there can be no doubt, what in common parlance we call poor fellows (pauvres diables), without fortune and without protection. It is possible the tribunals may take a fancy for experimenting upon such men, by way of exercising their powers; but let them be men who are in fashion; let them be, I do not say Bolingbrokes, but only Humes or Gibbons, they may blaspheme all their lifetime, and only reap honour and profit.

Had not Hume employed all the powers of his mind in endeavouring to overthrow the first truths, and all the foundations of morality ? If as he not said in as many words, among other elegant things, "that it is impossible for human reason to justify the character of God?" (24)

And has not Gibbon said, "that when Jean-Jacques Rousseau happened to compare Socrates to Jesus Christ, he had not reflected that the former did not allow a word of impatience or of despair to escape him." (25)

This detestable trait and a thousand more, which could be quoted from a book which in general is nothing better than a conspiracy against Christianity, have gained for their author more money and more honour than he could have hoped to obtain for the same amount of writing in any religious work by which he would have eclipsed the talent of Dittons, the Sherlocks, and the Lelands.

Acknowledge, Sir, that the tribunals, whilst impotent against such men, are very ridiculous, to say nothing worse, when they undertake to punish some miserable wretch who is incapable even of laughing at them.

It may be seen in the memoirs of Gibbon, with what culpable politeness the celebrated Robertson spoke to him of this same book, so little appreciated in our frivolous age, a book which is at bottom nothing better than a disguised ecclesiastical history, written, I say, not only by an unbeliever, but by a very ill-bred man.

Robertson (26) also has incurred great guilt by the unworthy praises he has prostituted on Voltaire, permitting himself, against his conscience surely, to describe as learned and profound, (27) an historian who is eminently superficial, and besides, without faith, without conscience, and without shame.

This criminal eulogium has done infinite evil, by furnishing an imposing authority to all the enemies of Christianity who have nothing more at heart than to praise and bring forward their Corypheus, without taking the least trouble to inquire whether Robertson was sincere or not.

The truth is, that Robertson basely paid court to Voltaire, of whose praise he was ambitious. In order to reach him and obtain his goodwill, he employed a celebrated woman, quite worthy to act as intermediary in this interesting connexion ; this lady was the pious Du Deffant, who wrote to Voltaire on the part of Robertson : "He is anxious to pay you the compliment of dedicating his works to you; I have taken it upon me to ask your permission ... His respect and veneration for you are extreme." (28)

What shall we say of a member of the established church (Haute-Eglise) of Scotland, of a Doctor in Theology, of a preacher of the Christian faith, who assures of his respect and veneration, the most ardent, the most notorious, the most in decent enemy of religion!

Charity, no doubt, and even politeness, are perfectly independent of creeds, and we must take care not to insult; but, nevertheless, there are bounds which conscience prescribes. Bergier would undoubtedly have rendered, on occasion, to all the miscreants whom he refuted during his long and precious life, every service in his power; and it is indeed very remarkable that the most impassioned attacks never extorted from him a single word of bitterness; but, notwithstanding, he would have taken good care not to speak to Frret or Voltaire of his respect and veneration. This compliment would have dishonoured a priest. But Robertson could afford to caress, without any dangerous consequence, both Gibbon and Voltaire; the Christianity which his state of life required him to preach being for him only edifying mythology, which could be made use of without inconvenience. He himself revealed the secret in his last work, wherein, spite of all the precautions taken by the author, every intelligent reader will behold only the accomplished deist. (29)

But enough has been said about Robertson, to whom, on account of his celebrity, I wished to direct attention. To go farther back, what will you say of the famous Chillingworth, swearing before God and on the Holy Scriptures, to the thirty- nine articles of the Anglican church and declaring a short time afterwards, in a confidential letter, that he cannot subscribe the thirty-nine articles without subscribing his own damnation; (30) and ending with the discovery that the doctrine of Arius is the truth, or at least, is not an error deserving of damnation? (31)< Truly it is a mere bagatelle. (32)<

Would you, by any chance, have the curiosity to know how another English doctor has spoken of original sin, and of the degradation of man, the very basis of Christianity? Listen to Doctor Beattie!

"Father Mallebranche," says he, "teaches us that the senses were in the origin very honest faculties, and such as could be desired, until the moment when they were debauched by original sin; an occurrence which gave them an invincible disposition to deceive us, so that now they are constantly on the watch to play us ill turns." (33)

Hitherto I have only quoted England, because it is at the head of the Protestant system. If I resolved to go beyond that country, I should likewise, at the same time, outstep the limits I have marked out for myself. I cannot, however, deny myself a short excursion, in order that you mayn know the profession of faith of an evangelical bishop; I mean to speak of the celebrated Herder, whom I have heard quite seriously styled, in some German book, the Bossuet of Germany. Listen, then, I pray you, to this doctor of the church. (34)

"Everything on our globe is constantly changing, like the turning of a wheel. What man, if he take into due consideration the circular figure of the earth, can allow himself to be carried away by the idea of desiring to convert the entire world to the same verbal belief (35) in philosophy and in religion, or to slay it (36) with a stupid but holy zeal? (37) The revolutions of a ball are the image of everything that takes place upon our earth."

It must be acknowledged that the argument against the unity and universality of religion, and against the enterprises of missionaries, taken from the form of the earth, is of a kind altogether new, and worthy of the Bossuet of Germany! An English critic, in reference to this, inquired, "Whether it would be equally absurd to make a martyr of one's-self for philosophical or religious opinions on an earth of conical as on one of cylindrical shape!" (38)I really must own that I do not know.

I would now ask you, Sir, when a preacher of this description ascends the pulpit, how is it possible that his hearers should not say to themselves: "Who knows whether this fellow believes all that he it about to preach to us?" What confidence can such preachers inspire, and how can the disciple who has read their books, who knows their maxims (the first of which is contempt of all authority), who can hide from himself that a hundred and a hundred times it will have happened to them to preach, not only without believing the doctrine which they announce, but also without haying any faith in the legitimacy of their ministry; how, I say, could this disciple do otherwise than despise his masters, and, in a short time, from contempt of the doctor, come to despise also the doctrine? He who should doubt of this unavoidable concatenation could have no idea of the nature of man. Thus, theory and observation combine to establish that there is not, and that there cannot be, either faith or positive religion properly so called, among the people whose envoys have taken so much trouble to abolish the detestable inquisition.

Christianity in obliterated in England to such a degree that recently certain men, still holding by some threads to the ancient faith, could entertain fears lest indifference, under the deceitful mask of toleration, should at last come to give to the British nation representatives quite alien to the Christian religion. Beholding, therefore, all the Christian dogmas disappearing, one after another, and desiring at, least to secure the preservation of the capital dogma, that of the Trinity, without which there is no Christianity, they proposed their bill on faith in the Trinity, by virtue of which every Englishman who should refuse to swear to this fundamental dogma should be declared unfit to hold a seat in Parliament. (39) Assuredly the promoters of the bill did not show any want of discretion, and, no doubt, less could not be required of men who attached the slightest importance to being Christians. Parliament, notwithstanding, found that it was too much; the members for the time being felt in their consciences that they were not entitled to embarrass the consciences of those who should succeed them. They properly refrained from imposing on other men the obligation of taking an oath by which they would have taken good care not to bind themselves, and they rejected the bill. Thus the Arian, and even the Mahometan Englishman, becomes eligible to a seat in Parliament, since no enlightened Islamite refuses to acknowledge Christ as a very honest man, - nay, even as a great prophet. On occasion of this proceeding, an anonymous writer, whose mirth was excited by this great act of English legislation, aimed at the Imperial Parliament the following epigram, which is not altogether without point: -

            "King, Lords, and Commons do decree
            That henceforth every man is free
            To think, or say, as it may be,
            That one is one, and three are three. (40)

I shall not forget to call your attention to the fact that England is really tolerant only towards sects, but, by no means so towards the church, from which she feels that she is separated; for, as regards the latter, the laws repel her with a degree of obstinacy which is perhaps not without danger to the state. The Englishman rejects the system which proposes to him that be should believe more: but everyone who comes to him to say that he should believe less, is sure to be well received. The Anglican church is swarming with non-conformist sects, which devour her, and leave her nothing more than a certain external form, which still retains the appearance of reality. Methodism, alone, is swallowing up all states, all conditions, and openly threatens to stifle the national religion. An Englishman, who lately wrote on this subject, proposed a singular means for opposing the torrent. "If the evil makes new progress," says he, "it will, perhaps, become necessary to use some indulgence in regard to the articles of faith admitted by the Anglican church, and to receive within its pale a greater number of Christians." (41)

We have here quite a complaisant writer: to destroy Methodism, Anglicans have only to cede the merit of good works to the Puritans, the sacraments to the Quakers, the Trinity to the Arians, etc. They will then enrol all these gentlemen, in order to render themselves sufficiently powerful against the Methodists. (42) There is nothing, as you see, better imagined. He who proposes this admirable means of reinforcing the national church, is, nevertheless, a loyal and sincere man, who reasons according to his conscience and the universal opinion by which he is surrounded. What matter dogmas? The creed has only one line - the first. The rest is cast into the circle of opinions and recollections. As a religious "establishment, as a spiritual power, the Anglican church no longer exists. Two centuries have sufficed to reduce to dust the trunk of that worm-eaten tree; the bark still subsists, because civil authority finds its account in preserving it.

You may have been justly astonished in beholding the representatives of a great Christian nation refusing to recognize, as a necessary condition in these same representatives, the quality of Christians! Nevertheless, I am in a position to show you something still more strange. If I told you that England has solemnly, I had almost said officially, renounced Christianity, you would, no doubt, accuse me of uttering a paradox, and I am myself also quite ready to protest that I am only presenting you with a paradox; but this is no reason for suppressing it. Cicero has favoured us with no fewer than six; why should you not pass me one? Read mine, I pray you, such as I shall propound it to you in my next letter. Afterwards, as I am of a mind to be easily treated with, we shall retrench from it whatever you please, in order to make of it a truth which will suffice for my purpose.

I am, etc..

Moscow, August 19/31, 1815.

End notes, Fifth Letter
1. "It belongs to the gods themselves to look to the wrongs done to them."-Tacius, Annals. liv. 73.

2. "The whole tyranny of the Inquisition, though without the order, was introduced into the kingdom." (Hume's History of England, James 1. 1617, chap. lvii. p. 109.) Hume, without perceiving it, expresses himself rather incorrectly. A tribunal which proceeds environed by laws and forms, founded upon mercy as well as upon justice, can only be severe. One which condemns without formalities, simply and absolutely commits murder, and is consequently execrable.

3. "Whoever is any way reconciled anyone to the church of Rome, or was himself reconciled, was declared to be guilty of treason." (Idem, Ibid., 1581, chap. xli, p. 113.)

4. Nat. Alex. His. Eccl. Saeculi XVI, cap. v. p. 169. Chaloner, Memoirs of those who suffered in England for Religion, London, 1741. Der Triumph der Philosophie, etc., tome i, p. 448.

5. Der Triumph der Philosophie, etc.

6.  Ibid.

7. "They cannot be excused on any principles of justice or necessity." Edinburgh Review, October, 1804, No. 9, p. 156.

8. Edinburgh Review, Ibid., p. 159.

9. Cambden's History of England, 1615, tome i., p. 327.

10. "Unparalleled code of oppression." (Burke's "Letter to Sir Henry Lang," p. 44.) In the sitting of 10th May, 1805, an Irish lord also feelingly exclaimed, "O my unfortunate country, art thou destined never to enjoy repose?" (Cobbett's "Parliamentary Debates," etc., tome iv., London, 1805, col. 721.)

11. Sylva Sylvarum, or a Natural History, cent. x. No. 998.

12. Parliamentary Debates, at the place already quoted, col. 677, discourse of Lord H--.

13. One of the greatest statesmen of our time (who, however, exercised his talents only on a narrow theatre), and who was by birth a Protestant, said to me some time ago, "Without you, we should not exist." This was a true and very profound remark; he perceived that the religion of all negatives whatsoever, is only a common abhorrence of that which affirms. Now, if the object of any hatred be suppressed, what remains? Nothing.

14. "Our articles and liturgy do not exactly correspond with the sentiments of any of the eminent reformers upon the continent, or with the creeds of any of the Protestant churches which are there established." (As if they did not protest because they do not protest in the same way as other Protestants!) "Our church is not Lutheran; it is not Calvinistic; it is not Arminian; it is scriptural," etc. ("A Charge delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of London," etc. London, Cadell & Davis, 1803.

A journal devoted to the true maxims of the Anglican church, highly approves of this assertion. (Anti-Jacobin, January, 1803, No. 67, p. 56), and it quotes, moreover, the work of an English theologian (Mr. Faber), who has taken it for the epigraph of his book.

It is obvious, besides, that the Lutherans will say, "Our church is not Calvinistic, etc., it is Scriptural." And the Calvinist will say, "Our church is not Lutheran, it is not Anglican, it is Scriptural." All other sects will hold the same language.

This sophism, although laughable in itself, does much honour, nevertheless, to the man of eminent merit who employed it. It shows a conscience ill at ease and consequently upright, which feels its way, and seeks a true support on which it may rest secure.

15. The words of the good bishop are as follows: -

"If in every other respect the match meet with her approbation, and that of her parents, it must not be declined from any apprehension of her children's salvation being risked by being educated in the R---- church, especially as, when they arrive at mature age, they will be at liberty to examine and judge for themselves which of all the Christian churches is most suitable to the gospel of Christ. C--P--, March 27, 1805."

16. Do you believe it?

17. "Circumstantial Details of the long illness and last moments of the Rt. Hon. Charles James Fox," etc. London, 1805, p. 60. The historian of his death informs us, that he was not an infidel, but that he had a religion of his own." - Ibid., p.37. There is in this nothing extraordinary; it is the only and necessary confession of faith of every man who is neither a thorough Atheist, nor a thorough Christian.

18. This is the same respectable person whom we have already seen disowning so nobly, although without any good ground whatever, the appellation of Protestant. - See above.

19. This is not, perhaps, all it ought to be; but, provided we do not act on purpose to offend him, it is reasonable.

20. In reality, it is neither that called the Apostles' creed, nor that called the creed of St.. Athanasius, nor that of Nice, nor that of Constantinople, nor that of Trent, nor the confession of Augburg, nor the thirty-nine articles, etc. etc.

21. Horace Walpole, in the letters of Madame du Deffant, vol. i, let. xxx, p. 153, note.

22. Unless he lean in his heart towards another system; but, in this case, it is a further proof in favour of the general thesis.

23. See the Morning Chronicle of June 5, 1812, No. 13,441. We there find a letter, the author of which blames the severity of the judges, and who subscribes himself a true Christian, but proves, at any rate, that he is not a true logician, as he concludes with the following inconceivable paradox: "A religion may indeed be destroyed, but it can never be sustained by persecution." As if it were possible to destroy a hostile system without supporting the religion it attacks. Just as if it were said that a certain remedy may, indeed, destroy a disease, but that it never preserved health. It is scarcely necessary to observe, that according to modem phraseology, the action of the tribunals which defend the religion of the state against its enemies is called persecution. (This remark is, of course, by no means intended as an expression of opinion in favour of persecution.)

24. "Essay on Liberty and Necessity," sub fin.; "Beattie on Truth." part ii, chap. ii. sect. iii.

25. "History of the Decline", etc. vol. xii. Paris, Maradan. 1794, chap. xlvii, pp. 9, 10. I am well pleased to understand that the magistrates, defenders of the religion the country, who send insignificants to the pillory, have found this phrase, and so many others, "not guilty upon their honour."

26. He wrote to Gibbon, "I cannot conclude without telling you how much I approve the reserve with which these new volumes are written; it will, I hope, protect you from the offensive and ill-bred criticism which has been passed upon the freedom of the first." (letter of 12th May, 1781, "Memoirs of Gibbon," vol. ii. p. 339.) Strange language in the mouth of an ecclesiastic and a preacher. Priestley was a little less complimentary: - "I have no scruple," says he to Gibbon, "in telling it you loudly; your conduct is low and unworthy. You insult the common sense of the Christian world; defend, then, I say, not your principles only, but also your honour. Can there be anything more disgraceful, etc. etc." (Letter of February 3,1783, ibid. vol. ii. p. 343, seqq.) Sentence is pronounced a little harshly, perhaps; but I do not see how there can be any appeal from it.

27.  Introduction to the "History of Charles V." vol. ii. sect. iii. note xliv. p. 417, 12mo.

28.  "Madame du Deffant  Voltaire," vol. iv. of this lady's letters, December 20, 1769, p. 320.

29. See, A Sketch of the History and the progress of Superstition and Religion in all parts of the World. ("Robertson's Historical Account, etc." Ble, 1792, appendix.)

"Fuit illa hominis divini (I speak English) tanquam cycnea vox." Cicero, De Orat. iii. 2.

30. "Ego Gulielmus Chillingworth omnibus hisce articulis. ... volens et ex anim subscribio." ("Memoirs of Gibbon," vol. ii. letter xxxiii. p. 305.)

31. Ibid.

32. Ibid.

33. "Beattie on Truth," part ii. chap ii. sect. i. He here accuses Malebranche of being in general mystical (that is Christian); and on what this great man had said, after St. Augustine and a thousand others, "that the pagan virtues were nothing better than pride," he exclaims, "Fy! M. Malebranche; Popery, with all its absurdities, does not require of its partisans an assertion so foreign to all candour and generosity." - Ibid. Malebranche, I am certain, would laugh even in heaven, if he could read there, in the beautific vision, these indecorous fooleries.

34. Herder's "Ideen zur Philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit," tome i. chap. iv. p. 23.

35. "Wortglauben." - If, however, there were question of words only there would neither be much rashness in endeavouring to bring men to such belief, nor much evil in not succeeding. But Herder will be an unbeliever, even at the cost of being incorrect.

36. Slay the whole world, to be sure ! What propriety of expression! What accuracy of thought!

37. Another would have said, "Holy, but stupid." The Bishop of Weimar is not so particular.

38. Anti-Jacobin, August, 1804, No. lxxiv. p. 408.

39. This experience is very precious in the general order of things. It proves to every sincere man, that there is nothing in Christianity more or less fundamental, and that we must believe all or nothing. Theoretically, this had often been demonstrated; but to theory it is good to add experience. Every nation, as well as every individual, who shall choose doctrines for themselves, will lose them all.

40. Morning Chronicle, November 11, 1814, No. 14,203.

41. "Causes of the Increase of Methodism in England," by Robert Acklem Ingram, in the "British Library," 1812, nos. 391, 392, p. 482.

42. If England would only believe me (the recruiting system being once admitted), it would receive us also, as with our chief, and all that would necessarily follow. Then, indeed, Methodism would see something!



Wayback Machine
  
http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/LetterSix.html
FEB	MAR	SEP
Previous capture	18	Next capture
2002	2003	2004
4 captures
18 Mar 2003 - 16 May 2008
 About this capture

LETTER VI

Sir, - Who has not heard of David Hume, cui non notus Hylas? I believe that, everything considered, the eighteenth century, so fertile in writers of a similar description, has produced no enemy of religion that can be at all compared to him. His icy venom is much more dangerous than the foaming rage of Voltaire. The latter, besides, sometimes respects certain fundamental truths, and he has been at least wise enough to say: - "If God existed not, he ought to be invented."

I am persuaded that, on this account, he is only the more guilty; this is not, however, the place for telling you the reasons that have led me to this conviction ; but his inconsistencies, which warn the consciences of readers, render him much more dangerous than Hume, who strikes at the foundations of all truth with a degree sang froid that resembles logic. A little above, we heard him affirm more loudly still: that it is impossible to justify the character of God; he adds, that all the power of philosophy cannot excuse God from being the author of sin. (1) What a display of dialectics has he not made in order to overthrow all idea of free-will; that is, in order totally to uproot morality. The mind most accustomed to considerations of this kind, staggers sometimes in the midst of the sophistry accumulated by this dangerous author. One perceives that Hume is to the wrong before being able to assign a reason for so thinking. If ever there existed among men who have had it in their power to bear the preaching of the gospel, a real Atheist (which I do not take it on me to decide), it is he. I never read his antireligious works without a sort of terror, and without asking myself how it was possible that a man, to whom was wanting no opportunity of knowing the truth, had been able, nevertheless, to descend to each a pitch, of degradation? It has always appeared to me that the obduracy of Hume, and his insolent coolness, could only be the last punishment of a certain revolt of the understanding, which excludes mercy, and which God punishes by withdrawing his grace.

It is sufficiently perceptible that Hume, who speaks of first truths in the manner we have just seen, need not be anywise embarrassed as regards Christianity, and none will be surprised to hear him say, with that kind of suppressed irony, peculiar to himself, "We may conclude, after all, that Christianity not only exists by the miracles which occurred at its origin, but that, in our times, even, no reasonable being, can believe in it without a miracle; reason alone is powerless to demonstrate its truth ; and every man, whom faith determines to believe it true, is conscious of a continual miracle operated within himself, and which overthrows in his mind all principles of right reason, in determining him to believe what is most contrary to custom and experience." (2)

This man, nevertheless, led a tranquil life in the midst of comfort and all the distinctions accorded to talent; which already proves that in England, as well as elsewhere, cobwebs (in this way at least) are terrible only to midges.

But, more than this, the honours conferred on the memory of Hume, have surpassed all those he had obtained in his lifetime: the British legislature, that is, the king and the two chambers, having solemnly accepted the dedication of the magnificent edition of his History of England, which was published not very, long ago. If the legislature had refused this offering without an other motive than that of chastising, if it may be thus expressed, the memory of so great an enemy of the national religion, it would only have done justice. More than once has ecclesiastical authority been blamed for having pronounced certain proscriptions in odium auctoris (in detestation of the author). Nevertheless if you consider the matter attentively, you will not readily disapprove of this judgment. There is no law, the perfect justice of which is more universally felt than that which punishes the guilty in the same way in which he has incurred guilt. Let him who abuses the gifts of genius, be deprived of its rewards. If this law were established, and rigorously executed, the greatest abuses would be presented. It is the disgrace of an age, and of a nation, that the author of "Joan of Arc " has not shut the gates of the French academy against the author of "Zaire," nor banished him from it.

Let us suppose that Hume had been condemned to death, or even brought before a court of justice, for one of those crimes that are punished with death in England. (3) Assuredly, several such crimes, that, for instance, of having stolen a sheep, would have rendered him much less guilty in the eyes of eternal justice, than that of having attacked in his writings, with so much obstinacy and perversity, the most sacred doctrines of natural and revealed religion. And, nevertheless, I by no means doubt that, in this supposition, the king and the parliament would have rejected the homage of a book that proceeded from such a hand.

If, therefore, they accepted the dedication which I have mentioned, it was because Hume did not appear to them in the least disgraced by all that he had written against religion ; which, in other words, means that, in their estimation, religion is only an opinion, in regard to which men may say yes or no indifferently, as on a question of physics or political economy.

But we am not yet reduced to indirect consequences; and I shall just call your attention to a circumstance, which is indeed remarkable, although not all observed, perhaps, and which will no doubt, appear to you very extraordinary.

At the head of this magnificent edition of the History of England of which I am speaking, there appeared an abridged biography of Hume by the editor, who writes himself in very legible characters, the friend and admirer of the philosopher. He describes, it is particularly to be remarked, the last hours of Hume with strange complacency. He presents him to us on his bed of death, brutally hardened, and braving God while falling into his hands. "He passed his time very well," said this officious friend, "with the help of amusing books: one of the last which he read was `The Dialogues of Lucian' (those of the courtesan perhaps); he inquired, jocularly, what excuses he should make to Charon in order that he might be dispensed from entering the bark. `I have endeavoured,' said he, `to open the eyes of the public; if I live a few years longer, I may have the satisfaction of seeing the downfall of some of the prevailing systems of superstition' (ibid. p. 11); he then quoted Chaulieu, and in this manner died on the 22nd August, 1776." Hereupon the editor emphatically exclaims: - "Thus died our excellent friend!"

What can we say of a man who holds up to public admiration such a death as this, - who appropriates the sentiments of the atheist philosopher, and boldly gives his name? What can we say of a Christian legislature which receives this dedication, and to which it does not even occur to require the slightest change in this guilty preface? What can be said especially of the episcopal body who, sitting in parliament, accept the honour of the dedication along with the other members? Men may say as much good as they please of these bishops, and they will never say more than I think; but whilst I deny not to these dumb guardians (4) any more virtue, I must say like Zaire: - "Gnreux, bienfaisants, justes, pleins de vertus, Dieu! s'ils taient Chrtiens, que seraient-ils de plus! (just, beneficent, generous, most virtuous! - if, 0 heaven, they were Christians, what more would they not be!)

I shall not fail, I believe, in respect to the French legislature by expressing my conviction that after a revolution, terrible and most impious in its origin, it certainly possesses a tolerably great number of men who are enemies of Christianity, and a still greater number who are more or less indifferent to it. I make no doubt, nevertheless, that if at this moment it were asked to accept the strange honour done to that of England, the two chambers (I do not include the king and the clergy) would hasten to repel it as an insult, until such time at least as the insolent frontispiece were removed.

Voltaire said, in 1766, and repeated it ten years later: - "Some pedants of Geneva still believe in consubstantiality; but beyond this there is not from Berne to Geneva a single true partisan of Christianity." (5)

He said particularly, of England, and this also, he repeated: - "At London Christ will be held in great contempt." (6)

If any man of exaggerated notions should think of maintaining that the hideous prophecy is accomplished, and that the very act of accepting the revolting dedication implies, on the part of the English legislature, and especially on the part of the episcopal body, an express and national renunciation of the Christian religion, he would be wrong, no doubt; nevertheless I should be curious to know what a sincere Englishman would say in reply to him.

This digression I have considered to be of the greatest importance, in order to show you that the English nation had no longer the right, and even less so than any other, to reproach the Spaniards with their detestable Inquisition, since this institution has served the purpose of preserving them from the detestable crimes (7) that have been committed in England during two centuries, from the detestable calamities that have been the consequences of those crimes, and from the still more detestable annihilation of Christianity, which no longer exists, except nominally, in that great country.

If I have chosen to speak of England rather than any other country, it is because it undoubtedly holds the first rank among all Protestant states, and because, having greater means than any of them for preserving Christian faith, and having retained the hierarchy and several useful forms, it has come, nevertheless, to something more than absolute indifference. This is so obvious, that it does not even require to be proved.

And if Spain itself be compared to other Catholic countries, to France, for instance, or to the orthodox parts of Germany, it will be found that it has done perfectly well to raise a strong barrier against all kinds of innovators.

In order to complete my profession of faith, I shall not conclude these letters without expressly declaring that, mortal enemy as I am of all kinds of exaggeration. I am far from weakening my cause by refusing to make the least concession. It was my purpose to prove that the Inquisition is in itself a salutary institution, which has rendered to Spain the most important services, and which has been ridiculously and shamefully calumniated by sectarian and philosophical fanaticism. Here I stop, having no mind to excuse any abuse. If the Inquisition has sometimes too much restrained the human intellect; if it has committed some acts of injustice; if it has shown itself either too suspicious or too severe (and I declare that I am quite unaware that it has), I readily condemn whatever ought to be condemned; but I would never advise a nation to change its ancient institutions, which are always founded on solid reasons, and which are scarcely ever replaced by anything so good. Nothing proceeds by chance; nothing exists without a cause. As often as you shall see a great institution or a great enterprise approved by the nations, but especially by the church, such, for instance, as the orders of knighthood, the religious communities, the mendicant, teaching, contemplative missionary, military orders, the hospitallers, etc., general indulgences, crusades, missions, the Inquisition, etc., receive all without hesitation, and, in a short time, philosophical inquiry will reward your confidence by presenting you with a complete demonstration of the merit of all these thing. I have already remarked to you, Sir, and nothing is more true : - force can only be repelled by force.

Nations, therefore, it they were wise, (8) would cease to criticize and reproach one another on account of the institutions peculiar to each, as if they were all placed in the same circumstances, and as if such and such a danger might not have required of one of them certain measures which the rest have thought they might dispense with. But what must not be laid to the charge of human error or folly! At the moment when the danger is past, and when institutions have become proportioned of themselves to the state of things, ancient facts are cited in order to overthrow these institutions; absurd laws are enacted in order to repress certain authorities which ought, on the contrary, to be reinforced by all possible means. The autos-da-f of the sixteenth century are pointed to in order to destroy the Inquisition of the nineteenth, which has become the mildest, as well as the wisest of tribunal. Books are written against the power of the popes; all legislators, all tribunals, are in arms in order to restrain it at a time when it is obvious that there no longer remains to the sovereign pontiff the authority necessary for the fulfilment of his most extensive duties. But college heroes, so bold against authorities which no longer threaten them, would have kissed the dust at their feet a few centuries ago. Imagine not that at the periods when general opinion made capital flow towards the church, laws could have been made to forbid or embarrass her acquisitions. This will be thought of in the midst of the most irreligious age, (9) when nobodv dreams of making foundations, and when all the sovereigns appear to be leagued together in order to rob the church instead of enriching her. Sovereignty is thus always the dupe of innovators, and nations cut themselves into an abyss, believing that they are obtaining a better state of things, whilst, in reality, they are only answering the interested and personal ends of those rash and perverse men. The half of Europe will change its religion to give a wife to a libertine priest, or money to extravagant princes. Meanwhile, nothing will be heard of in the world but the abuses of the church, the necessity for a reformation and for the pure word of God. In like manner will be uttered magnificent speeches against the Inquisition; but nevertheless, the advocates of humanity, of liberty, of knowledge, of perfectibility, etc., have nothing more at heart, for themselves and for their friends, than the liberty to do and to write whatever they please. Nobles, rich men, sensible men of all classes, who have everything to lose and nothing to gain by the overthrow of public order, led astray by the fascinations of modern philosophy, ally themselves with those whose greatest interest it io to overthrow it. Unaccountably accomplices of a conspiracy directed against themselves, they loudly demand for the guilty that liberty which the latter stand in need of in order to succeed. They will be heard exclaiming against all penalties whatsoever, although calculated to promote their peace and well-being, and whilst they themselves abhor the very shadow of the crimes against which such penalties are levelled. This is a species of madness which one must see in order to believe it, and which we still behold without understanding it.

I have nothing to say against those nations who do not desire the Inquisition: my only object here is to justify the Spaniards. It might, however, be said to the French in particular, that they have no reason to boast of having repelled this institution; and to a peoples, without distinction, that some kind of tribunal established to watch over, in a special manner, such crimes as are principally directed against national morals and religion, will be, for all times and for an places, an infinitely useful institution.

It now remains for me to speak to you of a subject which has often engaged our attention: - I mean the acts of the present government of Spain. You know how much, we have hesitated on this point. Sometimes we did not understand the inflexible measures of that government, and we were tempted to call them shameful, as they have been called in England. (10) Sometimes, considering the natural goodness, and, especially the popularity of the reigning monarch of Spain, we inclined to the belief that the nation, properly so called, is well-affected towards him, and that he only does what he ought to do.

In this conflict of two opposite opinions, let us see in the first place, what is certain.

In the celebrated manifesto of 14th May, 1814, the king said to his people: "True and loyal Spaniards, you will not be disappointed in your hopes. Your sovereign desire only to reign for you ... I abhor, I detest, despotism. The enlightenment of Europe can no longer suffer it; and never were the kings of Spain despots. Although there may have been from time to time in this country abuses of power which no imaginable institution could entirely prevent, nevertheless, in order to prevent them, as much it is given to human wisdom to do so, preserving, at the same time, the dignity and the rights of royalty, which it holds by inherent right, and those of the people, which are no less inviolable, I shall confer with your representatives of Spain and the Indies; and in the Cortes, legitimately convoked, I shall establish the foundations of the prosperity of my people. Individual liberty will repose upon the laws which order and public tranquillity will secure. The press will be as free as sound sense will permit. All dissipation of the property of the state will cease, and the expenses of the royal household will be separated from those of the state ; in order henceforth to make new laws, the sovereign shall agree with the Cortes. These bases will enable you to understand my royal intentions, and accustom you to behold in me, not a tyrant or a despot, but a king and a father," etc., etc. (11)

On the 13th of June following, the university of Salamanca, having been admitted to a solemn audience of the sovereign, reminded him of all his promises on personal and real property, on the liberty of the press on public contributions, on the re-establishment of order, and on the convocation of the Cortes; it then added by the lips of its deputies: -

"Sire! - Your Majesty has promised, you have even sworn in your first decree, to put an end to our evils, and to make it your glory to found upon its proper basis the government of an heroic nation, which, by imperishable deeds, has conquered the admiration of the world, and preserved its honour and its liberty. The University, seeing the remote consequences of these principles, would never have done speaking if it undertook to express all the joy and all the gratitude which these your royal intentions have made it experience ...Your Majesty recalls the forgotten representation of the Cortes, formed of the states of the clergy and of the nobility, and perhaps also you contemplate the re-establishment of the ancient states, and have it in view to give them that form which wise politicians have declared to be the most suited to constitute a moderate and stable government, as far as it is permitted to man to hope for so great a benefit; and to consolidate for ages the rights, equally inviolable, of the monarch and of his people." etc. etc. (12)

Behold, Sir, what the king said, and behold also the language he allowed to be addressed to him. I doubt whether candour and sincerity ever spoke or noted in a more convincing manner. It appears to me impossible to suspect the intentions of the monarch. Here I hold, and rigidly abstain from pronouncing an opinion upon doubtful acts, which a stranger, and especially a remote stranger, has no right to judge. I thank the King for what he has promised, and I rely on his word, closing my eyes on what I do not understand. Whatever way come of it, the abuse of ancient institutions would prove nothing against their essential merit; and 1 will always maintain that nations have everything to lose in overthrowing their ancient institutions instead of perfecting or correcting them.

I shall be abundantly satisfied, Sir, if I have been able to succeed in uprooting any prejudices from your mind; to-morrow, perhaps you will render me the same good service. Men too often interchange errors. I have nothing more at heart than to establish with you quite an opposite intercourse. This noble exchange mortifies no one; each party reserving to himself, whilst he asks or receives what is wanting to him the right to offer in his turn something that is wanting to the other; heads are like lands: non omnis fert omnia tellus.
 

I am, etc.

Philomathe de Civarron

Moscow, September 15/17, 1815

Return to Letters on the Spanish Inquisition.

End Notes


1. "To free the Deity from being the author of sin, has been found hitherto to exeed all the power of philosophy." ("Essays," tome iii. sect. vii.) This is the pure doctrine of Luther and of Calvin; the legitimate consequence of their principles. They said, "Therefore, he is not what you believe." Hume, a better logician, said, "Therefore he is not."

2. "Hume's Essays," vol. iii., "An Inquiry," etc., sect. x, of miracles.

3. The law which punishes with death the person who has been guilty of sheep-stealing; is called, and very appropriately, the black statute.

4. "Canes muti, non valentes latrare." - Is. .vi. 10.

5. "Lettres  Damilaville, du 18 Aot, 1766." - "A d'Alembert, du 28 Septembre, 1763, 8 Fvrier, 1776."

6. "A d'Alembert, 28 Septembre, 1776." - "Au Roi de Prusse, 15 Novembre 1773." (See the collection of the "Letters of Voltaire.")

7. These crimes amount to the number of seventy, as far as I recollect, according to the curious work of Mr. Colquboun.

8. I perceive at this moment, with pleasure, that I have fallen upon the same words as a very clever man, who unfortunately perished in the revolution of his country: Quid est quod contra vim sine vi fieri possit? - Cic. Epist. xii. 3.

9. The French law against the acquisitions of main-morte, date from the year 1745.

10. Supr, p. 69.

11. Yo os juro y prometto a vos ostros verdaderos y leales Espanoles ... Vuestro Soberano quiere serlo para vosotros. ... Aboresco y destesto el despotismo: ni las luces y cultura de las naciones de Europa lo sufren ya; ni en Esana fueron despotas jamas sus Reys. ... Conservano el decoro de la dignidad real y sus derechos, pues los tiene de suyo, y los que perteneren a los puelbos que son igualmente inviolables, yo trattare con sus procuradores, etc., etc. (Valence, 4 May 1814.)

12. V.M. ha promedito y aun ha jurado espontaneamente en su primero decreto, poner fin a nuestros males, colocando sus glorias en fundar sobre estas bases el gobierono de una nacion heroyca. ... Per la Universidad que ve mas de lejos las consecuencias de estos principios, no acaberia jamas, si habiesse de espresar toda su gratitud y su jubilo, etc. Recorda (V.M.) la representacion olvidado en cortes de los estados del clero y nobleza, y asaco V.M. meditata, etc. 13 junio 1814. (Gazetta de Madrid del Martes 14 de junio de 1814., no. 85, page 650.)

Return to Spanish Inquisition Page

Wayback Machine
  
http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/LebrunDefence.html
APR	JUL	AUG
Previous capture	07	Next capture
2002	2003	2004
9 captures
26 Aug 2002 - 11 May 2008
 About this capture

Joseph de Maistre's Defence of the Spanish Inquisition
by Richard Lebrun

[This article will appear in French in a forthcoming issue of Dossier H devoted to Joseph de Maistre. It serves here as an introductory essay to Dawson's translation of Maistre's Letters on the Spanish Inquisition.]

Joseph de Maistre has long been well known as an outspoken defender of "throne and altar," and has often been characterized as a Francophone equivalent to Edmund Burke. His acerbic criticisms of the famous writers of the Enlightenment, his denunciations of the French Revolution, his defence of monarchy, and his high papalism have all been studied and appreciated. Even his scandalous reflections about violence, bloodshed, and sacrifice have been analysed favourably by a younger American historian. In a book entitled A Modern Maistre, Owen Bradley makes a strong case for Maistre's stature as a highly original theorist of violence and unreason (rather than portraying him as someone who recommended such things), and yet Bradley is still clearly uncomfortable with Maistre's defence of the Spanish Inquisition, which he characterizes as "the worst travesty of the principles of his thought, produced by Maistre himself." (1)

Maistre's Letters on the Spanish Inquisition is a slight volume that was first published in 1822, a year after the author's death. Among Maistre's many works, it counts as a very minor work indeed, and most French scholars who have studied Maistre's life, works, and theories, have almost completely ignored this little work. However it is interesting to note that the Letters on the Spanish Inquisition was the first of Maistre's works to be translated into English. In fact, not only were the Letters the first of his works to be so honoured, this little book is the only one of all Maistre's works to have the distinction of having been translated into English three times. The first, an abbreviated version by the Rev. John Fletcher, was published in London in 1838. The second, a complete version by the Rev. T.J. O'Flaherty with numerous and lengthy editorial footnotes, was published in Boston in 1843. The third, which appeared in London in 1851, was a complete and first-rate translation by the Rev. Aeneas McD. Dawson, who the previous year had published an excellent English version of Maistre's much more famous work on The Pope. Now here is a minor mystery: why so much interest among Anglophone Catholics in both England and the United States in Maistre's defence of the Spanish Inquisition?

I would like to do three things in this essay. First, I will set out the main lines of his defence of the Spanish Inquisition and try to place this defence in the broader context of his political and religious thought. Secondly, I will try to assess the originality and effectiveness of his defence. Lastly, I will speculate briefly about the reasons for this remarkable interest by English and American Catholic in the mid-nineteenth century in Joseph de Maistre and his defence of the Spanish Inquisition.

We really don't know why Joseph de Maistre undertook such a seemingly thankless task as the defence of the Spanish Inquisition. There are no references to his little work on this topic in either his notebooks or his correspondence. The Letters themselves take the form of six letters to a "Russian gentleman," dated Moscow, 13 June 1815 through 27 September 1815. Since Maistre was never in Moscow (in fact, he was in St. Petersburg during this period), we know that the supposed place of composition is fictitious. The dates, however, are probably genuine since the manuscript copy of the work carries the date 1815. (2) As for the "Russian gentleman," though we know that Maistre had many Russian friends in St. Petersburg, we have no way of knowing whether these letters were written for a real or fictitious friend. Maistre begins the first letter, however, by saying that "this celebrated institution having been the subject of several conversations between us," [I have now] "suitably arranged and committed to writing for your use [...] the divers reflections I made in regard to it." (3)

Maistre's primary argument in defence of the Spanish Inquisition is that it "was, originally, an institution required and established by the kings of Spain in difficult and extraordinary circumstances." (4) At the time of its establishment, "the very existence of the Spanish nation," according to Maistre (citing the 1812 Committee report to the Cortes that abolished the Inquisition), had been threatened by Judaism and Islam; the Jews, especially, were a "nation enclosed within a nation," and "almost the masters of Spain." (5) In support of this political argument, Maistre cites what he calls the "one of the most incontestable of political axioms," i.e., "Never could great political evils, never especially could violent attacks against the body of the state, be prevented or repelled, except by means equally violent." (6) Maistre also cites the "Roman formula": Videant consules, ne respublica detrimentum capiat (Let the consuls look to the safety of the state), as justification for the Spanish king's decision to use the Inquisition to ensure national unity.

This stress on the existence and continuity of state sovereignty is in fact entirely consistent with both Maistre's political beliefs about the nature of sovereignty and its importance for peaceful social life and with his actions as a subject of the King of Piedmont-Sardinia. Against the social contract theories so popular in his time, Maistre argued that since men are by nature both social and prone to evil, sovereignty is something willed by God (and not a mere matter of convention), and required for the very existence of human society. (7) For Maistre, the alternative amounts to anarchy, which is simply unacceptable. Maistre's political conduct was consistent with his political theory. In his private correspondence he might rail against the narrow-mindedness and stupidity of the Piedmontese monarchy, but he always obeyed his sovereign and called on others to obey as well. His life long attitude of reverence for established sovereignty is nicely exemplified in an incident that occurred just shortly before his death. In January 1821 there was violent student agitation in Turin, which led to reprisals by the government. When a female acquaintance complained to Joseph de Maistre that the police had wounded one of the students, he is reported to have said: "Madam, that was a small misfortune, a private misfortune. The important thing is that force be retained by authority." (8) In short, in both theory and practice, Maistre believed that a government has a duty to rule and must not to allow itself to be undermined or overthrown by dissidents or revolutionaries.

To return to Maistre's defence of the Spanish Inquisition, having asserted the political necessity of the Inquisition for the Spanish nation, Maistre then argues that the institution has been badly misjudged because of three widely held "capital errors." (9) It is believed, he writes, "that the Inquisition is a purely ecclesiastical tribunal," "that the ecclesiastics who sit in this tribunal, condemn certain accused parties to the punishment of death," and "that men are condemned simply for opinions." (10) Against these errors, Maistre argues that the Inquisition was "entirely a royal institution," with the king appointing the inquisitor-general, who in turn named the other inquisitors with the consent of the king. (11) The Inquisition, he maintains, was "an instrument wholly royal, [...] completely in the hands of the king," and it could "never inflict injury except through the fault of the ministers of the prince." (12) If there was a question of capital punishment, it was the king or his counsellors who could quash the process.

Maistre makes no apology for the existence of the death penalty in a nation's laws. He asks: "Where, in all the world, is the tribunal that never condemned to death? And what crime does the civil tribunal commit which sentences to death an accused party, by virtue of a law of the state appointing this punishment for the offence of which such accused party is convicted?" (13)

As for the error of believing that "priests could condemn a man to death," Maistre pours scorn on Europeans who could be so ignorant of Catholic Christianity. Everyone knows or should know, Maistre asserts, that "The Church abhors blood," that "the priest is forbidden to be a surgeon, lest his consecrated hand should shed the blood of man even in attempting to heal him," and that "in the countries of the obedience of the Church, the priest is dispensed from deposing as a witness in capital trials." (14) Maistre also reminds his readers of the saying about the church-states in Germany that "It is good to live under the crosier," and that the government of the papal states "was never blamed for anything but mildness." (15) If the Church has been mild, tolerant, and charitable in every country in the world, how could it be different in Spain? Maistre insists:

When discussing the Inquisition, therefore, let us separate and distinguish most exactly the part of the civil government from that of the church. All the severity and terror this tribunal exhibits, and the punishment of death particularly, belong to the government. ... All the clemency, on the contrary, which plays so important part in the tribunal of the Inquisition, proceeds from the church, which interferes with punishments only in order to suppress or modify them. (16)

Maistre concludes that the Inquisition could only acquire the right of pronouncing the death penalty "by becoming a royal institution and that every sentence of death remains essentially foreign to the priesthood." (17) He then goes on to cite the formula of the Inquisition itself to demonstrate that in any case it was only the "apostate heretic" (that is, the relapsed heretic) who was given up to the secular arm for the ultimate punishment. (18)

The third serious error about the Inquisition that Maistre addresses is the belief "that the Inquisition condemned to death on account of mere opinions, and that a Jew, for instance, was burned purely and simply for no other reason that he was a Jew." (19) On the contrary, Maistre maintains, "In Spain and Portugal, as elsewhere, every man who remains quiet is left undisturbed." However, Maistre continues, "as to the imprudent man who dogmatizes or interferes with public order, he has no reason to complain of any but himself." (20) Here, Maistre maintains without apology, that "You will not find a single nation - I say not a Christian, I say not a Catholic, but merely a civilized nation - that has not decreed capital punishments against deadly blows struck at its religion." (21) In evidence of the point, there is a footnote citation from an eighteenth-century publication entitled Mmoire sur les Chinois testifying that China (so often cited by Enlightenment authors as a model of toleration) in fact had "a tribunal of Inquisition to maintain the purity of doctrine of the belief and the morality of the Empire," and suggesting that "persons who set up China as a pattern of toleration would not have lived long there, or would have held their peace." (22) Maistre's legalistic position is clearly stated in his summary on the issue:

If, therefore, the Spanish law, written and known to all, bears the punishment of exile, of death even, against a declared and public enemy of Spanish dogma, none are entitled to pity the guilty party who shall have incurred these punishments, and he himself has no right to complain, as he possessed a very simple means of avoiding them - he could have held his tongue. (23)

Maistre goes on to insist that the Inquisition "pursued only the Christian who became a Jew, the relapsed Jew," and that "the Christian, or the converted Jew who wished to embrace the Jewish religion, were quite at liberty to leave Spain, and in remaining there, they knew to what they exposed themselves, no less than the Jew who dared to attempt leading a Christian astray." (24)

As for the complaints about the Inquisition's use of torture, Maistre contends that "the inquisitors ordered torture in virtue of the laws of Spain and because all Spanish tribunals were accustomed to order it." (25) He points out that "all modern nations have employed this terrible means of discovering truth," and argues that "as long as torture belongs not more to the Inquisition than to all other tribunals, none are entitled to reproach it with this usage." (26) Maistre then takes a gibe at the vivid propaganda prints circulated in Protestant countries:

Let the Protestant burin of Bernard Picart exert itself as it will in tracing to us hideous representations of real or imaginary tortures inflected by the judges of the Inquisition, it signifies nothing, or can only be addressed to the king of Spain. (27)

In fact, Maistre maintains, "in the tribunals of the Inquisition, torture was surrounded by all the precautions the nature of things admitted of." Moreover, Maistre goes on to declare that:

If, indeed, the king of Spain should think proper to abolish questioning by torture in his states, as it has been abolished in England, in France, in Piedmont, etc., he would do well, as these powers have done, and, undoubtedly, the inquisitors would be the first to applaud him. (28)

Nevertheless, from a legal and institutional point of view, Maistre believes that the Inquisition is "irreproachable," in "that it judges as other tribunals do, that it condemns to death only great criminals, and that it is never anything else than the instrument of the legislative and written will of the sovereign." (29) In addition to arguing for the legality of the institution, Maistre also argues strongly for its rationale. He states his belief that "the heresiarch, the obstinate heretic, and the propagator of heresy, ought to be classed among the greatest criminals." (30) Scorning the modern philosophers and sophists who would label religious zeal as "fanaticism," Maistre takes his stand with the "ancient legislatures," who "appreciating well what these fatal doctrines were calculated to cost mankind, most justly visited with the last punishment, a crime that was capable of shaking society to its foundations, and of bathing it in blood." (31) Contending that "the arguments of Luther produced the thirty years' war," and that "the tribunal of the Inquisition would certainly have prevented the French revolution," Maistre concludes that "we cannot be too sure that the sovereign, who should deprive himself, without restriction, of this instrument, would not deal a fatal blow against humanity." (32)

Even while arguing vigorously in defence of the Spanish Inquisition, Maistre tries to portray himself as a moderate and reasonable writer. He asks his reader "to do me the justice to believe that no man is farther than I am from justifying useless severities." (33) In arguing against those who would blame St. Dominic and the first inquisitors sent by Pope Innocent III to combat the Albigensian heresy for subsequent severities, Maistre is pleased to cite an author who claimed that it is fully proved "that the first Inquisitors, and St. Dominic in particular, never opposed to heresy any other arms than prayer, patience, and instruction." (34) And if, in fact, there were abuses in the operation of the Spanish Inquisition, Maistre asks his readers to remember that "Nothing human can be perfect; and there is not an institution that does not involve some abuses." (35)

Another charge against the Spanish Inquisition that Maistre takes up is the common one that it hindered the development of Spanish literature and culture by "its benighting influence on the human mind." (36) It is not a charge that Maistre takes very seriously; he asks who "does not know that the great age of literature was the age of Philip II"? He does not believe that "genius is chained up, because it is forbidden to attack the national creed," and points out that "Mathematics, astronomy, chemistry, all the natural sciences, philology, history, antiquities, etc., are pretty extensive fields, which the human mind is quite at liberty to traverse in every direction, without the slightest interference on the part of the reverend father inquisitor." (37)

One other argument that Maistre uses in defence of the Inquisition is a rather curious one that he purports to draw from "natural philosophy," where, he says, it "is always a question of mean qualities," where "the form of expression is always mean distance, mean motion, mean time, etc." Contending that it "would be highly proper [...] to transfer this notion to politics," Maistre suggests that we should "understand that the best institutions are not those which bestow on mankind the greatest degree of happiness at such or such a given time, but those, on the contrary, which afford the greatest possible sum of happiness to the greatest possible number of generations." This, Maistre states, "is the mean amount of happiness." (38) Applying this notion to the Inquisition, Maistre has an imaginary Spaniard argue that for Spanish kings the Inquisition was "the political means they made use of for maintaining religious unity, and for preventing wars of religion." (39) Recalling the long roll call of wars, massacres, and assassinations stemming from the Protestant revolt, Maistre's Spaniard suggests that "the point is to inquire whether during the three last centuries there have been, through the agency of the Inquisition, more peace and more happiness in Spain, than in the other countries of Europe?" (40) In the context of the Napoleonic defeats in the Peninsular Wars just concluded, Maistre's Spaniard triumphantly concludes:

The Inquisition has saved - immortalized Spain. It has preserved that public spirit, that faith, that religious patriotism which produced the miracles you have witnessed, and which, to all appearance, in saving Spain, saved Europe itself, by causing a diversion in its favour the most noble and the most persevering. (41)

In passing, we might note that Maistre used the same argument about "mean happiness" in arguing for the superiority of monarchy over other forms of government. (42)

Given Maistre's portrayal of the Spanish Inquisition as a moderate and beneficent institution, he is left with the problem explaining how it has come to have such a bad reputation. Although he lays some blame on the French philosophes, and on Montesquieu and Voltaire especially, for making false or misleading statements about the Spanish Inquisition, Maistre places the primary onus on Protestant (and especially English) prejudice and propaganda. English travel literature, in particular, is singled out for containing all kinds of "absurdities" about the Inquisition. Maistre cites as an example of "Protestant credulity" a work by Joseph Townsend entitled Travels in Spain during the Years 1786 and 1787." (43) Following a sarcastic commentary on some of Townsend's naive anecdotes about the Inquisition, Maistre concludes that "It is quite possible, no doubt that Mr. Townsend may have been, or may even still be, a man of much sense; but, against national, and especially religious prejudice, good sense avails not." (44)

It is Maistre's opinion "that the English are, perhaps, the least entitled, of any people in the world, to reproach Spain its religious legislation," (45) and this for two reasons. In the first place, he argues, the English have a terrible record of persecuting Catholics. Here Maistre recites a long litany of English legislation and injustices against Catholics from the time of Elizabeth I through the eighteenth century. Following one of his favourite polemical tactics of quoting an enemy, he cites David Hume (from his History of England) to the effect that "The whole tyranny of Inquisition, though without its order, was introduced into the kingdom." He also cites Edmund Burke's view that the laws the English introduced against Catholics in Ireland amounted to an "unparalleled code of oppression." (46) Reviewing English history from the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries, Maistre contends that the English, when faced with religious dissent, "had recourse [...] to the same extravagant proceedings; as they banished a legitimate king, and put another to death [...] they passed through all the convulsions of fanaticism and rebellion before subsiding at last into a state of tranquillity." (47)

The second reason the English have no right to reproach Spain, according to Maistre, is that in the end, the English experience "has not only cost England torrents of blood [...] but her faith also, which is everything." (48) He contends that England "has only ceased to persecute in ceasing to believe." (49) As for the toleration of which England was boasting by Maistre's time, it is, in his view, "in reality nothing better than absolute indifference." (50) Maistre read English, and his notebooks contain many excerpts from contemporary English periodicals. He also counted Englishmen, and in particular, the English ambassador to St. Petersburg, among his personal friends. He was, I think, scandalized by what he perceived as a frightful lack of orthodox Christian belief among English Protestants. In the Letters on the Spanish Inquisition, he professed outrage that writers such as David Hume and the Scottish historian William Robertson, writers who had praised Voltaire and had attacked the foundations of morality and Christian belief, were publically honoured in England. Maistre summed up his judgment about English Protestants in this way:

I have known many Protestants, English Protestants particularly, in whose conversation I have been accustomed to study Protestantism. I have never been able to see in them anything better than theists, more or less perfected by the gospel, but wholly strangers to what is called faith, in other words, divinized belief. (51)

Maistre puts his own point of view in the mouth of another imaginary Spaniard, who is made to exclaim:

"God has spoken; it is for us to believe. The religion which he has established is one, even as he is himself. Truth being essentially intolerant, to profess religious toleration is to profess scepticism; in other words, to exclude faith. Wo, a thousand times wo to the stupid imprudence which accuses us of damning men. It is only God who damns; he alone has said to his messengers: Go, teach all nations! He that believes shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be condemned. Deeply persuaded of his goodness, we cannot, notwithstanding, forget any of his oracles; but, although he cannot tolerate error, we, nevertheless know that he can pardon it. Never shall we cease to recommend it to his mercy, never shall we cease either to hope for all for sincerity, whilst we tremble in thinking that God alone knows who is sincere." (52)

From all this, Maistre argues that:

It might [...] be said [...] that some kind of tribunal established to watch over in a special manner, such crimes as are principally directed against national morals and religion, will be, for all times and for all places, an infinitely useful institution. (53)

So how might we assess Maistre's defence of the Spanish Inquisition? It must be recalled, of course, that Maistre wrote long before documented studies of the Spanish Inquisition based on its extensive archives were available. The Inquisition itself had followed a policy of never commenting on what others said about it, so that most works about it written up through Maistre's time had been written by its enemies. Maistre certainly appears to have tried to inform himself as well as he could, working as he did in St. Petersburg. We know that he knew Spanish diplomats there, and in the work he mentions conversations with Spaniards about the institution. In the work itself, he cites more than fifty sources, and it is interesting to note that Maistre made a point of quoting "as far as possible only works that are opposed to the Inquisition." (54) Like a good lawyer (which he was by training), he made the strongest case he could with the evidence at hand.

It would seem, as well, that Maistre's unflinching defence of the Spanish Inquisition can be characterized as quite original for its time. Although there had been articulate Catholic apologists in the eighteenth century who defended Catholicism against the attacks of the philosophes, for the most part they avoided the topic of the Spanish Inquisition. (55) The Abb Nicolas-Sylvestre Bergier, perhaps the best known of these apologists, did include a generic article on the Inquisition in his Dictionnaire de thologie. His article is prefaced with the comment: "We certainly have no wish to eulogize this tribunal, nor its way of proceeding, but heretics and unbelievers have forged so many deceptions on this subject that it is natural to look for what is true or false about it." (56) One has the impression that French apologists were thankful that they were not in the position of having to explain a French Inquisition.

It has been claimed that Maistre was the first Catholic writer to press the point that the Spanish Inquisition was an essentially royal institution, (57) but in fact Bergier made the same point about the nature of the institution in all Catholic states. (58)

As for historical accuracy of Maistre's little work, judging by the best recent historical studies of the institution, such as the 1997 book by Henry Kamen, (59) I would say that Maistre's portrait was closer to historical fact than the "myth of the Spanish Inquisition" (to cite the title of a 1994 BBC television program) that was current in his lifetime. In effect, Maistre was responding to the myth, because it was only after 1811 that treatments based on the archives of the Inquisition began to be published. (60) By the measure of recent studies, of course, Maistre's interpretation falls short on many counts. Modern scholars, for example, would not support Maistre's contention that Ferdinand and Isabella created the Inquisition to help forge national unity, nor would they accept the argument that Jews and conversos posed a significant threat to royal authority. Maistre was correct in insisting that the tribunal had been a royal body, but disingenuous about the role of the clergy. The Inquisitor-General was always a priest, often a bishop, and the clergy filled many inquisitorial offices. Although the Inquisition itself did not carry out executions, the great ceremonies of repentance and condemnation, the autos de fe, were religious in character and involved extensive clerical participation. Moreover, Maistre seems not to have noticed how the institution had changed over time. By the eighteenth century it had become far less formidable, with few executions after 1720. On the whole, though, Maistre's little book can be characterized as an astute and well written challenge to the prejudices of his time.

However, when we come to assess Maistre's defence of the rationale of the Inquisition, and his unquestioning acceptance of the role of the Church in the operation of such a tribunal, it must be admitted that Maistre's position suffered from a kind of category mistake - in effect, he confused religion (and its rights) and sovereignty (and its rights). Without going into further detail about Maistre's beliefs about the nature of sovereignty and the nature of Christianity (and Catholicism in particular), we must note how these beliefs interacted in his views about toleration. We find that Maistre made a distinction between the means by which Catholicism normally expanded, and the means by which it might be defended once it became the dominant and established religion. (61) Maistre asserted (in another little work of religious apologetics) that "when Catholicism appears in a non-Catholic country, whether it comes from the outside or whether it begins its growth there by the mere force of truth and grace, never, never no never will it exercise another force than that of persuasion. Never will it counsel a single act of violence." (62) However, he argued (in a third work of apologetics) that: "When Christianity has finally ascended the throne, things change face. Since religion and sovereignty have embraced one another in the state their interests must necessarily be confounded." (63) In effect, in Maistre's thought the rights of the sovereign and the rights of the Church were confounded and the assumed rights of sovereignty were attributed to the Church. Or, at best, religious intolerance was justified by associating it with sovereignty. It must be recognized, of course, that Joseph de Maistre was not alone in this way of thinking. From the time of Constantine down to Vatican II, Rome's official position on religious toleration reflected this confusion. And insofar as the Vatican still retains the appurtenances of a sovereign state, with nuncios serving as ambassadors to other states, one might suggest that some of this confusion still persists.

Finally, to turn to Maistre's popularity with English and American Catholics in the mid-nineteenth century, here is my guess as to why his little book was appreciated and translated. It must be remembered that at that time in both countries Roman Catholics were small minorities among populations characterized by a great deal of anti-Catholic bigotry. The Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition was one of the sticks used by the majority to berate if not beat the Catholic minority. Joseph de Maistre offered an articulate and vigorous defence of the Spanish Inquisition; moreover he was an author who knew and cited English authors and the English record in persecuting Catholics. Taking these circumstances into account, it is perhaps not surprising that English and American Catholics enlisted the Savoyard count on their side.

Return to Letters on the Spanish Inquisition.

End Notes

1. A Modern Maistre: The Social and Political Thought of Joseph de Maistre (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press 1999), 134.

2. Archives dpartmentale de Savoie, Archives de Joseph de Maistre et de sa famille. Series 2J 3.

3. Letters to a Russian Gentleman on the Spanish Inquisition, translated by Aeneas McD. Dawson (London: C. Dolman, 1851), 1. (All translations from the Letters are from this excellent version.) In Maistre's manuscript, though not in the published versions, the title is given as Letters de Philomathe de Civarron  un gentilhomme russe sur l'inquisition espagnole. The sixth letter of the printed version is signed "Philomathe de Civarron." It should be noted that there is no critical French edition of this work. A comparison of the existing French editions and Maistre's manuscript reveals a number of additions and revisions in the printed versions.

4. Ibid., 4

5. Ibid., 4-5.

6. Ibid.

7. See especially, Maistre's "On the State of Nature," to be found in Against Rousseau (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press 1996), translated and edited by Richard A. Lebrun.

8. See "Un portrait de Joseph de Maistre trac par sa fille Constance," Etudes, 125 (1910), 502.

9. Letters, 7.

10. Ibid.

11. Ibid.

12. Ibid., 8.

13. Ibid., 11.

14. Ibid., 11-12.

15. Ibid., 14.

16. Ibid., 17-18.

17. Ibid., 19.

18. Ibid., 21-22.

19. Ibid., 31.

20. Ibid., 33.

21. Ibid.

22. Ibid., footnote.

23. Ibid., 34.

24. Ibid.

25. Ibid., 35.

26. Ibid.

27. Ibid. Picard was a well known engraver whose illustrations of the horrors of the Inquisition received wide circulation.

28. Ibid., 36. In Maistre's manuscript, this reads "the inquisitors would not complain."

29. Ibid., 37-8.

30. Ibid., 38.

31. Ibid.

32. Ibid.

33. Ibid., 42.

34. Ibid., 3.

35. Ibid., 42.

36. Ibid., 45.

37. Ibid., 46.

38. Ibid., 60.

39. Ibid., 61

40. Ibid., 61-2.

41. Ibid., 62.

42. See, especially, Maistre's "On the Sovereignty of the People," in Against Rousseau, 159-72.

43. Letters, 48.

44. Ibid., 51.

45. Ibid., 77.

46. Ibid., 75.

47. Ibid., 77-8,

48. Ibid., 78.

49. Ibid.

50. Ibid., 79.

51. Ibid., 84.

52. Ibid., 71-2. In Maistre's manuscript, however, the Spaniard's "profession of faith" reads as follows: "God has spoken; it is for us to believe. The intolerance that they reproach us for is from him. He said that the one who will believe will be saved, and that one who will refuse to believe will be condemned! He cannot have either agreement nor compromise with him. He is intolerance itself because he is truth itself; he can undoubtedly pardon error (and we will never cease to recommend it to his mercy), but, in essence, he can never tolerate it. The truth being intolerant by its nature, to profess religious tolerance is to profess doubt, and, in consequence, to exclude the faith. In his word as in himself he is neither more nor less. The one who dares judge his oracles in the balance or declares one less important than another commits an absurd sacrilege. The one who is called Saviour only carries this name, par excellence, because without him we are all lost. The immensity of the remedy proclaims the immensity of the evil. This remedy is one like God; it can no more be divided than pushed aside. We damn no one; it is God who damns. We recommend all men to his goodness, but without ever forgetting that he has ordered us to believe on pain of incurring his anger. Never will we cease to hope for all men of good faith nor cease to tremble in considering how rare good faith is."

53. Ibid., 110.

54. Ibid., 20, footnote. It should be noted that Maistre does not seem to have been aware of the publications of Jan Antonio Llorente, a former official of the Spanish Inquisition who was given custody of its archives by Joseph Bonaparte in 1808, and who in 1811 published a two-volume Memoria historica on its history. On Llorente's works, which were also published in French translation, see Edward Peters, Inquisition (New York: The Free Press, 1988), 280-83.

55. See Robert R. Palmer, Catholics and Unbelievers in Eighteenth Century France (Princeton University Press, 1939), William R. Everdell, Christian Apologetics in France, 1750-1860 (Edwin Mellon Press: Lewiston/Queenston, 1987), and Darrin M. McMahon, Enemies of the Enlightenment and the Making of Modernity, Oxford University Press, New York, 2001). In none of these volumes does "Spanish Inquisition" even appear in the indices.

56. This dictionary was originally published as part of the Encylopdie mthodique, and then published as an "extract" in 8 volumes (Lige: La Socit Typographique, 1789-1892). Citation from 4:338.

57. "Joseph de Maistre introduced the thesis that the Spanish Inquisition was mostly a civil tribunal; formerly, however, theologians never questioned its ecclesiastical nature." "Inquisition," article by Joseph Bltzer, The Catholic Encyclopedia (1910), 8:37). The Dictionnaire de Thologie Catholique (Letouzey: Paris, 1927), 7:2065, makes the same point.

58. Bergier, 4:338.

59. The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision (New Haven and London: Yale University Press 1997).

60. On the historiography of the Inquisition, see Peters, Chapter 9, "From Myth to History," 263-95.

61. On this distinction see, Richard Allen Lebrun, Throne and Altar: The Political and Religious Thought of Joseph de Maistre (Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press 1965), 152-4.

62. "Lettre sur l'Etat du Christianisme en Europe," Oeuvres compltes (Lyons: Vitte et Perrussel 1884-93), 8:493.

63. "Rflexions sur le protestantisme dans ses rapports avec la souverainet," O.C., 8:67.

Return to Spanish Inquisition Page

Wayback Machine
  
http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/unionsavoy.html
NOV	JUL	NOV
Previous capture	29	Next capture
2002	2003	2004
5 captures
17 Nov 2002 - 11 Feb 2005
 About this capture

Memoir on the Union of Savoy to Switzerland, 1795
by Joseph de Maistre

The slightest knowledge of European affairs proves how essential it is that Savoy not belong to France. If this formidable and always restless power possessed that country, it would find itself in contact with Italy, which it could invade with extreme ease.
    This great reason of propriety has always been an obstacle to the greedy designs of France, which has never been able to seize Savoy or at least to retain it, despite the extreme desire that it had for it. The interest of Europe has always resisted this French ambition.
    However the obstacle that Savoy opposes to France is of a very singular kind; it is a purely negative obstacle. It is that of a void, placed between France and Italy, but which is nevertheless the salvation of this latter country and especially of Piedmont because it is necessary to traverse this void before arriving at the Italian frontier, and because French usually lose a campaign before putting themselves in a position to attempt the passage of the Alps.
    However Savoy pays dearly for this singular position. As soon as a war is declared in which the king of Sardinia is not on the French side, it is sure to be conquered, and history proves that at least once each century it is certain to be ravaged.
    Such is its geographical and political position that it cannot be defended by its sovereign, who would even do it harm if he tried to defend it.
    In effect, if the King of Sardinia were to build fortresses in Savoy and if he had considerable forces there, what would be the consequences of such precautions? The forces of the King never being able to be in proportion to those that France could oppose to him, Savoy would always be invaded. Food shortages would be on th side of the enemy during the winter; the fortresses would be taken sooner or later. They would be destroyed, the artillery removed, and the country, which would have become a battlefield, would be a thousand times more miserable that if it had been given up without resistence.
    The disadvantage of such a position was never more striking than in 1792. We saw the storm approaching Savoy without being able to avoid it: evils of all kinds were going to overwhelm its inhabitants, and it was in vain that they would have held their hands out to the king for help; he could do nothing for them. The weak military machine with which it had been believed prudent to surround the province disappeared at the first sign of hostilities. A precipitous retreat alienated the people, who understand nothing of politics and who complained bitterly at seeing themselves abandoned to the brigands without reflecting that they would probably have suffered more if one had tried to defend them. (1)
    But since such is the nature of things, it would be very desirable if one could find some means of delivering the King from his worries with respect to Savoy and of pulling this country out of the deplorable position in which its geographical situation places it.
    To attain this end, one would have to neutralize Savoy, so that the quarrels of the House of Austria, of France, and of the King of Sardina have no more influence on it.
    The problem has its difficulties, for it if were only a question of detaching Savoy from Piedmont, by reviving the old independent duchy, under the rule of a prince of that house, the thing would not present any difficulties, but it is a question of maintaining the sovereignty of the King of Sardina over this country, and yet rendering it neutral in European wars.
    The Swiss Union suggests itself at first glance, and more than once statesmen have occupied themselves with this idea. At the beginning of this century, His Majesty's ancestor, to escape the ambitious projects of Louis XIV, and to keep Savoy from him in a decisive way, offered to the Swiss Confederation to unite his duchy to this peaceful confederation. However this project did not succeed. It is likely that Louis XIV prevented it either out of resentment or out of ambition, but it appears that it did not please the Swiss either, and that they themselves would have rejected it.
    In effect this project was proposed ex abrupto without the necessary arrangements and preparations. Let us begin by discussing the difficulties of the project. Then we will pass on to the means of overcoming them.
    Monarchical government is of such a different nature to those that form the Swiss confederation, that there is no way of amalgamating them. Not only are these states republics, but republics that are small, poor, modest, and prudent to the point of timidity. The brilliance of monarchy and the uproar that surrounds it, its lofty and well-defined style frighten these modest associations, and every time that a king abruptly approaches the Swiss Union to propose any condition whatsoever, one always sees Switzerland make a very polite bow and take a step backward.
    In 1782, the Canton of Bern impatiently tolerated the union with two crowned heads, produced by the troubles in Geneva, and we have several times since seen certain negotiations succeed poorly with the Swiss because they were not opened in a bourgeois enough way.
    So one can be perfectly sure that any pure and simple proposition to unite Savoy to Switzerland without affecting adjusting modifying the government of the first will be rejected almost without examination, and the Swiss Union would be right, because in consenting to ally discordant elements, it could gravely harm the association.
    Today these considerations have a particular force, for aristocracy has a certain kinship with monarchy, but all the aristocracies of Switzerland have made great steps towards democracy. Even Bern is a veritable democracy, and this so often pronounced word, Bernese aristocracy, is now no more than a memory. Since 1735 there has been a great revolution in this country, although little noticed at first; but that is not what the question is here. It is enough to observe that the Swiss union today would refuse more than ever to unite its interests with a crowned head.
    This is not all. After having considered the Swiss association in general, we must look closely at the Canton of Bern in particular. This Canton exercises a kind of dictatorship over the others, which it merits in several ways.
    So what is the Canton of Bern? It is a city of 10,000 souls at most, the capital of a country that does not contain 350,000. Now Savoy in 1792 had some 400,000 inhabitants and its capital contained 12,000 of them. It is scarcely necessary to observe that if the centre of the government were fixed in that country, in less than a century Chambry would have 20,000 in habitants, and all of Savoy 500,000 or 600,000.
    Ths the Canton of Bern would not be number one in the Swiss union, and this it will never tolerate. This reason will perhaps not be voiced, but it will be the strongest reason.
    So there would be two kinds of obstacles: 1. obstacles on the part of the Swiss union in general, and 2. obstacles on the part of the Canton of Bern in particular.
    Let us begin with the first: here is the problem.
    1. To alter the government of Savoy in such a way that it can be amalgamated with those of Switzerland.
    2. To maintain the supremacy of the king [of Piedmont-Sardinia] in such a way that it can be said that he is not deprived of Savoy.
Without losing ourselves in a long detour, here is a glimpse of the constitutional laws that could resolve the problem.

Article 1

The King of Sardina will always be the sovereign of Savoy and will carry as usual the ancient title of Duke. In this respect there will be nothing new.

Article 2

The government of Savoy will be aristocratic, composed of a general council called the Two-hundred, and a small council called the Senate, whose members will be called Senators.
    These councils will be presided over by a prince of the House of Savoy, who will be the base of the structure. The Stadholder at the heart of the Estates General, or the President of the American Congress at the centre of that assembly will give you an approximate idea of the political position of this prince.
    The title that he will carry is not unimportant, for words influence infinitely the minds of men. The title hereditary avoyer (2) would appear to be the most suitable that could be imagined, because it is not too solemn and would strike only sympathetic vibrations in Swiss ears.
    Let us pause for a moment on these two institutions.
    It would appear obvious that Savoy is not made for a republican government properly speaking, and it is no less so because, in the hypothesis that we are examining, it would be necessary to detach it from the country of the King of Sardinia as little as possible. Therefore one can imagine nothing better than the idea of submitting it to the government of a prince of this house, and of modifying the power of this leader enough so as not to shock the Swiss confederation, but little enough to keep it from being a dreadful democracy.
    Minor details do not enter into the sketch of this memoir. It suffices, as they say in Paris, to decree it in principle.
    However, to give some general ideas, let us try to sketch out some laws on the order of succession in the family of the hereditary avoyer.

Article 3

The title of avoyer would be hereditary in the masculine descent, by order of strict primogeniture, to the exclusion of women and of male descendants of women.

Article 4

The masculine line happening to fail, the reigning King of Sardinia would be able to confer this title on whatever prince of his family he chose.

Article 5

The hereditary avoyer of Savoy would not be required to abdicate his eventual rights to the crown of Sardinia; if the succession happened to open in his favour, the title of hereditary avoyer would ipso facto be vacant, and the succession to it would be open.

Article 6

In the case where no prince of the House of Savoy would be in a position to accept this title, the oldest or only daughter of the last hereditary avoyer would be able to transmit it to the head of a Catholic prince that she would wed with the agreement of the king of Sardinia and the Swiss Diet.

Article 7

The case where all these ways of succession would be lacking is perhaps hypothetical; one could however legislate that in this case the King of Sardinia could name a foreign Catholic prince acceptable to the Swiss federation.

Article 8

The Prince's Domain, such as it would be formed, would be declared inalienable, and all the land acquisitions of the hereditary avoyers would be of the same kind and would be incorporated into the domain, at least up to certain limits that the law could fix.

Observations on the Councils

    On this subject we have proposed only a very general idea, which can be modified in several ways. For example, if one wanted to avoid the hate and the disturbances that can result from an aristocracy concentrated in a single city, and at the same time to allow something for the general propensity of minds towards representative government, one could legislate that the Great Council be formed of deputies sent by the provinces, cities, and towns following a method that would be fixed. This form would follow the English government, or the old government of the Val d'Aoste which, by a singularity very little noticed even by the subjects of the king, was copied exactly from that of Great Britain.
    In that case, the Senators should all be noble in order to establish a divided representation and a just equilibrium between the two branches.
    But all these transplantations of forms of government from one country to another are not the most ideal thing in the world; the best thing is always to employ the customary forms in each country and by altering them the least possible and keeping even the words if one can.
    For example, there was a Senate and a City Hall in Chambry. One could keep these two institutions, or, to put it better, these two names, by simply legislating that the positions of the Senators, conferred freely by the hereditary avoyer, would be permanent and could only be conferred on nobles. It this way the Senate would be dependent enough but not too dependent on this prince whose prerogative would have immense strength.
    The cities on their part could send deputies to the capital, and these deputies together could be called the Council of the Cities.
    One could prove that it would not be advantageous to have representation right down to the countryside, but a sketch is not intended to be the whole picture.
    For the same reason we abstain from entering into the question of knowing if and how that same bodies could be alternatively political bodies and judicial bodies. This question requires altiorem indaginem [much study], and would exceed the limits of this memoir.
    Let us pass to the constitutional Laws one by one.

Article 9

The nobility would be recognized by the fundamental law as a constitutional element of the government. All the noble families would be registered in a book deposited in the Senate, whether one judged it appropriate to fix this number or to leave it unfixed, the King of Sardinia alone would be able to ennoble anyone.
    N.B. This law is of capital importance; and without it the government would necessarily become democratic over time, unless one made the avoyer absolute, which would suit neither the King of Sardinia nor the Swiss federation.

Article 10

There would be levied on all of Savoy forever a sum called the Royal Tax, which would be sent each year to the Royal Treasury in Turin, except that the government of Savoy would be able to decide the distribution of its imposition.

Article 11

In the case of a war waged by the King of Sardinia, this sum would be augmented by one third, and in both cases there could not be a diminution for any reason.

Article 12

There would always be a perfect fraternity between Piedmont and Savoy, so that the inhabitants of each of these two countries would enjoy all the rights of citizenship in the other.

Article 13

The first Company of the Royal Bodyguard would be kept, as also the Regiment of Savoy which would however be considered a Swiss Regiment; and in case of war waged by the King, his duchy would still be obliged to furnish him with two national regiments under the name, for example, of the Regiments of Maurienne and of Tarentaise.

Article 14

By virtue of Article 12, every institution established in Savoy for the education of youth would be open to Piedmontese on the same basis as to Savoyards. Reciprocally, these latter would be received in the colleges of the Provinces and of the Nobles, to the Academy, and even as pages. However the number of places in this last body would have to be restricted to what would be sufficient to maintain the fundamental union and the supremacy of the King. From this perspective two or three places would have as much effect as ten.

Article 15

Savoyard nobles would take their investitures from the hereditary avoyer and would swear fealty and homage to him, except for the rights of the Swiss association. However this prince would act in this case in the capacity of the Hereditary and Perpetual Lieutenant of the Kings of Sardinia.

Article 16

The avoyer would be the supreme leader of all the military forces: he would have the inspection of the national militias; he is the one who would convene them. He would have a guard paid as regular troops; he would name the officers in the regiments in the king's service, etc. The different articles would require a number of explanations and limitations that do not enter into this sketch.
    These laws and others that one might create in the same spirit would keep the Title of the House of Savoy in the House of Savoy, would maintain the Supremacy of the King of Sardinia, and yet alter the government of Savoy enough to make it open to the Swiss alliance.
    Let us now see how the opposition of Bern can be avoided.
    First let us observe that the ancient suzerainty which the Emperor has undeniably enjoyed over Savoy until recent times could very well frighten Bern, which does not want to have anything to do (and certainly it is right) with the great Lords.
    Therefore one should try to ensure that, under a general arrangement where everyone, in appearance, would have to sacrifice something, the Emperor would consent to relinquish a purely nominal right.
    We should have spoken above of this difficulty which affects the whole Swiss union, but as the politics of Bern are the most persuasive and since it is, especially at this moment, omnia tuta timens [afraid of all things], it is probably from Bern that the objection would come.
    It would be good if one could glide over this difficulty and no one have to think of it.
    As for what concerns Bern's interest in particular, we saw above that this canton, dreading a rival and perhaps a superior in the Swiss union, would probably be opposed to the projected union.
    The first thing to do to remove this opposition would be to make no claim to the title of canton.
    When it comes down to it, it appears that this title would separate Savoy from Piedmont too much, and render it too Swiss, if it may be put that way. Moreover, this claim, which would undoubtedly alienate the Canton of Bern and probably the others, would not in truth be of great importance. The Swiss union is not at all a systematic whole composed of parts arranged according to a pre-determined plan. There, like elsewhere, what we call chance has done everything. In certain respects the Swiss are not united, for they have neither a common treasury nor a common government. In other respects they are united, in that they treat of their common interests in a common council, and that the Cantons today attribute to themselves in Solidum a right of control over a canton that would undertake something against the common interest. However, nothing is written down, nothing is precisely determined, and, for example, it is not easy to draw the line that distinguishes the Canton from the simple Ally. The Valais and the Abbey of St. Gal send deputies to the Diet and furnish their military contingents like the cantons. It would therefore be well to keep oneself from asking for more than the simple title of Ally. All the more so in that our principal, or, to put it better, our unique interest in this affair is the neutrality of Savoy, the rest would be a frill more than a necessity, so that again if one or several of the cantons would oppose the admission of deputies from Savoy to the Swiss Diet and remained inflexible on this point, it would be necessary to go that route without hesitation in order to acquire the real advantages that we will talk about in a moment.
    However one can hope that there will not be any difficulty in keeping with the simple title of ally. It cannot be repeated too often: words do much if they do not do everything. In general in all affairs where one finds oneself in the situation of proposing a delicate proposition, which must undergo great difficulties, it is good to present it in weakened terms and to pass over a great part of these difficulties. For the first moment is often quite decisive, and if one begins by frightening people, one will bring them back in only with difficulty. Here then are more or less the Features to be given this proposal.
    "The King of Sardinia, touched by the evils that Savoy has just suffered and the dangers that Switzerland and Italy have known, proposes to the Swiss union to detach (3) Savoy from Piedmont and to make of it a state subordinate to a mixed government under the simple supremacy of the King and the direction of a Prince of his House; in return the Swiss union will receive Savoy into the Confederation under the title of ally."
    To appreciate under what perspectives of usefulness this arrangement could be proposed, it must be examined in its relationship with France, with Switzerland, and with Piedmont.
    This memoir is written in the supposition that negotiations would take place with France before it returns to the monarchy. This last is a possible, and even probable hypothesis, unfortunately.
    In this supposition, there is no doubt that France will be reluctant to give up Savoy purely and simply. There will surely be opposition of the part of the Allobroge representation (at least in part), on the part of all the republicans who are still numerous although a great minority in relation to the totality of the nation, and finally, on the part of all the old supporters of the Revolution who, although converted, nevertheless fear its return.
    The new Legislature therefore cannot consent to restitution pure and simple, but it will not ask more than to find a pretext; at least it appears that in a little time it must be brought to this point. Now the project that has just been outlined would put it perfectly at ease and it is probable that it would seize this opportunity if it is offered to it.
    The events that have just occurred on the Rhine probably will probably make the new kings flexible; (4) and on the other hand we are tired enough not to be difficult. Therefore all could be arranged easily.
    Perhaps there will not be another moment to put through the project in question, for the French throne being on the way to restoration, and the kings would not likely consent, according to all appearances, to seeing another door closed on their ambitions.
    By this arrangement, Piedmont would acquire perfect security for this side of the Alps. The Mont Saint-Bernard, the Mont Cenis, and other less important passes as far as the Alle blanche (5) would be that many doors closed eternally against the demon of war.
    What did not the vain preparations to defend Savoy in 1792 cost, and the vain efforts to retake it the following year! What did not the defence of the Mont Saint-Bernard and Mont Cenis cost! What continual cares! What sufferings for the soldiers! What sacrifices of men and money! All this is ended if this project succeeds, the blessings of peace will remain forever on this side of the Alps, and the King actually doubles or triples his forces since he will be able to use them all in a much more restricted space.
    The advantage for Switzerland is no less striking, and the frightful dangers to which contact with France has just exposed it will make it realize it more vividly. On the south side, France will be moved back and moved back forever, to 40 leagues from Lake Lman, and over this vast area Switzerland will be tranquil for ever. Although the neutrality of Switzerland results from the very nature of things, it would not be a bad thing in a future treaty to make it a fundamental and explicit point of the public law of Europe, in order to avoid the least misunderstanding.
    Again one could give a pledge of security to the Bernese who are the dictators of Switzerland and our nearest neighbours by legislating that they could maintain a Bernese garrison on the way to the Alps, at Montmelliant, for example.
    It would be desirable in a general arrangement to detach from France that tongue of land by which it touches the Lake, and which cuts, in very inconvenient way, the territory of Berne. Undoubtedly the entire Gex would have to belong to Switzerland; but even if one only succeeded in enclosing the vast Lake Lman in the territory of peace, that would be a lot. Bern, pleased by an important acquisition, would use its influence with Switzerland, if one made that the price of this acquisition. The way to succeed in this depends on the circumstances, and cannot be explored in this memoir.
    Let us end with a few important reflections.
    It would be a great error to imagine that there can be a perfect Counter-Revolution. The French Revolution will necessarily leave profound traces. The general spirit of the peoples that have experienced it can be considered as a great mass of liquid put into fermentation. Undoubtedly it will be purified; undoubtedly the dregs and the froth will be separated out, but it will always remain a spirited and intoxicating liquid with which one must not play. Those who have only seen this revolution from afar have no idea of the change that it has made on people's minds. He who writes these lines has seen a rough Savoyard peasant sit down beside him and ask him a thousand pertinent questions on the peace of Spain, on that of Prussia, on the Vende, and on several other points that four years ago were a thousand leagues beyond his rustic intelligence. If the Piedmontese had experienced the Revolution, they would be equal to the Savoyards, but it happened otherwise, and this difference between the two peoples necessitates certain precautions. The Sovereign will have to keep an eye on their communications, and one could doubt, for example, that the Piedmontese regiments would be well placed in Savoy in the period just following the restitution of this country.
    On the other hand one would be counting without the guest, to use the common expression, if one imagined that a minister seated in his armchair in Turin will be able to run Savoy and to re-establish there not only order but the social order that was shaken in its foundation. The resistance, difficulties of all kinds, would be immense and will be the result of things as much as persons. If one dared to undertake from afar a work such as the regeneration of a revolutionized society like Savoy, there would result from it, without exaggeration, a chaos worse than the one that we have witnessed. For at this moment, since the electoral Assembly of Savoy has chased out the Jacobins from every place, there is the means to breath. But in the other hypothesis, one would see a kind of indefinable anarchy necessarily mixed with despotism and weakness, which would be neither the old regime nor the new, which would put everyone into despair and from which the government, with the best will in the world, would never be able to extract itself.
    Therefore it is absolutely necessary that the King, immediately after the restitution of Savoy, establish in this country a centre of government and that a prince of his family spend his time there, using his influence, and his virtues, without prejudice to the supremacy and the sanction of the Sovereign.
    It would appear therefore that only by the force of circumstances would things in Savoy be brought to approximately the point where they must be in order to move towards the Swiss union.

14 September 1795

Return to Memoir On Savoy home page

End Notes

1. [At the time, Maistre reasoned like the "people." He wrote in his diary, on 22 September 1792, the day of the French invasion: "Saturday, invasion by the French, horrible rain, infamous flight of the troops. Treason or stupidity of the generals, an incredible and even somewhat mysterious rout, according to some people. It is the eternal shame of the government, and perhaps the annihilation of the military state."]

2. [Triomphe points out that the title of avoyer was the most eminent in the Great Council of Bern, and notes that, according to a glossary of the dialects of French Switzerland, it was a form similar to the French avou (from the Latin advocatus). The original sense of the word was therefore that of an "official representative, representing the rights and interests of a third party."]

3. There is in this word detach the necessary exaggeration.

4. [A reference to the new situation in France, where five new Directors (referred to ironically by Maistre as "new kings") had succeeded to the Convention three weeks previously, and where French troops had just been defeated on the Rhine.]

5. [The pass between Savoy and Aoste in Piedmont.]

