Project Gutenberg's Les Chants de Maldoror, by Comte de Lautreamont

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Songs of Maldoror

Author: Count of Lautreamont

Release Date: April 9, 2004 [EBook # 12005]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO Latin-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LES CHANTS DE MALDOROR ***




Produced by Anne Dreze and Marc D'Hooghe




THE SONGS OF MALDOROR

by

THE LAUTREAMONT COUNTY




SONGS I, II, III, IV, V, VI




[Drawing: ...; he was dragging his slabs across the room
skin turned]

[Illustration: manuscript of a letter.]



_ To my friend_ ALBERT LACROIX.


The current edition of _Chants de Maldoror_ is a reprint, revised
and corrected from the original manuscript, from a work that never
published in bookstores. In the course of 1869, the Count of Lautréamont
had just issued the last vouchers from his book, and this one
was going to be stapled, when the publisher - continually exposed to
persecutions of the Empire - suspended their sale due to
certain types of violence which made publication dangerous.
"I had a work of poetry published by M. Lacroix. But, once
that it was printed, he refused to publish it, because life
was painted there in colors that were too bitter, and that he feared the
Attorney General."

Thus expresses the author in the letter reproduced in _fac-simile_ in
head of this volume. The poetry work in question and which,
thus presented, attests to the lyrical aim attached by the author, is
well this one. M. le Comte de Lautréamont refused to amend the
violence of his text. It was only after long defending it
that he consented to the modifications which were requested of him. Cartons
intended to replace passages deemed dangerous were to be fired.
But in 1870, war broke out. We no longer thought of the _Chants of
Maldoror_. And suddenly the author died, having executed only one
part of the revisions to which he had consented.

The text of this edition is therefore consistent with that of the edition
original whose print went astray in the cellars of a bookseller
Belgian who timidly after four years broached
copies with anonymous title and cover [1]. A few
literate only know these copies.

We believed that the reissue of such an interesting work would be
well received. His vehemence of style cannot scare an era
as literary as ours. However outraged they are, they keep
of deep beauty and are not pornographic in nature.

Critics will appreciate, as appropriate, the _Chants of Maldoror_,
strange and unequal poem in which, in a furious disorder, collide
admirable episodes and others often confused. By writing this
notice, we just want to destroy a formed legend, we don't know
too much why, with regard to the personality of Count de Lautréamont.
Just recently, Mr. Léon Bloy, whose mission, below, consists
decidedly to demolish everyone, the dead as the living, was trying
to accredit this legend in a long study devoted to volume [2]:
he repeats over and over that the author was mad and that he died mad.
- "It is an insane who speaks, the most deplorable, the most heartbreaking
of the insane. "-" The catastrophe which made this stranger an insane ... "
- "... Because he is a real madman, alas! A real madman who feels his madness. ”
And further: "_The author died in a shed, and that's all we
know about him_. " In writing this, Mr. Léon Bloy knowingly did very
bad job; indeed, it follows from the very thorough investigation that
we did it results from authentic documents that we have
collected, that the author of _Chants de Maldoror_ did not die mad. The
Comte de Lautréamont died at the age of twenty, carried away in two
days with malignant fever. If Mr. Léon Bloy had read the alienists,
and if physiological science had nursed him a little, he would have brought
more reserve in the invention of a fable, interesting only in
point of view of the literary effect he wanted to produce. Science,
indeed, we learn that cases of real madness are extremely rare
below twenty years. However, the author was born in Montevideo on April 4
1850; his manuscript was delivered to the printing press in 1868; we can without
temerity presume its complete completion in 1867; the _Chants of
Maldoror_ therefore emerged from the imagination and cerebral labor of a
young man of seventeen. In addition, the extract of the minutes of the acts
of the ninth arrondissement of Paris wears that Isidore-Lucien
Ducasse - his real name - died on Thursday, November 24
1870, at eight in the morning, at his home, Faubourg-Montmartre, no 7.
The number 7 of Faubourg-Montmartre has never been either a shed or a
crazy's house.

Our active investigations have not resulted in penetrating into its
completeness, the mystery which seems to have been the life of the author in Paris
surrounded. The Prefecture of Police refused to assist us in these
searches, because we had no official character for them
to ask him. This, of course, is a strong administrative rigor
regrettable. What disadvantage can there be in providing an editor
some information on the life of a man of letters dead since
twenty years? Limited to our investigations alone, we have acquired the certainty
that Ducasse had come to Paris in order to attend the courses of
Polytechnic or Mines school. In 1867 he occupied a room
in a hotel located at number 23 rue Notre-Dame-des-Victoires.
He had stayed there as soon as he arrived from America. He was a tall boy
man, brown, beardless, nervous, tidy and hardworking. He only wrote
at night, sitting at his piano. He declaimed, he forged his sentences,
plating his prosopopoeias with chords. This method of composition
made the hotel tenants desperate, who often woke up
startled, could only suspect that an astonishing musician of the verb, a
rare symphonist of the phrase sought, by hitting his keyboard, the
rhythms of his literary orchestration.

If such short cuts in a man’s life are not enough to
reconstruct a very definite resemblance, they will however help
to elucidate, for a small part, the mystery of this figure dedicated to
remain, by almost all sides, obscure. But, restore a character
with documents, doesn't that have something to do with science
occult? At least, have we sought to shed light on this summary portrait
using that of the sciences of that time which, according to a text,
applies to evoke the most fleeting directions of the Soul and the
Thought. Since we had this fortune of having manuscripts of
Ducasse, it seemed curious to ask a learned graphologist his
opinion on the author of _Chants of Maldoror_.

"--Oh! Oh! it's pretty, he says (that's a familiar expression to
graphologists when the subject seems interesting to them); singular
mixture, for example. So see the order and the elegance, this date
regular at the top, this margin, these rigid lines, and this distraction
unexpected which makes him start his letter backwards forgetting the
initials that the paper carries [3] ... Uppercase harmonics: the V of
Voltaire and the R of Rousseau and others. Then look now
_the childishness_ of P de Paris and G of Grandes Têtes. About the
signature, it is literally from a child; how to reconcile
the harmony of such a parafe with what I have just said? We will
have the explanation by analyzing it. He signed: J. Ducasse, without
parafe, he was never to do it, which, you know, is one of the
graphological signs of distinction. Then, remembering that he
was asking for money, he added his address, and to reunite the two
things, by order and logic, he surrounded the whole with a very vague
ellipse made a little "go as I push you" and that it should not
confuse, in this analysis, with the usual spiral parafe
lover of family life. I repeat, there is no
parafe, and _there can not be_, given _the sobriety of the
rest_.

"But, let's continue: harmony showed me an artist, and suddenly I
discovers a logician and a mathematician. The last words: "_the kindness
to write it to me_ ", doesn't that sound like an algebraic formula,
with the abbreviation of _bonté_, and a syllogism, with this narrow
chain of words; and, it is so narrow, this sequence, the
writer is so obsessed with logic that he never puts them
apostrophes only after the finished word, and without forgetting a single one! This is
admirable, maybe I haven't seen this ten times out of the thousands of
letters that I studied.

"Scrupulous and energetic bars with, sometimes, a small harpoon
of selfishness (but who has none?). There is just _ the dose needed_
so as not to alter in any way the kindness which bursts out in the roundness of the letters:
as there is a little prussic acid in almonds, if you will.
A small detail: your man seems a little sensual, there are sometimes
impasto; I'm not angry about this little spot (if it is
a), because really it was too good.

"I sum up: above all, balance: harmony or logic: perhaps
did he never do anything, but I doubt it, because writing is nothing like
lazy: if he's an artist, he might as well have made a
scholar: if he is a scholar, he could just as easily have been a great
artist.

"But is he not mad then?"

"--What do you mean? Or all of the above is true, and everything
it hardly seems crazy to me, or there is no graphology. ”

Only then did we decide to deliver the
some details of Ducasse's life that we know and that,
voluntarily, we had delayed communicating to him for fear of
influence it. And above all, we insisted on this madness that we
reproached and by which one seemed to want to attenuate the conscience
of his talent.

"But I am surprised that such a legend has found credit with
distinguished spirits; you are aware of how much madness at this
are rare, I hear real madness, because idiots,
morons, melancholy, morons, asylums are crowded, but
a real _fou_, a fool of twenty years who, of his madness, would die in a
shed, I doubt that we often see it: even note that this sad detail
and topically, death in a shed immediately reminds me of a
general paralytic with all this classic succession: intelligence
vivid, - obscuration, - madness of persecutions .-- megalomania,
- excitement then complete forfeiture and disappearance of the individual
going for a long time in shreds. Well, question
specialists and ask them how many paralytics they could have
generous of twenty years! Bayle says he has never seen one before
twenty five years; Calmeil only observed it twice before thirty-two
years. Finally, there is mania and circular madness, but these two forms
of insanity follow pretty much the same laws and with infinite exceptions
rare, there is no madman of nineteen years. Finally, if the volume
appeared when Ducasse was nineteen, and died at twenty
years, so this is an alienation that would have evolved in a year ...
not to say with Verlaine: All this is literature! ”

Although Montévidéen, Ducasse was French by origin. His father,
chancellor of the French legation in Montevideo, was born in Tarbes. The
family must have been wealthy. She was in business relationships with
a rue de Lille banker, Mr. Darasse, who paid the son a
monthly pension. Thanks to the kindness of Mr. Dosseur, successor of Mr.
Darasse, we got to know part of the
correspondence of the young writer and give, at the head of this volume,
one of his letters in _fac-simile_. This letter contains in some
so a literary profession of faith and alludes to
circumstances that precluded the sale of his book, as well
as the preface to a new volume, which the publisher Lemerre never
received. Ducasse's correspondence is curious and shows how much
his literary concerns were keen.

In a letter, dated May 22, 1869, we note the passages
following, which we reproduce only as a curiosity:


   "Sir,

   “It was yesterday that I received your letter dated May 21; it was
   yours. Well, know that unfortunately I cannot leave
   so pass the opportunity to express my apologies. Here's why:
   because, if you had announced me the other day, in the ignorance of
   which can be annoying in the circumstances where my person is
   placed, that the funds were running out, I would have been careful not to touch it;
   but certainly I would have felt so much joy in not writing these
   three letters that you would have experienced yourself not to read them.
   You have put into effect the deplorable system of mistrust prescribed
   vaguely by the oddity of my father; but you guessed that
   my headache doesn't stop me from carefully considering the
   difficult situation where you have placed so far a sheet of paper
   letter from South America, the main defect of which was
   lack of clarity; because I do not take into account the
   misunderstanding of some melancholy observations that we forgive
   easily to an old man, and which seemed to me, at first reading,
   to have seemed to impose on you, in the future, perhaps, the necessity
   to step out of your strict role as a banker, vis-à-vis a gentleman
   who comes to live in the capital ...

   "... Sorry, sir, I have a prayer for you: if my father
   sent other funds before September 1, when my
   body will make an appearance in front of your bank door you'll
   kindly let me know? Besides, I'm at home at all
   time of day; but you'd just have to write me a word, and it's
   likely then I will receive it almost as soon as the lady
   who pulls the cord, or well before, if I meet on the
   hallway ...

   "... And all this, I repeat, for an insignificant trifle
   of formality! Present ten dry nails instead of five, the beautiful
   affair: after thinking a lot, I confess that it seemed to me
   filled with a significant amount of zero importance ... "


The author's extreme youth will no doubt attenuate the severity of
some judgments that are sure to be made on the _Chants
from Maldoror_. If Ducasse had lived, he could have become one of the glories
literary of France. He died too soon, leaving behind
his work scattered across the four winds: and by a curious coincidence,
his mortal remains suffered the same fate as his book. Buried in a
temporary concession of the cemetery of the North, on November 25, 1870, it
was exhumed on January 20, 1871 to be re-buried in another
temporary concession. It is currently in the fields
disused and taken over by the City.

LG


Notes:

[1] The cover and the title are composed as follows: _Les Chants - de
--Maldoror - by - the count of Lautréamont - (Songs I, II, III, IV, V, VI)
--Paris and Brussels - On sale at all bookstores - 1874_. Below
of the cover, in the double net, this mention: _All rights of
translation and reproduction reserved_. On the back of the half title:
_Brussels - Typ. by E. Wittmann_. This last indication is false,
no printer by the name of Wittmann having existed in Brussels. Blanket
Brown Brown.

In 1869, the author expressed the desire to have a few copies
from his book; we spit a dozen. The coverage of these
copies is yellow. She wears: _Paris. On sale at all
booksellers (1869) _. On the back of the half title and on the fourth page of the
cover: _Brussels. Printing works by A. Lacroix, Verboeckhoven et Cie,
boulevard de Waterloo, 42_.

[2] _V. la Plume_, 2nd year, no 33.

[3] Photoengraving restored the figure to its place. This one is found
on the fourth page of the letter, crossed out with a stroke of the pen.




THE SONGS OF MALDOROR




SONG FIRST


Would to heaven that the reader, emboldened and momentarily ferocious
like what he reads, finds, without being disoriented, his steep path and
wild, through the desolate swamps of these dark and full pages
poison; because, unless he brings in his reading a logic
rigorous and a tension of spirit equal at least to his distrust, the
deadly fumes from this book will soak his soul like water
sugar. It is not good for everyone to read the pages that go
to follow; only a few will enjoy this bitter fruit safely. By
therefore, shy soul, before penetrating further into such
unexplored moors, direct your heels back and not forward. Listen
well what I tell you: direct your heels backwards and not forward,
like the eyes of a son who respectfully turns away from
august contemplation of the maternal face; or, rather, as an angle
as far as the eye can see, cold cranes meditating a lot, which during
winter, fly powerfully through silence, all sails set,
towards a determined point on the horizon, from which suddenly a wind starts
strange and strong, forerunner of the storm. The oldest crane and
who alone forms the vanguard, seeing this, shakes his head like
a reasonable person, consequently its beak also that it makes
slam, and is not happy (me, either, I would not be
his place), while his old neck, stripped of feathers and contemporary
of three generations of cranes, stirs in irritated ripples which
portend the storm which is approaching more and more. After having
composure looked at several times from all sides with eyes that
contain the experience, carefully, the first (because, it is she who
has the privilege of showing the tail feathers to other cranes
lower in intelligence), with its vigilant cry of melancholy
sentry, to repel the common enemy, it veers with flexibility
the tip of the geometric figure (maybe it's a triangle, but
we don't see the third side that these curious people form in space
passing birds), either to port or to starboard, like a skilful
captain; and, maneuvering with wings that appear no more
as large as a sparrow, because she is not stupid, she
thus takes another philosophical and safer path.

       * * * * *

Reader, maybe this is the hate you want me to invoke in the
beginning of this work! Who says you won't sniff it,
bathed in innumerable pleasures, as long as you like, with your
proud, wide and thin nostrils, tipping your stomach,
like a shark, in the beautiful and black air, as if you understood
the importance of this act and the no less importance of your appetite
legitimate, slowly and majestically, the red emanations? I
assure you, they will delight the two shapeless holes of your hideous snout,
O monster, if you apply yourself before to breathe three thousand
time after time the cursed conscience of the Lord! Your nostrils, which
will be disproportionately dilated with ineffable contentment, ecstasy
still, won't ask for something better from space,
become embalmed like perfumes and incense; because, they will
satiated with complete happiness, like the angels who dwell in the
magnificence and peace of the pleasant skies.

       * * * * *

I will establish in a few lines how Maldoror was good during his
early years, where he lived happily; it is done. Then he saw
that he was born wicked: extraordinary fatality! He hid his character
as long as he could, for a large number of years; but, in the end, at
because of this unnatural concentration every day
blood rushed to his head; until, no longer able to bear
such a life, he threw himself resolutely into the career of evil ...
sweet atmosphere!

       * * * * *

Who would have said it! when he kissed a small child, in the face
pink, he wanted to take his cheeks off with a razor, and he
would have done it very often, if Justice, with its long procession of
punishments, would not have prevented each time. He was not
a liar, he admitted the truth and said he was cruel. Humans,
did you hear? he dares to say it again with this quivering feather!
So therefore, it is a power stronger than the will ...
Curse! The stone would like to evade the laws of
gravity? Impossible. Impossible, if evil wanted to ally with
good. This is what I said above.

       * * * * *

There are some who write to seek human applause,
means of noble qualities of the heart that the imagination invents or that they
can have. I use my genius to paint the delights of
cruelty! Non-transient, artificial delights; but who started
with man, will end up with him. Can't genius ally with
cruelty in the secret resolutions of Providence? or, because
that one is cruel, can't one have genius? We will see the proof
in my words; it's up to you to listen to me, if you want
well ... sorry, it seemed to me that my hair stood on end
head; but, it's nothing, because, with my hand, I managed easily
to put them back in their first position. No one who sings pretends
not that his cavatines are an unknown thing; on the contrary, it
praise that the haughty and wicked thoughts of his hero are
in all men.

       * * * * *

I have seen, throughout my life, without exception of a single one, men, with
narrow shoulders, doing stupid and numerous acts, dumbing down their
alike, and pervert souls by all means. They call them
motives for their actions: glory. Seeing these shows, I wanted
laugh like the others; but this, a strange imitation, was impossible.
I took a penknife whose blade had a sharp edge, and I
split the flesh where the lips meet. One moment I
believed my goal achieved. I looked in a mirror at this bruised mouth
by my own will! It was a mistake! The blood that flowed with
abundance of the two wounds made it difficult to distinguish whether
that was the laughter of others. But after a few moments
comparison, I can see that my laughter was not like that of
human, that is to say that I did not laugh. I saw the men at the head
ugly and with terrible eyes sunk in the dark orbit, surpass
the hardness of the rock, the rigidity of the molten steel, the cruelty of the shark,
the insolence of youth, the senseless fury of criminals, the
betrayals of the hypocrite, the most extraordinary comedians, the
power of character of priests, and the most hidden beings in the
outside, the coldest of worlds and of the sky; tire the moralists
to uncover their hearts, and bring relentless anger upon them
from the top. I saw them all at once, sometimes the strongest fist
directed towards the sky, like that of a child already perverse against his
mother, probably excited by some spirit of hell, eyes
charged with remorse baking at the same time as hateful, in silence
freezing, daring to emit the vast and ungrateful meditations that concealed
their bosom, so full of injustice and horror, and
grieve with compassion the God of mercy; sometimes at every moment
of the day, from the beginning of childhood until the end of
old age, spreading incredible anathemas, which did not have the
common sense, against all that breathes, against themselves and against
Providence, prostitute women and children, and dishonor them
the parts of the body devoted to modesty. So the seas raise
their waters engulf the planks in their abysses; hurricanes,
earthquakes overturn houses; plague, diseases
various decimate the praying families. But, men do not
not see. I saw them also blushing, turning pale with shame for
their conduct on this earth; rarely. Storms, hurricane sisters;
bluish firmament, whose beauty I do not admit; hypocritical sea, picture
from my heart; earth, in a mysterious womb; inhabitants of the spheres; universe
whole; God, who created it magnificently, I am invoking you:
show me a good man! ... But let your grace increase my
natural forces; because at the sight of this monster, I can die
astonishment: you die unless.

             * * * * *

You have to let your nails grow for fifteen days. Oh! like him
is sweet to brutally tear a child who has nothing yet out of bed
on the upper lip, and, with the eyes very open, to make
pretending to smoothly pass his hand over his forehead, tilting
back her beautiful hair! Then suddenly, when he expects it
the least, to push the long nails into his soft chest, so
let him not die; because if he died, we would not have the appearance later
of his miseries. Then we drink the blood by licking the wounds; and,
meanwhile, which should last as long as eternity lasts, the child
cry. Nothing is so good as his blood, extracted as I just said,
and still warm, if not her tears, bitter like salt.
Man, have you never tasted your blood, when by chance you cut yourself
finger? How good it is, isn't it; because, it has no taste. In
Besides, don't you remember having a day in your reflections
dismal, carried by hand, hollowed out at the bottom, on your sickly wet figure
by what fell from the eyes; which hand then fatally headed
towards the mouth, which drew with long lines, in this cup, trembling
like the teeth of the student who looks obliquely at the one born for
oppress her, tears? How good they are, isn't it; because they
taste like vinegar. It looks like the tears of the one who loves the most;
but, the child's tears are better on the palate. He does not betray
not, not yet knowing evil: the one who loves the most betrays early
or late ... I guess by analogy, although I don't know what it is
friendship, than love (it is likely that I will never accept them;
at least on the part of the human race). So since your blood and your
tears don't disgust you, feed yourself, feed yourself with confidence
the teenager's tears and blood. Blindfold him while you
will tear his palpitating flesh; and after hearing long
hours its sublime cries, similar to the piercing groans that grow in
a battle the throats of the dying wounded, then, having pushed you aside
like an avalanche, you will rush from the next room, and you will
pretending to come to his rescue. You will untie her hands, her nerves
and with swollen veins, you will restore sight to his lost eyes,
putting back to licking her tears and her blood. As then repentance is
true! The divine spark which is in us, and appears so rarely, is
watch; too late! How the heart overflows to be able to console the innocent
who were harmed: "Adolescent, who has just suffered from
cruel pains, who therefore could commit a crime on you that I do not
know what name to qualify! Unhappy you are! As you must
suffer! And if your mother knew that, she wouldn't be any closer to
death, so abhorred by the culprits, that I am not now.
Alas! what is good and evil? Is it the same thing by
which we testify with rage our helplessness, and passion
to reach infinity by even the most foolish means? Or,
are these two different things? Yes ... that it is rather the same
thing ... because, if not, what will become of me on the day of judgment! Teenager,
forgive me; it is the one who is before your noble and sacred figure, who
broke your bones and tore the flesh hanging in different places
of your body. Is it a delirium of my sick reason, is it an instinct
secret that does not depend on my reasoning, like that of the eagle
ripping apart its prey, which drove me to commit this crime; and yet
as much as my victim, I suffered! Teenager, forgive me. Once
come out of this fleeting life, I want us to be intertwined
during eternity; form one being, my mouth glued to your
mouth. Even, in this way, my punishment will not be complete. So,
you will tear me, without ever stopping, with teeth and nails
at a time. I will adorn my body with balmy garlands, for this
expiatory holocaust; and we will both suffer from being
torn you to tear me ... my mouth stuck to your mouth. O
teenager, with blond hair, with eyes so sweet, will you do now what
that I advise you? In spite of you, I want you to do it, and you will return
happy my conscience. " After speaking like this, at the same time you will have
hurts a human being, and you will be loved by the same being: this is the
greatest happiness that one can imagine. Later you can
put him in the hospital; because, the perclus will not be able to earn a living. We
will call you good, and laurel wreaths and gold medals
hide your bare feet, scattered on the big tomb, with an old face,
O you, whose name I don't want to write on this page which dedicates the
holiness of crime, I know that your forgiveness was immense like the universe.
But, I still exist!

       * * * * *

I made a pact with prostitution to make a mess
in families. I remember the night before this
dangerous bond. I saw before me a tomb. I heard a
glowworm, big like a house, who says to me: "I will
enlighten you. Read the inscription. It is not from me that this
supreme order. " A vast blood-colored light, looking like
which my jaws snapped and my arms fell inert,
spread through the air to the horizon. I leaned against
a ruined wall, for I was about to fall, and I read: "Here is a
teenager who died of breast cancer: you know why. Don't pray
not for him. " Many men may not have had
as much courage as me. Meanwhile, a beautiful naked woman
came to lie down at my feet. Me, hers, with a sad figure:
"You can get up." I held out my hand with which the
fratricide slays his sister's throat. The glow worm, to me: "You, take
a stone and kill it; - Why? I said." Him, to me: "Take
beware; the weakest, because I am the strongest.
This is called _Prostitution_. " Tears in my eyes,
rage in the heart, I felt an unknown force being born in me.
I took a large stone; after much effort, I raised it
with difficulty to the height of my chest; I put it on
the shoulder with the arms. I climb a mountain to the top:
from there I crushed the glow-worm. His head sank under the ground
greatness of a man; the stone bounces up to the height of
six churches. She went back to a lake, whose waters
lowered for a moment, spinning, digging a huge
inverted cone. Calm reappeared on the surface; blood light
no longer shone. "Alas! Alas! cried the beautiful naked woman;
what did you do?" Me, to her: “I prefer you to him; because I have
pity the unhappy. It's not your fault, if justice
eternal created you. " She, to me: "One day, men
will do justice; I don't tell you more. Leave me
leave to hide my infinite sadness at the bottom of the sea.
Only you and the hideous monsters swarm in these
black abysses, which do not despise me. You are good. Goodbye, you who
loved me! ” Me, to her: “Farewell! Again: farewell! I
will always love you! ... As of today, I give up virtue. "
This is why, O people, when you hear the winter wind
groaning on the sea and near its edges, or above large
cities that have long mourned for me, or
across the cold polar regions, say, "It's not
the spirit of God passing by: this is only the sharp sigh of the
prostitution, united with the serious groans of the Montevideen. "
Children, I'm telling you this. So, full of mercy,
kneel down; and that men, more numerous than lice,
make long prayers.

       * * * * *

In the moonlight, near the sea, in remote areas of the
countryside, we see, immersed in bitter reflections, all things
put on yellow, indecisive, fantastic shapes. The shade of the trees,
sometimes fast, sometimes slowly, short, come, come back, by various
shapes, flattening, sticking against the ground. In time,
when I was carried on the wings of youth, it made me
dreaming, seemed strange to me; now I'm used to it. Wind
groans through the leaves its languorous notes, and the owl sings
his grave lament, which makes the hair of those who hear it stand up.
So the dogs, made furious, break their chains, escape from
distant farms; they run in the countryside, here and there, plagued by
madness. Suddenly they stop, look from all sides with a
wild anxiety, the eye on fire; and, like the elephants, before
to die, take a last look at the sky in the desert, raising
desperately cheats on them, leaving their ears inert, so too
dogs leave their ears inert, raise their head, swell their neck
terrible, and begin to bark, in turn, like a child who
screams of hunger, like a wounded cat in the stomach above a roof,
either as a woman who is going to give birth, or as a dying man with
the plague in the hospital, like a young girl singing a sublime tune,
against the stars in the north, against the stars in the east, against the stars
to the south, against the stars to the west; against the moon; against the mountains,
distant like giant rocks, lying in the dark; against
the cold air they breathe in, making the inside of their
nostril, red, burning; against the silence of the night; against owls,
whose oblique flight shaves their snout, carrying a rat or a frog
in the beak, live food, sweet for the little ones; against hares,
which disappear in the blink of an eye; against the thief, who fled to
galloping his horse after committing a crime; against snakes,
stirring the heather, which makes them tremble the skin, gnash their teeth;
against their own barking, which scares them to themselves; against the
toads they grind with one jaw (why did they
far from the marsh?); against the trees, whose leaves, limply
rocked, are as many mysteries that they do not understand, that they want
discover with their fixed, intelligent eyes; against spiders,
suspended between their long legs, which climb trees to get
to save; against crows who did not find something to eat during the
day, and who return to the lodge the tired wing; against the rocks
from the shore; against fires, which appear on the masts of invisible ships;
against the dull sound of the waves; against the big fish, which, swimming,
show their black backs, then sink into the abyss; and against man
which makes them slaves. After which, they start running again
the countryside, leaping, with their bloody legs, over the ditches,
paths, fields, grasses and steep stones. They look like
rabies, seeking a large pond to quench their thirst. Their
prolonged howls terrify nature. Woe to the lingering traveler!
Friends of cemeteries will throw themselves on him, tear him apart, eat him,
with their mouth from which blood falls; because, they do not have spoiled teeth.
Wild animals, not daring to approach to take part in the meal
of flesh, run away as far as the eye can see, trembling. After a few hours, the
dogs, exhausted from running here and there, almost dead, their tongues outside
mouth, rush on each other, without knowing what they
do, and tear into a thousand shreds, with incredible speed. They
do not do so out of cruelty. One day, with glassy eyes, my mother
said to me: "When you are in your bed, you will hear the barking
dogs in the countryside, hide in your blanket, don't turn
make fun of what they do: they have an insatiable thirst for the infinite, like you,
like me, like the rest of humans, with a pale, long face. Same,
I allow you to stand in front of the window to contemplate this spectacle,
which is quite sublime. " Since that time, I respect the wish of the dead.
I, like dogs, feel the need for infinity ... I cannot, I
can not satisfy this need! I am the son of man and woman,
from what I was told. It surprises me ... I thought I was more! At
rest, what does it matter to me where i come from? Me, if it could have depended on my
will, I would rather have been the son of the female shark, whose
hunger is friend of storms, and of the tiger, with recognized cruelty: I do not
wouldn't be so mean. You who look at me, move away from me, because
my breath exhales a poisoned breath. No one has seen wrinkles yet
green on my forehead; nor the protruding bones of my thin figure, like
ridges of some large fish, or rocks covering the shores of the
sea, or to the steep alpine mountains, which I often crossed, when
I had hair of another color on my head. And when I roam
around men's homes, during stormy nights, eyes
fiery, hair flogged by the wind of storms, isolated like a
stone in the middle of the path, I cover my withered face, with a piece
of velvet, black like the soot that fills the interior of the chimneys: it
the eyes must not witness the ugliness that the Supreme Being,
with a smile of powerful hatred, put on me. Every morning when
the sun rises for others, spreading joy and warmth
beneficial in nature, while none of my features move,
staring at the space full of darkness, crouching towards the bottom of
my beloved cave, in a despair that intoxicates me like wine, I bruise
with my mighty hands my tattered chest. However, I feel that I
don't get rabies! However, I feel that I am not the
alone who suffers! However, I feel that I breathe! Like a convict who
try his muscles, thinking about their fate, and that will soon
go up to the scaffold, standing on my bed of straw, eyes closed, I
slowly turn my collar from right to left, from left to right, during
whole hours; I don't fall dead. From moment to moment,
when my cervix can no longer continue to turn in the same direction, it
stop, to start turning in an opposite direction, I look
suddenly the horizon, through the rare interstices left by
thick brush covering the entrance: I can't see anything! Nothing ...
if not the countryside dancing in swirls with the trees and
with long lines of birds crossing the air. It troubles me
the blood and the brain ... Who then, on the head, kicks me
iron bar, like a hammer striking the anvil?

       * * * * *

I propose, without being moved, to declaim aloud the stanza
serious and cold that you will hear. You pay attention to
what it contains, and beware of the painful impression that it does
will not fail to leave, like a wilt, in your imaginations
troubled. Don't think I'm about to die, because I don't
am not yet a skeleton, and old age is not stuck to my
forehead. So let's dismiss any idea of ​​comparison with the swan,
as its existence flies away, and see before you only one
monster, which I am glad you cannot see
figure; but, less horrible is she than her soul. However, I am not
not a criminal ... Enough on this subject. I haven't been long
reviewed the sea, and set foot on the ship deck, and my memories are
perennial as if I had left it the day before. Be nevertheless, if you
as calm as I can, in this reading that I repent of
already to offer you, and don't blush at the thought of what the
human heart. O octopus, with a silk look! you, whose soul is
inseparable from mine; you, the most beautiful of the inhabitants of the globe
terrestrial, and who commands a seraglio of four hundred suction cups; you,
in which sit nobly, as in their natural residence, by a
by mutual agreement, of an indestructible bond, the soft communicative virtue and
divine graces, why are you not with me, your belly of mercury
against my aluminum chest, both sitting on some rock
from the shore, to contemplate this spectacle which I adore!

Old ocean, with crystal waves, you resemble in proportion to
these azure marks that we see on the bruised back of mosses; you
are a huge blue, applied to the body of the earth: I like this
comparison. So, at your first appearance, a prolonged breath of
sadness, that one would believe to be the murmur of your sweet breeze, pass, in
leaving indelible traces on the deeply shaken soul, and
you remember the memories of your lovers, without always being surrendered
account, the rough beginnings of man, where he gets to know
the pain, which never leaves him. I salute you, old ocean!

Old ocean, your harmoniously spherical shape, which delights the face
serious geometry, reminds me only too much of the little eyes of
man, like those of the boar for smallness, and those of
night owls for circular perfection of the outline. However,
man has believed himself handsome in all ages. I rather assume that
man believes in his beauty only by self-love; but, that it is not
really beautiful and he suspects it because, why is he looking at the
figure of his fellow with so much contempt? I salute you, old ocean!

Old ocean, you are the symbol of identity: always equal to yourself.
You do not vary in an essential way, and, if your waves are
somewhere furious, further away, in some other area, they are
in the most complete calm. You are not like the man who stops
in the street, to see two dodds grabbing their necks, but who
does not stop when a funeral passes; which is accessible this morning
and tonight in a bad mood; who laughs today and cries tomorrow. I
greet you, old ocean!

Old ocean, there would be nothing impossible for you to hide in your
within future uses for man. You already gave him the whale.
You don't easily let science-hungry eyes guess
natural the thousand secrets of your intimate organization: you are modest.
The man constantly boasts, and for minutiae. I salute you, old man
ocean!

Old ocean, the different species of fish you feed have
not sworn brotherhood between them. Each species lives on its own. The
temperaments and conformations that vary in each of them,
explain, in a satisfactory manner, what seems at first only a
anomaly. So it is with man, who does not have the same motives
excuse. Is a piece of land occupied by thirty million beings
humans, they believe they are obliged not to interfere in the existence of
their neighbors, fixed like roots on the following piece of land.
Descending from big to small, each man lives like a savage in
his den, and rarely leaves it to visit his fellow, crouching
similarly in another den. The great universal family of
humans is a utopia worthy of the most mediocre logic. In addition,
from the sight of your fertile breasts, the notion of ingratitude emerges;
because we immediately think of these numerous parents, who are quite ungrateful towards the
Creator, to abandon the fruit of their miserable union. I salute you,
old ocean!

Old ocean, your material greatness can only be compared to the measure
that we make of what it took active power to generate the
all of your mass. We can't kiss you at a glance. For
to contemplate you, the sight must turn its telescope, by a movement
continuous, towards the four points of the horizon, as well as a
mathematician, in order to solve an algebraic equation, is forced
to examine the various possible cases separately before deciding the
difficulty. Man eats nourishing substances, and makes others
efforts, worthy of a better fate, to appear fat. That she
swell as much as it likes, this adorable frog. Be quiet,
it won't match you in size; I suppose so, at least. I salute you,
old ocean!

Old ocean, your waters are bitter. It's exactly the same taste as the
gall that criticism distils on the fine arts, on the sciences, on
all. If someone has genius, they pass him off as an idiot; if
some other is beautiful in body, it is a hideous hunchback. Certainly,
let the man strongly feel his imperfection, three-quarters of which
moreover are due only to himself, to criticize it thus! I
salute, old ocean!

Old ocean, men, despite the excellence of their methods, are
not yet reached, helped by the means of investigation of science,
to measure the vertiginous depth of your abysses; you only have them
the longest, heaviest probes recognized that they were inaccessible.
Fish ... it's allowed: not men. I often
asked which thing was easier to recognize: the depth
from the ocean or the depth of the human heart! Often the hand brought to the
forehead standing on the vessels as the moon swayed between
the masts irregularly, I surprised myself, doing
disregarding everything that was not the goal I was pursuing,
m'efforçant de résoudre ce difficile problème! Oui, quel est le plus
profond, le plus impénétrable des deux: l'océan ou le coeur humain?
Si trente ans d'expérience de la vie peuvent jusqu'à un certain point
pencher la balance vers l'une ou l'autre de ces solutions, il me sera
permis de dire que, malgré la profondeur de l'océan, il ne peut pas se
mettre en ligné, quant à la comparaison sur cette propriété, avec la
profondeur du coeur humain. J'ai été en relation avec des hommes qui ont
été vertueux. Ils mouraient à soixante ans, et chacun ne manquait pas de
exclaim: "They have done good on this earth, that is to say, they have
practiced charity: that's all, it's not smart, everyone can
do the same. " Who will understand why two lovers who idolized
the day before, for a misinterpreted word, move away, one towards the east,
the other towards the west, with the stings of hatred, of
revenge, love and remorse, and never see each other again
draped in his lonely pride? It's a miracle that is renewed
every day, which is no less miraculous. Who will understand
why we savor not only the general disgraces of our
similar, but still the particulars of his dearest friends,
while we are afflicted at the same time? An undeniable example
to end the series: the man hypocritically says yes and thinks no. This is
why the wild boars of humanity have so much confidence in one
in others and are not selfish. It remains to psychology
a lot of progress to be made. I salute you, old ocean!

Old ocean, you are so powerful, that men taught it to their
own costs. They may use all the resources of their
genius ... unable to dominate you. They found their master. I say
that they found something stronger than them. This something
has a name. This name is: the ocean! The fear that you inspire in him is such,
that they respect you. Despite this, you are waltzing their heaviest
machines with grace, elegance and ease. You make them jump
gymnastics to the sky, and wonderful dives to the bottom of
your domains: a acrobat would be jealous. Blessed are they,
when you don’t wrap them up in your bubbling folds,
to go and see, without a railway, in your aquatic entrails,
how the fish are doing, and especially how they are doing
themselves. The man says, "I'm smarter than the ocean." This is
possible, it's even quite true; but the ocean is more formidable to him
than him in the ocean: this is not necessary to prove. This
patriarch observer, contemporary of the first eras of our
hanging globe, smiles in pity, when he attends the naval battles of
nations. Here are a hundred leviathans who came out of the hands of
humanity. The emphatic orders of the superiors, the cries of the wounded,
the cannon shots are noise made on purpose to destroy some
seconds. It seems that the drama is over, and that the ocean has put everything
in her womb. The face is great. She must be tall towards
low, in the direction of the unknown! To finally crown the stupid
comedy, which is not even interesting, we see, in the middle of the air,
some stork, retarded by fatigue, who starts to cry, without
stop the scale of his flight: "Here! ... I find it bad! There is
had black dots below; I closed my eyes: they have disappeared. ”
I salute you, old ocean!

Old ocean, oh great bachelor, when you travel solemn solitude
of your phlegmatic realms, you rightly take pride in your
native magnificence, and true praise that I hasten to give you.
Swung voluptuously by the fragrant mols of your majestic slowness,
which is the grandest among the attributes of which sovereign power
gratified you, you unroll, in the middle of a dark mystery, on all your
sublime surface, your incomparable waves, with the calm feeling of your
eternal power. They follow each other in parallel, separated by
short intervals. Barely one decreases, another goes to meet it
growing up, accompanied by the melancholy sound of foam melting,
to warn us that everything is scum. (So ​​human beings, these
living waves, die one after the other, in a monotonous manner; But,
without leaving a frothy noise). The passing bird sits on them
avec confiance, et se laisse abandonner à leurs mouvements, pleins d'une
grâce fière, jusqu'à ce que les os de ses ailes aient recouvré leur vigueur
accoutumée pour continuer leur pèlerinage aérien. Je voudrais que la
majesté humaine ne fût que l'incarnation du reflet de la tienne. Je demande
beaucoup, et ce souhait sincère est glorieux pour toi. Ta grandeur morale,
image de l'infini, est immense comme la réflexion du philosophe, comme
l'amour de la femme, comme la beauté divine de l'oiseau, comme les
méditations du poëte. Tu es plus beau que la nuit. Réponds-moi, océan,
veux-tu être mon frère? Remue-toi avec impétuosité ... plus ... plus
encore, si tu veux que je te compare à la vengeance de Dieu; allonge tes
griffes livides en te frayant un chemin sur ton propre sein ... c'est bien.
Déroule tes vagues épouvantables, océan hideux, compris par moi seul, et
devant lequel je tombe, prosterné à tes genoux. La majesté de l'homme est
empruntée; il ne m'imposera point: toi, oui. Oh! quand tu t'avances, la
high and terrible crest, surrounded by your tortuous folds like a courtyard,
magnetizer and fierce, rolling your waves on top of each other, with
awareness of what you are, as you push, from the depths of
your chest, as if overwhelmed by an intense remorse that I cannot
discover, that muffled perpetual roar that men fear so much,
even when they contemplate you, safe, trembling on the shore,
so I see it doesn't belong to me, the insignificant right to tell me
your equal. This is why, in the presence of your superiority, I would give you
all my love (and no one knows how much love my
aspirations towards the beautiful), if you did not make me painfully think
to my fellows, who form the most ironic contrast with you,
the most clownish antithesis we have ever seen in creation:
I can't love you, I hate you. Why do I come back to you, for
the thousandth time, towards your friendly arms, which part, to caress
my burning forehead, which sees the fever disappear on contact! I do not
don't know your hidden destiny; everything that concerns you interests me.
Tell me then if you are the home of the prince of darkness. Tell me ...
tell me, ocean (to me alone, so as not to sadden those who have
still known as illusions), and if the breath of Satan creates the
storms that lift your salt water to the clouds. You have to
tell me, because I would be glad to know hell so close to
the man. I want this to be the last stanza of my
invocation. Therefore, once again, I want to greet you and
say goodbye to you! Old ocean, with crystal waves ... My eyes are
wet abundant tears, and I do not have the strength to continue;
because, I feel that the time has come to return among men, to the appearance
brutal; but ... courage! Let’s make a big effort, and let’s accomplish,
with the feeling of duty, our destiny on this earth. I
salute, old ocean!

       * * * * *

They won't see me at my last hour (I write this on my bed
dead), surrounded by priests. I want to die, lulled by the sea wave
stormy, or standing on the mountain ... eyes up, no: I
know that my annihilation will be complete. Besides, I would not have
thanks to hope. Who opens the door to my burial chamber? I said
let no one come in. Whoever you are, get away; but, if you
think you see some mark of pain or fear on my face
hyena (I use this comparison, although the hyena is more beautiful than
me, and more pleasant to see), think again: let him approach. We
are in a winter night as the elements collide
everywhere, that the man is afraid, and that the adolescent meditates some
crime on one of his friends, if he was what I was in my youth. that
the wind, whose plaintive whistles sadden humanity, since
that the wind, humanity exists, moments before the agony
last, carry me on the bones of his wings, around the world,
impatient for my death. I will still enjoy, in secret, the examples
many of human wickedness (a brother, without being seen, likes to see
acts of his brothers). The eagle, the raven, the immortal pelican, the
wild duck, traveling crane, awake, shivering with cold, me
will see the lightning flash, horrible and happy specter. They
won't know what it means. On earth, the viper, the big eye of the
toad, tiger, elephant; in the sea, the whale, the shark, the
hammer, the shapeless stripe, the tooth of the polar seal, will wonder
what is this derogation from the law of nature. Man, trembling,
will stick his forehead against the earth, in the midst of his groans. "Yes,
I surpass you all by my innate cruelty, cruelty that it does not have
depended on me to erase. Is it for this reason that you show yourself
before me in this prostration? or is it because you
see it travel, new phenomenon, like a frightening comet,
bloody space? (I am showered with blood from my vast body,
like a blackish cloud pushed by the hurricane in front of you). Don't fear
nothing, children, I don't want to curse you. The harm you have done to me
is too great, too great the harm I have done to you, for it to be
voluntary. You, you have walked in your way, I, in the
mine, both alike, both perverse.
Nécessairement, nous avons dû nous rencontrer, dans cette similitude de
caractère; le choc qui en est résulté nous a été réciproquement fatal.»
Alors, les hommes relèveront peu à peu la tête, en reprenant courage,
pour voir celui qui parle ainsi, allongeant le cou comme l'escargot.
Tout à coup, leur visage brûlant, décomposé, montrant les plus terribles
passions, grimacera de telle manière que les loups auront peur. Ils se
dresseront à la fois comme un ressort immense. Quelles imprécations!
quels déchirements de voix! Ils m'ont reconnu. Voilà que les animaux
de la terre se réunissent aux hommes, font entendre leurs bizarres
clameurs. Plus de haine réciproque; les deux haines sont tournées contre
l'ennemi commun, moi; on se rapproche par un assentiment universel.
Vents, qui me soutenez, élevez-moi plus haut; je crains la perfidie.
Oui, disparaissons peu à peu de leurs yeux, témoin, une fois de plus,
des conséquences des passions, complément satisfait ... Je te remercie,
ô rhinolophe, de m'avoir réveillé avec le mouvement de tes ailes, toi,
dont le nez est surmonté d'une crête en forme de fer à cheval: je
m'aperçois, en effet, que ce n'était malheureusement qu'une maladie
passagère, et je me sens avec dégoût renaître à la vie. Les uns disent
que tu arrivais vers moi pour me sucer le peu de sang qui se trouve dans
mon corps: pourquoi cette hypothèse n'est-elle pas la réalité!

       *       *       *       *       *

Une famille entoure une lampe posée sur la table:

--Mon fils, donne-moi les ciseaux qui sont placés sur cette chaise.

--Ils n'y sont pas, mère.

--Va les chercher alors dans l'autre chambre. Te rappelles-tu cette
époque, mon doux maître, où nous faisions des voeux, pour avoir un
enfant, dans lequel nous renaîtrions une seconde fois, et qui serait le
support of our old age?

--I remember it, and God heard us. We don't have to
complain about our lot on this earth. Every day we bless the
Providence of its benefits. Our Edward has all the graces of
his mother.

--And the male qualities of his father.

--Here are the scissors, mother; I finally found them.

He goes back to work ... But someone showed up at the door
entry, and contemplate, for a few moments, the table which
offers to him:

--What does this show mean! There are a lot of people who are less
happy that those. What is the reasoning they do to love
existence? Get away, Maldoror, from this peaceful home; your place is
not here.

He retired!

--I do not know how it is done; but, I feel the human faculties
who are fighting in my heart. My soul is worried, and without
know why; the atmosphere is heavy.

--Woman, I feel the same impressions as you; I tremble that he does
some misfortune happens to us. Let us trust in God; in him is the
supreme hope.

--Mother, I hardly breathe: my head hurts.

--You too my son! I'm going to wet your forehead and temples with
vinegar.

--No, good mother ...

See, he's leaning his body on the back of the chair, tired.

--Something is going back inside me, which I cannot explain.
Now the slightest object annoys me.

- How pale you are! The end of this vigil will not happen without
some fatal event plunges the three of us into the
despair!

I hear, in the distance, prolonged cries of the most pain
poignant.

--My son!

--Ah! mother! ... I'm afraid!

--Tell me quickly if you suffer.

--Mother, I am not suffering ... I am not telling the truth.

The father does not return from his astonishment:

--These are the cries that we sometimes hear, in the silence of the nights
without stars. Although we hear these cries, however, whoever
sprout is not near here; because, we can hear these groans at
three leagues away, carried by the wind from a city to a
other. I had often been told about this phenomenon: but, I had never
had the opportunity to judge for myself its veracity. Woman, you were talking to me
of doom; if more real misfortune existed in the long spiral of time,
it is the misfortune of him who now disturbs the sleep of his
similar ...

I hear in the distance cries prolonged from the most pain
poignant.

--Plût au ciel que sa naissance ne soit pas une calamité pour son pays,
qui l'a repoussé de son sein. Il va de contrée en contrée, abhorré
partout. Les uns disent qu'il est accablé d'une espèce de folie
originelle, depuis son enfance. D'autres croient savoir qu'il est d'une
cruauté extrême et instinctive, dont il a honte lui-même, et que ses
parents en sont morts de douleur. Il y en a qui prétendent qu'on l'a
flétri d'un surnom dans sa jeunesse: qu'il en est resté inconsolable le
reste de son existence, parce que sa dignité blessée voyait là une
preuve flagrante de la méchanceté des hommes, qui se montre aux
premières années, pour augmenter ensuite. Ce surnom était _le
vampire_!...

J'entends dans le lointain des cris prolongés de la douleur la plus
poignante.

--They add that, days, nights, without truce or rest,
horrible nightmares make him bleed blood from his mouth and
ears; and specters sit at the bedside, and he
throw in the face, pushed in spite of themselves by an unknown force, sometimes
in a soft voice, sometimes in a voice like the roars of
fights, with relentless persistence, this nickname still alive,
always hideous, and which will only perish with the universe. Some even
claimed that love reduced him to this state: or that these cries
bear witness to the repentance of some crime buried on the night of his
mysterious past. But most people think that an immeasurable
torture, as Satan once did, and he wanted to equal God ...

I hear in the distance cries prolonged from the most pain
poignant.

--My son, these are exceptional secrets: I pity your
age of hearing them, and I hope you will never imitate this
man.

Speak, oh my Edward; answer that you will never imitate this man.

--O beloved mother, to whom I owe the day, I promise you, if the saint
promise of a child has any value, never to imitate this man.

"It is perfect, my son; you have to obey your mother, whatever it is.

We no longer hear the groans.

--Woman, have you finished your work?

--I am missing a few points on this shirt, although we have
extended the day before very late.

- Me too, I haven't finished a chapter started. Let's take advantage of
last lights of the lamp; because there is almost no oil left, and
let's each finish our work ...

The child exclaimed:

--Si Dieu nous laisse vivre!

--Ange radieux, viens à moi: tu te promèneras dans la prairie, du matin
jusqu'au soir: tu ne travailleras point. Mon palais magnifique est
construit avec des murailles d'argent, des colonnes d'or et des portes
de diamants. Tu te coucheras quand tu voudras, au son d'une musique
céleste, sans faire ta prière. Quand, au matin, le soleil montrera ses
rayons resplendissants et que l'alouette joyeuse emportera, avec elle,
son cri, à perte de vue, dans les airs, tu pourras encore rester au lit,
jusqu'à ce que cela te fatigue. Tu marcheras sur les tapis les plus
précieux; tu seras constamment enveloppé dans une atmosphère composée
des essences parfumées des fleurs les plus odorantes.

--Il est temps de reposer le corps et l'esprit. Lève-toi, mère de
family, on your muscular ankles. It's just that your fingers
stiffened abandon the needle of exaggerated labor. Extremes have
nothing good.

--Oh! how sweet your existence will be! I will give you an enchanted ring;
when you return the ruby, you will be invisible, like the princes,
in fairy tales.

- Put your daily weapons back in the protective cupboard, while,
on my side, I arrange my business.

--When you put it back in its ordinary position, you will reappear as
that nature has formed you, O young magician. This, because I love you and
that I aspire to make you happy.

- Go away, whoever you are; don't take me by the shoulders.

--My son, do not fall asleep, lulled by the dreams of childhood: the
common prayer is not started and your clothes are not yet
soigneusement placés sur une chaise ... A genoux! Éternel créateur de
l'univers, tu montres la bonté inépuisable jusque dans les plus petites
choses.

--Tu n'aimes donc pas les ruisseaux limpides, où glissent des milliers
de petits poissons rouges, bleus et argentés? Tu les prendras avec un
filet si beau, qu'il les attirera de lui-même, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit
rempli. De la surface, tu verras des cailloux brillants, plus polis que
le marbre.

--Mère, vois ces griffes; je me méfie de lui; mais ma conscience est
calme, car je n'ai rien à me reprocher.

--Tu nous vois, prosternés à tes pieds, accablés du sentiment de ta
grandeur. Si quelque pensée orgueilleuse s'insinue dans notre
imagination, nous la rejetons aussitôt avec la salive du dédain et
nous t'en faisons le sacrifice irrémissible.

--Tu t'y baigneras avec de petites filles, qui t'enlaceront de leurs
bras. Une fois sortis du bain, elles te tresseront des couronnes de
roses et d'oeillets. Elles auront des ailes transparentes de papillon
et des cheveux d'une longueur ondulée, qui flottent autour de la
gentillesse de leur front.

--Quand même ton palais serait plus beau que le cristal, je ne sortirais
pas de cette maison pour te suivre. Je crois que tu n'es qu'un
impostor, since you talk to me so softly, for fear of making you
hear. Abandoning your parents is a bad thing. It's not
I who would be an ungrateful son. As for your little girls, they are not
not as beautiful as my mother's eyes.

--All our lives have been exhausted in the songs of your glory. Such
we have been so far, as we will be, until we
will receive from you the order to leave this earth.

--They will obey you at your slightest sign and will only think of pleasing you.
If you want the bird that never rests, they will bring it to you.
If you want the snow car, which transports to the sun in the blink of an eye
look, they will bring it to you. What would they not bring you! They
would even bring you the kite, tall as a tower, that we hid
in the moon, and at the tail of which are suspended, by links of
silk, birds of all kinds. Pay attention to you ... listen to my
advice.

--Do what you want: I don't want to interrupt my prayer, to
Call for help. Whatever your body evaporates, when I want
dismiss it, know that I do not fear you.

--Front of you, nothing is great, except the flame exhaled from a heart
pure.

--Think about what I told you, if you don't want to repent.

--Heavenly Father, conjure, conjure up the misfortunes that can melt on
our family.

--So you do not want to withdraw, evil spirit?

- Keep this beloved wife, who comforted me in my discouragement
...

--Since you refuse me, I'll make you cry and cringe like
a hanged.

--And this loving son, whose chaste lips barely open to
kisses of the dawn of life.

--Mother, he is strangling me ... Father, rescue me ... I can no longer
breathe ... Your blessing!

A cry of immense irony rose in the air. See how
eagles, dizzy, fall from the clouds, rolling in on themselves,
littéralement foudroyés par la colonne d'air.

--Son coeur ne bat plus ... Et celle-ci est morte, en même temps que le
fruit de ses entrailles, fruit que je ne reconnais plus, tant il est
défiguré ... Mon épouse!... Mon fils!... Je me rappelle un temps
lointain où je fus époux et père.

Il s'était dit, devant le tableau qui s'offrit à ses yeux, qu'il ne
supporterait pas cette injustice. S'il est efficace, le pouvoir que lui
have bestowed infernal spirits, or rather that he draws from himself, this
child, before the night passes, should no longer be.

       * * * * *

The one who does not know how to cry (because he has always repressed suffering
inside) noticed that he was in Norway. In the Faeroé Islands, there
assisted in the search for seabird nests, in crevices
sheer, and was astonished that the three hundred meter rope, which holds
the explorer over the precipice was chosen with such solidity.
He saw there, whatever we say, a striking example of human kindness,
and he couldn't believe his eyes. If he was the one who should have prepared
the rope, he would have made cuts in several places, so
let it cut itself, and throw the hunter into the sea! One evening he
dirigea vers un cimetière, et les adolescents qui trouvent du plaisir à
violer les cadavres de belles femmes mortes depuis peu, purent, s'ils le
voulurent, entendre la conversation suivante, perdue dans le tableau
d'une action qui va se dérouler en même temps.

--N'est-ce pas, fossoyeur, que tu voudras causer avec moi? Un cachalot
s'élève peu à peu du fond de la mer, et montre sa tête au-dessus des
eaux, pour voir le navire qui passe dans ses parages solitaires. La
curiosité naquit avec l'univers.

--Ami, il m'est impossible d'échanger des idées avec toi. Il y a
longtemps que les doux rayons de la lune font briller le marbre des
tombeaux. C'est l'heure silencieuse où plus d'un être humain rêve qu'il
voit apparaître des femmes enchaînées, traînant leurs linceuls, couverts
de taches de sang, comme un ciel noir, d'étoiles. Celui qui dort pousse
des gémissements, pareils à ceux d'un condamné à mort, jusqu'à ce qu'il
se réveille, et s'aperçoive que la réalité est trois fois pire que le
rêve. Je dois finir de creuser cette fosse, avec ma bêche infatigable,
so that it’s ready tomorrow morning. To do serious work, it
don't do two things at once.

--He believes that digging a pit is serious work! You think that
digging a pit is serious work?

--When the wild pelican resolves to give its breast to devour
his little ones, having as witness only the one who knew how to create such a love,
in order to shame men, though the sacrifice is great, this
act is understandable. When a young man sees, in the arms of his friend,
a woman whom he idolized, he then began to smoke a cigar; he ... not
not come out of the house, and form an indissoluble friendship with the
pain; this act is understandable. When an internal student in a high school,
is ruled, for years, which are centuries, from morning
until evening and from evening until the following day, by a pariah of the
civilization, which constantly has its eyes on it, it feels the waves
tumultuous of a perennial hatred, rising like thick smoke, to his
brain, which seems to him to explode. From the moment we threw it away
in the prison, up to the one who approaches, where he will leave, a
intense fever turns his face yellow, brings his eyebrows together, and digs him
the eyes. At night he thinks because he doesn't want to sleep. The
jour, sa pensée s'élance au-dessus des murailles de la demeure de
l'abrutissement, jusqu'au moment où il s'échappe, ou qu'on le rejette,
comme un pestiféré, de ce cloître éternel; cet acte se comprend. Creuser
une fosse dépasse souvent les forces de la nature. Comment veux-tu,
étranger, que la pioche remue cette terre, qui d'abord nous nourrit, et
puis nous donne un lit commode, préservé du vent de l'hiver soufflant
avec furie dans ces froides contrées, lorsque celui qui tient la pioche,
de ses tremblantes mains, après avoir toute la journée palpé
convulsivement les joues des anciens vivants qui rentrent dans son
royaume, voit, le soir, devant lui, écrit en lettres de flammes, sur
chaque croix de bois, l'énoncé du problème effrayant que l'humanité n'a
pas encore résolu: la mortalité ou l'immortalité de l'âme. Le créateur
de l'univers, je lui ai toujours conservé mon amour; mais, si, après la
mort, nous ne devons plus exister, pourquoi vois-je, la plupart des
nuits, chaque tombe s'ouvrir, et leurs habitants soulever doucement les
lead covers, to breathe fresh air?

--Stop in your work. Emotion takes away your strength; you ... me
seem weak like the reed; it would be great folly to continue.
I am strong: I will take your place. You put yourself aside; you ... me
will give advice, if I am not doing well.

--That his arms are muscular, and that there is pleasure in looking at him
dig the earth so easily!

--It must not be that an unnecessary doubt torments your thought: all these
graves, which are scattered in a cemetery, like flowers in a
prairie, comparison that lacks truth, are worth measuring
with the philosopher's serene compass. Dangerous hallucinations
can come during the day; but, they mostly come at night. By
Therefore, do not be surprised by the fantastic visions that your eyes
seem to notice. During the day, when the mind is at rest,
question your conscience; she will tell you, with certainty, that the God who
created man with a plot of his own intelligence has a
kindness without limits, and will receive, after earthly death, this chief-
of work within it. Gravedigger, why are you crying? Why these
tears, like a woman's? Remember the good; we are
on this ship dismasted to suffer. It is a merit for man that
God judged him capable of overcoming his most serious sufferings.
Speak, and since, according to your dearest wishes, we would not suffer
not, say what virtue would consist of, ideal that everyone should strive
to reach, if your tongue is made like that of other men.

--Where am I? Have I not changed my character? I feel a breath
mighty consolation touch my reassured forehead like the breeze of the
spring revives the hope of the elderly. Who is this man whose
sublime language said things that the first comer would not have
pronounced? What a beauty of music in the incomparable melody of her
voice! I prefer to hear it speak, than sing others. However,
the more I observe it, the more its face is not blunt. The expression
general of its features contrasts singularly with these words that
the love of God alone could inspire. His forehead, wrinkled with a few folds,
is marked with an indelible stygma. This stygma, who aged him before
l'âge, est-il honorable ou est-il infâme? Ses rides doivent-elles être
regardées avec vénération? Je l'ignore et je crains de le savoir.
Quoiqu'il dise ce qu'il ne pense pas, je crois néanmoins qu'il a des
raisons pour agir comme il l'a fait, excité par les restes en lambeaux
d'une charité détruite en lui. Il est absorbé dans des méditations qui
me sont inconnues, et il redouble d'activité dans un travail ardu qu'il
n'a pas l'habitude d'entreprendre. La sueur mouille sa peau: il ne s'en
aperçoit pas. Il est plus triste que les sentiments qu'inspire la vue
d'un enfant au berceau. Oh! comme il est sombre!... D'où sors-tu?...
Étranger, permets que je touche, et que mes mains, qui étreignent
rarement celles des vivants, s'imposent sur la noblesse de ton corps.
Quoi qu'il en arrive, je saurais à quoi m'en tenir. Ces cheveux sont les
plus beaux que j'aie touchés dans ma vie. Qui serait assez audacieux
pour contester que je ne connais pas la qualité des cheveux?

--Que me veux-tu, quand je creuse une tombe? Le lion ne souhaite pas
qu'on l'agace, quand il se repaît. Si tu ne le sais pas, je te
l'apprends. Allons, dépêche-toi; accomplis ce que tu désires.

--Ce qui frissonne à mon contact, en me faisant frissonner moi-même, est
de la chair, à n'en pas douter. Il est vrai ... je ne rêve pas! Qui
es-tu donc, toi, qui te penches là pour creuser une tombe, tandis que,
comme un paresseux qui mange le pain des autres, je ne fais rien? C'est
l'heure de dormir, ou de sacrifier son repos à la science. En tout cas,
no one is absent from his house, and is careful not to leave the door open,
so as not to let thieves in. He locks himself in his room, the
best he can, while the ashes of the old chimney know
further warm the room from a remnant of heat. You don't
like the others; your clothes indicate a resident of some country
distant.

--While I am not tired, it is useless to dig the pit
more. Now undress me; then put me in it.

--The conversation, which we both have, for a few
moments, is so strange, that I do not know how to answer you ... I believe
that he wants to laugh.

--Yes, yes, it's true, I wanted to laugh; pay no more attention to what
I said.

He collapsed, and the gravedigger hastened to support him!

--What have you?

--Yes, yes, that's right, I lied ... I was tired when I
abandoned the pick ... this is the first time I have undertaken this
work ... no longer pay attention to what I said.

--My opinion takes more and more consistency: it's someone
who has appalling sorrows. Heaven take away the thought of
question him. I prefer to remain in uncertainty, as he inspires me to
pity. Then he wouldn't want to answer me, that's for sure: it's
suffer twice than to communicate his heart in this abnormal state.

- Let me out of this cemetery; I will continue my journey.

--Your legs do not support you; you would get lost while you
would walk. My duty is to offer you a coarse bed; I do not have any
else. Trust me; for hospitality will not demand
violation of your secrets.

--O venerable louse, you whose body is devoid of elytra, one day,
you bitterly reproach me for not loving your sublime enough
intelligence, which cannot be read: perhaps you were right,
since I don't even feel gratitude for this one. Lantern
from Maldoror, where do you guide his steps?

--Home. That you are a criminal, who did not have the precaution to
wash his right hand, with soap, after committing his crime, and
facile à reconnaître, par l'inspection de cette main; ou un frère qui a
perdu sa soeur; ou quelque monarque dépossédé, fuyant de ses royaumes,
mon palais vraiment grandiose, est digne de te recevoir. Il n'a pas été
built with diamond and precious stones, because it's only one
poor cottage, badly built; but, this famous thatched cottage has a past
history that the present constantly renews and continues. If she
could speak, she would surprise you, you, who seem to me not to surprise you
nothing. How many times, at the same time as she, have I seen parading before me
funeral beers, containing bones soon wormier than the
back of my door, against which I leaned. My countless
subjects are increasing every day. I don't need to do, at
fixed periods, no census to notice. Here it’s like
in the living; each pays a tax, proportional to the wealth of
the house he chose for himself; and, if some miser refused to
délivrer sa quote-part, j'ai ordre, en parlant à sa personne, de faire
comme les huissiers: il ne manque pas de chacals et de vautours qui
désireraient faire un bon repas. J'ai vu se ranger, sous les drapeaux de
la mort, celui qui fut beau; celui qui, après sa vie, n'a pas enlaidi;
l'homme, la femme, le mendiant, les fils de rois; les illusions de la
jeunesse, les squelettes des vieillards; le génie, la folie; la paresse,
son contraire; celui qui fut faux, celui qui fut vrai; le masque de
l'orgueilleux, la modestie de l'humble; le vice couronné de fleurs et
l'innocence trahie.

--Non certes, je ne refuse pas ta couche, qui est digne de moi, jusqu'à
ce que l'aurore vienne, qui ne tardera point. Je te remercie de ta
bienveillance ... Fossoyeur, il est beau de contempler les ruines des
cités; mais, il est plus beau de contempler les ruines des humains!

       *       *       *       *       *

Le frère de la sangsue marchait à pas lents dans la forêt. Il s'arrête à
plusieurs reprises, en ouvrant la bouche pour parler. Mais, chaque fois
sa gorge se resserre, et refoule en arrière l'effort avorté. Enfin, il
s'écrie: «Homme, lorsque tu rencontres un chien mort retourné, appuyé
contre une écluse qui l'empêche de partir, n'aille pas, comme les
autres, prendre avec ta main, les vers qui sortent de son ventre gonflé,
les considérer avec étonnement, ouvrir un couteau, puis en dépecer un
grand nombre, en te disant que, toi, aussi, tu ne seras pas plus que ce
chien. Quel mystère cherches-tu? Ni moi, ni les quatre pattes-nageoires
de l'ours marin de l'océan Boréal, n'avons pu trouver le problème de la
vie. Prends garde, la nuit s'approche, et tu es là depuis le matin. Que
dira ta famille, avec ta petite soeur, de te voir si tard arriver? Lave
tes mains, reprends la route qui va où tu dors ... Quel est cet être,
là-bas, à l'horizon, et qui ose approcher de moi, sans peur, à sauts
obliques et tourmentés; et quelle majesté, mêlée d'une douceur sereine!
Son regard, quoique doux, est profond. Ses paupières énormes jouent avec
la brise, et paraissent vivre. Il m'est inconnu. En fixant ses yeux
monstrueux, mon corps tremble; c'est la première fois, depuis que j'ai
sucé les sèches mamelles de ce qu'on appelle une mère. Il y a comme une
auréole de lumière éblouissante autour de lui. Quand il a parlé, tout
s'est tu dans la nature, et a éprouvé un grand frisson. Puisqu'il te
please come to me, as if attracted by a magnet, I will not oppose it
not. How handsome he is! It pains me to say it. You must be
powerful; because, you have a more than human figure, sad like the universe,
beautiful like suicide. I abhor you as much as I can; and I
prefer to see a snake, intertwined around my neck from the
beginning of centuries, that not your eyes ... How! ... it is
you, toad! ... big toad! ... unfortunate toad! ... Forgive! ...
forgive! ... What are you doing on this earth where the accursed are?
But what did you do with your slimy, foul pustules to
look so sweet? When you come down from above, by an order
superior, with the mission of consoling the various races of beings
existing, you fall on the earth, with the speed of Milan, the
wings not tired from this long, magnificent race; I live you!
Poor toad! Like then I thought of infinity, at the same time as
my weakness. "One more that is superior to those on earth, me
I said: that, by divine will. Why not too? What
good injustice, in the supreme decrees? Is it foolish, the Creator;
however the strongest, whose anger is terrible! ” Since you are me
appeared, monarch of ponds and swamps! covered with a glory which
belongs only to God, you have partly consoled me; but, my reason
tottering sinks before so much grandeur! Who are you then? Rest ...
Oh! still stay on this earth! Flip up your white wings, and don't
regarde pas en haut, avec des paupières inquiètes ... Si tu pars,
partons ensemble!» Le crapaud s'assit sur les cuisses de derrière (qui
ressemblent tant à celles de l'homme!) et, pendant que les limaces, les
cloportes et les limaçons s'enfuyaient à la vue de leur ennemi mortel,
prit la parole en ces termes: «Maldoror, écoute-moi. Remarque ma figure,
calme comme un miroir, et je crois avoir une intelligence égale à la
tienne. Un jour, tu m'appelas le soutien de ta vie. Depuis lors, je n'ai
pas démenti la confiance que tu m'avais vouée. Je ne suis qu'un simple
habitant des roseaux, c'est vrai; mais, grâce à ton propre contact, ne
prenant que ce qu'il y avait de beau en toi, ma raison s'est agrandie,
et je puis te parler. Je suis venu vers toi, afin de te retirer de
the abyss. Those who call themselves your friends look at you, struck with
dismay, every time they meet you, pale and hunched, in
theaters, in public places, in churches, or pressing,
two nervous thighs, this horse that gallops only at night,
while he is carrying his ghost master, wrapped in a long coat
black. Give up those thoughts, which make your heart empty like a desert;
they are hotter than fire. Your mind is so sick
that you do not notice it, and that you believe to be in your naturalness,
every time he makes foolish words out of your mouth, though
full of hellish grandeur. Unfortunate! what have you said since
day of your birth? O sad remains of an immortal intelligence, that
God had created with so much love! You only spawned curses
more frightful than the sight of hungry panthers! I would prefer to have
my eyelids stuck, my body missing legs and arms, having
murdered a man, what not to be you! Because I hate you. Why
have this character that surprises me? What right do you come from on this earth,
to mock those who inhabit it, rotten wreckage, tossed by
skepticism? If you don't like it, you have to go back to the spheres
where are you from. A resident of the cities must not reside in the villages,
like a stranger. We know that in spaces there are
spheres larger than ours, and whose minds have a
intelligence that we cannot even conceive of. Well, go! ...
withdraw from this mobile soil! ... finally show your divine essence, which you have
hidden so far; and, as soon as possible, direct your upward flight to
your sphere, that we do not envy, proud that you are! because, I am not
failed to recognize if you are a man or more than a man! Farewell
so; no longer hope to find the toad in your path. You were there
because of my death. I am leaving for eternity, to implore your forgiveness! ”

       * * * * *

If it sometimes makes sense to refer to the appearance of
phenomena, this first song ends here. Don't be harsh on that
who is still just trying his lyre: it makes such a strange sound!
However, if you want to be impartial, you will already recognize a
strong imprint, in the midst of imperfections. As for me, I will
put back to work, to make a second song appear, in a lapse
of time that is not too delayed. The end of the nineteenth century
will see his poet (however, at the beginning, he must not start with a
masterpiece, but follow the law of nature): he was born on the banks
America, at the mouth of the Plata, where two peoples once
rivals, are currently striving to outdo themselves by material progress
and moral. Buenos-Ayres, the Queen of the South, and Montevideo, the coquette,
extend a friendly hand across the Argentinian waters of the great estuary.
But, the eternal war placed its destructive empire on the
campaigns, and harvests with joy from numerous victims. Farewell,
old man, and think of me, if you read me. You, young man, don't you
désespère point; car, tu as un ami dans le vampire, malgré ton opinion
contraire. En comptant l'acarus sarcopte qui produit la gale, tu auras
deux amis.


FIN DU PREMIER CHANT




CHANT DEUXIÈME


Où est-il passé ce premier chant de Maldoror, depuis que sa bouche,
pleine des feuilles de la belladone, le laissa échapper, à travers les
royaumes de la colère, dans un moment de réflexion? Où est passé ce
chant ... On ne le sait pas au juste. Ce ne sont pas les arbres, ni les
vents qui l'ont gardé. Et la morale, qui passait en cet endroit, ne
présageant pas qu'elle avait, dans ces pages incandescentes, un
défenseur énergique, l'a vu se diriger, d'un pas ferme et droit, vers
les recoins obscurs et les fibres secrètes des consciences. Ce qui est
du moins acquis à la science, c'est que, depuis ce temps, l'homme, à la
toad figure, no longer recognizes himself, and often falls into
fits of fury that make him look like a beast of the woods. It's not
not his fault. In all times, he had believed, the eyelids bending
under the resedas of modesty, that it was composed only of good and
of a minimal amount of harm. Suddenly I taught him, discovering
in broad daylight its heart and its wefts, that on the contrary it is composed
that harm, and a minimal amount of good that lawmakers have of
the trouble not to let evaporate. I wish he didn't feel,
I, who teach him nothing new, an eternal shame for my
bitter truths; but, the realization of this wish would not be
conforms to the laws of nature. Indeed, I tear off the mask from its
treacherous figure full of mud, and I drop one by one, like
ivory balls on a silver basin, sublime lies with
which he himself is mistaken: it is then understandable that he
do not order calmly to lay hands on his face, even when the
reason disperses the darkness of pride. This is why the hero that
I stage an irreconcilable hatred has arisen, by attacking
humanity, which believed itself invulnerable, through the breach of the absurd
philanthropic tirades; they are piled up like grains of
sand, in his books, which I am sometimes on the verge of, when the
reason abandons me, to consider the comedian so funny, but boring. he
had foreseen it. It is not enough to carve the statue of kindness on the
pediment of the scrolls which the libraries contain. O human being!
there you are, now, naked like a worm, in the presence of my sword
diamond! Give up your method: it is no longer time to do
the proud: I send my prayer to you, in the attitude of
prostration. Someone is watching the smallest movements
of your guilty life; you are enveloped by the subtle networks of her
keen insight. Do not trust him when he turns his back;
for he looks at you; don't trust him when he closes his eyes; because,
he's still looking at you. It is difficult to assume that, affecting
cunning and wickedness, your formidable resolution is to surpass
the child of my imagination. His least blows strike. With some
precautions, it is possible to teach the one who believes to ignore it
que les loups et les brigands ne se dévorent pas entre eux: ce n'est
peut-être pas leur coutume. Par conséquent, remets sans peur, entre ses
mains, le soin de ton existence: il la conduira d'une manière qu'il
connaît. Ne crois pas à l'intention qu'il fait reluire au soleil de te
corriger; car, tu l'intéresses médiocrement, pour ne pas dire moins;
encore n'approché-je pas, de la vérité totale, la bienveillante mesure
de ma vérification. Mais, c'est qu'il aime à te faire du mal, dans la
légitime persuasion que tu deviennes aussi méchant que lui, et que tu
l'accompagnes dans le gouffre béant de l'enfer, quand son heure sonnera.
Sa place est depuis longtemps marquée, à l'endroit où l'on remarque une
potence en fer, à laquelle sont suspendus des chaînes et des carcans.
Quand la destinée l'y portera, le funèbre entonnoir n'aura jamais goûté
de proie plus savoureuse, ni lui contemplé de demeure plus convenable.
Il me semble que je parle d'une manière intentionnellement paternelle,
et que l'humanité n'a pas le droit de se plaindre.

       *       *       *       *       *

Je saisis la plume qui va construire le deuxième chant ... instrument
arraché aux ailes de quelque pygargue roux! Mais ... qu'ont-ils donc mes
doigts? Les articulations demeurent paralysées, dès que je commence mon
travail. Cependant, j'ai besoin d'écrire ... C'est impose cible! Eh bien,
je répète que j'ai besoin d'écrire ma pensée: j'ai le droit, comme un
autre, de me soumettre à cette loi naturelle ... Mais non, mais non,
la plume reste inerte!... Tenez, voyez, à travers les campagnes, l'éclair
qui brille au loin. L'orage parcourt l'espace. Il pleut ... Il pleut
toujours ... Comme il pleut!... La foudre a éclaté ... elle s'est abattue
sur ma fenêtre entr'ouverte, et m'a étendu sur le carreau, frappé au front.
Pauvre jeune homme! ton visage était déjà assez maquillé par les rides
précoces et la difformité de naissance, pour ne pas avoir besoin, en outre,
de cette longue cicatrice sulfureuse! (Je viens de supposer que la blessure
est guérie, ce qui n'arrivera pas de sitôt.) Pourquoi cet orage, et
pourquoi la paralysie de mes doigts? Est-ce un avertissement d'en haut pour
m'empêcher d'écrire, et de mieux considérer ce à quoi je m'expose, en
distillant la bave de ma bouche carrée? Mais, cet orage ne m'a pas causé
la crainte. Que m'importerait une légion d'orages! Ces agents de la police
celestial zealously perform their painful duty, if I judge it
summarily by my injured forehead. I don't have to thank the Almighty
of his remarkable address; he sent lightning so as to cut
precisely my face in two, from the forehead, where the wound
was the most dangerous: that another congratulates him! But, thunderstorms
attack someone stronger than them. So then, horrible Lord,
to the figure of a viper, it was necessary that not content with having placed my soul
between the borders of madness and the thoughts of fury that kill with
in a slow manner, you believed, moreover, suitable for your majesty, after a
ripe examination, to bring out from my forehead a cut of blood! ... But,
Finally, who is telling you something? You know that I don't love you, and that
contraire je te hais: pourquoi insistes-tu? Quand ta conduite voudra-t-elle
cesser de s'envelopper des apparences de la bizarrerie? Parle-moi
franchement, comme à un ami: est-ce que tu ne te doutes pas, enfin, que tu
montres, dans ta persécution odieuse, un empressement naïf, dont aucun de
tes séraphins n'oserait faire ressortir le complet ridicule? Quelle colère
te prend? Sache que, si tu me laissais vivre à l'abri de tes poursuites,
ma reconnaissance t'appartiendrait ... Allons, Sultan, avec ta langue,
get rid of this blood that stains the floor. The bandage is finished: my
waterproof front was washed with salt water, and I crossed
strips across my face. The result is not infinite: four
shirts, full of blood and two handkerchiefs. You wouldn't believe, at first
first, that Maldoror contained so much blood in his arteries; because on his
figure, shine only the reflections of the corpse. But, finally, it's like
it. Maybe it's almost all the blood that his body could contain,
and it’s likely there’s not much left. Enough, Enough, Dog
greedy; leave the floor as it is: you have a full stomach. He ... not
do not continue drinking: because, you will not be long in vomiting. You are
suitably sated, go to bed in the kennel; consider yourself swimming in
le bonheur; car, tu ne penseras pas à la faim, pendant trois jours
immenses, grâce aux globules que tu as descendues dans ton gosier, avec
une satisfaction solennellement visible. Toi, Léman, prends un balai: je
voudrais aussi en prendre un, mais je n'en ai pas la force. Tu comprends,
n'est-ce pas, que je n'en ai pas la force? Remets tes pleurs dans leur
fourreau; sinon, je croirai que tu n'as pas le courage de contempler,
avec sang-froid, la grande balafre, occasionnée par un supplice déjà
perdu pour moi dans la nuit des temps passés. Tu iras chercher à la
fontaine deux seaux d'eau. Une fois le parquet lavé, tu mettras ces
linges dans la chambre voisine. Si la blanchisseuse revient ce soir,
comme elle doit le faire, tu les lui remettras; mais, comme il a plu
a lot since an hour, and it continues to rain, I don't think
let her come out of her house; so she will come tomorrow morning. If she
ask where all that blood comes from, you don't have to answer it. Oh!
how weak I am! No matter: I will however have the strength to raise the
penholder and the courage to dig my thoughts. What did he report to
Creator to bother me, as if I were a child, by a thunderstorm that
bear lightning? I still persist in my resolution to write.
These strips annoy me, and the atmosphere of my room breathes the
blood ...

      * * * * *

Let it not happen the day when Lohengrin and I go into the
street, one next to the other, without looking at us, brushing against us
coude, comme deux passants pressés! Oh! qu'on me laisse fuir à jamais
loin de cette supposition! L'Éternel a créé le monde tel qu'il est: il
montrerait beaucoup de sagesse si, pendant le temps strictement
nécessaire pour briser d'un coup de marteau la tête d'une femme, il
forgot his sidereal majesty, in order to reveal the mysteries to us
amidst which our existence suffocates, like a fish at the bottom of a
small boat. But, he is tall and noble; he prevails over us by the
power of his designs; if he were to negotiate with men, all
shame would spill over to his face. But ... miserable that you
es! why don't you blush It is not enough that the
physical and moral pain, which surrounds us, was born: the
secret of our destiny in rags is not disclosed to us. I the
know, the Almighty ... and he, too, must know me. If, by
chance, we walk on the same path, his piercing sight sees me
arrive from a distance: it takes a side road, in order to avoid the triple
platinum dart that nature gave me like a tongue! You will make me
pleasure, O Creator, to let me pour out my feelings. Wielding them
terrible ironies, with a firm and cold hand, I warn you that my
heart will contain enough to attack me until the end
of my existence. I'll hit your hollow carcass: but, so hard, that I
instructs me to bring out the remaining plots of intelligence that
you didn't want to give to the man, because you would have been jealous of him
make equal to you, and that you had brazenly hidden in your guts,
cunning bandit, as if you didn't know that sooner or later I would
would have discovered with my eye still open, would have removed them, and
would have shared them with my fellow men. I did as I speak,
et, maintenant, ils ne te craignent plus; ils traitent de puissance à
puissance avec toi. Donne-moi la mort, pour faire repentir mon audace:
je découvre ma poitrine et j'attends avec humilité. Apparaissez donc,
envergures dérisoires de châtiments éternels!... déploiements
emphatiques d'attributs trop vantés! Il a manifesté l'incapacité
d'arrêter la circulation de mon sang qui le nargue. Cependant, j'ai des
preuves qu'il n'hésite pas d'éteindre, à la fleur de l'âge, le souffle
d'autres humains, quand ils ont à peine goûté les jouissances de la vie.
C'est simplement atroce; mais, seulement, d'après la faiblesse de mon
opinion! J'ai vu le Créateur, aiguillonnant sa cruauté inutile, embraser
des incendies où périssaient les vieillards et les enfants! Ce n'est pas
me who starts the attack: it is he who forces me to make it turn,
as well as a spinning top, with the whip with steel ropes. Is it not him
who provides me with charges against himself? Will not dry up my verve
appalling! She feeds on insane nightmares that torment
my insomnia. It is because of Lohengrin that the above was
written; So let's come back to him. In fear that it would become later
like the other men, I had first resolved to kill him with
knife, when he would have passed the age of innocence. But I
thought about it, and I wisely gave up my resolution in time. He never
have no doubt that his life was in jeopardy for a quarter of an hour. All was
ready, and the knife had been bought. This stylus was cute, because I like
la grâce et l'élégance jusque dans les appareils de la mort: mais il
était long et pointu. Une seule blessure au cou, en perçant avec soin
une des artères carotides, et je crois que ç'aurait suffi. Je suis
content de ma conduite; je me serais repenti plus tard. Donc, Lohengrin,
fais ce que tu voudras, agis comme il te plaira, enferme-moi toute la
vie dans une prison obscure, avec des scorpions pour compagnons de ma
captivité, ou arrache-moi un oeil jusqu'à ce qu'il tombe à terre, je ne
will never reproach you: I am yours, I belong to you, I
don't live for me anymore. The pain you cause me won't be
comparable to the joy of knowing that the one who hurts me with his hands
murderous, is steeped in a more divine essence than that of its
alike! Yes, it's still beautiful to give your life for a human being,
and thus keep the hope that not all men are
bad guys, since there was one, finally, who knew how to attract, by force,
towards you, the defiant reluctance of my bitter sympathy! ...

       * * * * *

It's midnight; we do not see a single Bastille omnibus at the
Madeleine. I am wrong; there is one that suddenly appears, as if it
came out from underground. The few late passers-by look at him
carefully; because it looks like no other. Are seated,
imperial, men who have a motionless eye, like that of a
dead fish. They are pressed against each other, and appear
to have lost your life; moreover, the statutory number is not exceeded.
When the driver gives his horses a boost, it looks like
it is the whip that makes his arm move, not his arm the whip.
What must this assembly of bizarre and dumb beings be? Are they
inhabitants of the moon? There are times when one would be tempted to
believe; but, they look more like corpses. The bus, in a hurry
arrive at the last station, devour the space and crack the pavement
... He fled! ... But, a shapeless mass pursues him fiercely,
on his tracks, in the middle of the dust. “Stop, I beg you;
stop ... my legs are swollen from walking during the day
... I haven't eaten since yesterday ... my parents abandoned me ... I
do not know, what to do ... I am resolved to return home, and I will
would have arrived quickly, if you gave me a place ... I am a little
child of eight years, and I trust you ... "He fled! ... He
flees! ... But, a mass informs pursues it relentlessly, on
his tracks, in the middle of the dust. One of these cold-eyed men
nudges his neighbor, and seems to express his
dissatisfaction with these groans, Argentinian stamp, which reach
up to his ear. The other bows his head in an imperceptible way
in the form of acquiescence, and then plunges back into the stillness of
his selfishness, like a turtle in his shell. Everything indicates in
traits of other travelers the same feelings as those of the two
first. The screams are still heard for two or three
minutes, more piercing from second to second. We see windows
open onto the boulevard, and a frightened figure, light in hand,
after looking up at the road, close the shutter with
impetuosity, so as not to reappear ... He fled! ... He fled! ...
But, a shapeless mass pursues it relentlessly, on its tracks,
middle of the dust. Alone, a young man, immersed in reverie,
middle of these stone characters, seems to feel pity for
unhappiness. In favor of the child, who believes he can reach him, with
his sore little legs, he dares not raise his voice; because the
other men look at him with contempt and authority, and he
knows he can't do anything against everyone. The elbow resting on his
knees and head in his hands, he wonders, amazed, if it's there
really what is called _human charity_. He then recognizes that
it's just an empty word, which you can't even find in the dictionary
poetry, and frankly admits his error. He said to himself: "Indeed,
why care about a small child? Let’s leave it aside. ”
However, a burning tear fell on the cheek of this adolescent, who
just blasphemed. He painfully runs his hand over his forehead, as
pour en écarter un nuage dont l'opacité obscurcit son intelligence. Il
se démène, mais en vain, dans le siècle où il a été jeté; il sent qu'il
n'y est pas à sa place, et cependant il ne peut en sortir. Prison
terrible! Fatalité hideuse! Lombano, je suis content de toi depuis ce
jour! Je ne cessais pas de t'observer, pendant que ma figure respirait
la même indifférence que celle des autres voyageurs. L'adolescent se
lève, dans un mouvement d'indignation, et veut se retirer, pour ne pas
participer, même involontairement, à une mauvaise action. Je lui fais un
signe, et il se remet à mon côté ... Il s'enfuit! Il s'enfuit!... Mais
une masse informe le poursuit avec acharnement, sur ces traces, au
milieu de la poussière. Les cris cessent subitement, car l'enfant a
touched with a foot against a protruding pavement, and was injured
to the head, falling. The bus has disappeared on the horizon and you can't see
more than the silent street ... He runs away! ... He runs away! ... But a
shapeless mass no longer pursues it relentlessly, on these traces,
middle of the dust. See this ragpicker passing by, bent over his
pale lantern; there is more heart in him than in all his peers
from the highway. He just picked up the child; be sure he will cure him
and will not abandon him, as his parents did. He runs away! ... He
flees! ... But, from where he is, the piercing gaze of the
ragpicker pursues him furiously, on his tracks, in the middle of
dust! ... Stupid and stupid race! You will repent of driving yourself
so. I'm the one telling you. You will repent, go! you go away
repent. My poetry will only consist in attacking, by all means,
man, this wild beast, and the Creator, who should not have fathered
such a vermin. Volumes will pile up on volumes, up to
the end of my life, and yet we will only see this one idea,
always present to my conscience!

       * * * * *

Going for my daily walk, every day I passed on a street
narrow: every day, a slender girl of ten years followed me,
distance, respectfully, along this street, looking at me with
sympathetic and curious eyelids. She was tall for her age
and was slim. Abundant black hair, split in half
on the head fell in independent braids on shoulders
marmoreal. One day, she followed me as usual; arms
muscle of a common woman grabs her by the hair, like the
whirlpool grabbed the sheet, applied two brutal slaps to one cheek
proud and mute, and brought that lost conscience back into the house. In
vain, I was carefree; she never failed to chase me
of his untimely presence. When I was stepping over another street,
continue my way, she stopped, making a violent effort on
herself, at the end of this narrow street, motionless like the statue of the
Silence, and kept looking in front of her, until I
disappears. Once, this young girl preceded me on the street, and
followed in front of me. If I went quickly to overtake her, she
almost ran to keep the distance equal; but, if I
slow down, so that there is a path interval, enough
big between her and me, so she slowed it down too, and put it in
the grace of childhood. At the end of the street, she turned around
slowly, so as to block my way. I did not have time
to slip away, and I found myself in front of his face. She had eyes
swollen and red. I could easily see that she wanted to talk to me, and
that she didn't know how to do it. Suddenly pale as a
corpse, she asked me, "Would you be so kind as to tell me what time
is it?" I told her I was not wearing a watch, and I walked away
quickly. From that day, a child with a worried and precocious imagination,
tu n'as plus revu, dans la rue étroite, le jeune homme mystérieux qui
battait péniblement, de sa sandale lourde, le pavé des carrefours
tortueux. L'apparition de cette comète enflammée ne reluira plus, comme
un triste sujet de curiosité fanatique, sur la façade de ton observation
déçue; et, tu penseras souvent, trop souvent, peut-être toujours, à
the one who did not seem to worry about the evils, nor the goods of the life
present, and went off at random, with a horribly dead figure,
spiky hair, shaky gait, and swimming arms
blindly in the ironic waters of ether as if to seek the
bloody prey of hope, tossed continually, through the
immense regions of space, by the relentless snow plow of the
fatality. You will not see me any more, and I will not see you any more! ... Who knows?
Maybe this girl was not what she was showing herself. Under a
naive envelope, it hid perhaps an immense cunning, the weight of
eighteen years, and the charm of vice. We saw love sellers
expatriate with gaiety from the British Isles, and cross the strait.
They radiated their wings, spinning, in golden swarms, in front
Parisian light; and when you saw them, you said, "But
they are still children; they are no more than ten or twelve years old. ”
In reality they had twenty. Oh! in this supposition, damned
may they be the detours of this obscure street! Horrible! horrible! what
happens there. I think her mother hit her because she didn't
son métier avec assez d'adresse. Il est possible que ce ne fût qu'un
enfant, et alors la mère est plus coupable encore. Moi, je ne veux pas
croire à cette supposition, qui n'est qu'une hypothèse, et je préfère
aimer, dans ce caractère romanesque, une âme qui se dévoile trop tôt ...
Ah! vois-tu, jeune fille, je t'engage à ne plus reparaître devant mes
yeux, si jamais je repasse dans la rue étroite. Il pourrait t'en coûter
cher! Déjà le sang et la haine me montent vers la tête, à flots
bouillants. Moi, être assez généreux pour aimer mes semblables! Non,
non! Je l'ai résolu depuis le jour de ma naissance! Ils ne m'aiment pas,
eux! On verra les mondes se détruire, et le granit glisser, comme un
cormoran, sur la surface des flots, avant que je touche la main infâme
d'un être humain. Arrière ... arrière, cette main!... Jeune fille, tu
n'es pas un ange, et tu deviendras, en somme, comme les autres femmes.
Non, non, je t'en supplie; ne reparais plus devant mes sourcils froncés
et louches. Dans un moment d'égarement, je pourrais te prendre les bras,
les tordre comme un linge lavé dont on exprime l'eau, ou les casser avec
smash like two dry branches, and then make you eat them,
using force. I could, taking your head in my hands,
caressingly and softly, stick my greedy fingers in the lobes
from your innocent brain, to extract from it, a smile on your lips, a
effective fat that washes my eyes, sore from eternal insomnia
of life. I could, sewing your eyelids with a needle, you
deprive the spectacle of the universe, and make you impossible
to find your way; I will not be your guide. I
could, lifting your virgin body with an arm wrestling, grab you by
legs, roll you around like a sling, focus
my strengths by describing the last circumference, and launching yourself against
the wall. Every drop of blood will spatter on a human chest,
to scare men, and set before them the example of my
wickedness! They will tear themselves away without shreds of shreds and shreds of
flesh; but, the drop of blood remains indelible, in the same place, and
will shine like a diamond. Don't worry, I will give to a
half a dozen servants the order to keep the revered remains of your
body, and keep them from the hunger of voracious dogs. No doubt, the
body remained stuck on the wall, like a ripe pear, and is not
not fall to the ground; but, dogs can jump high,
if we are not careful.

       * * * * *

This child, who sits on a bench in the Tuileries garden, as he
est gentil! Ses yeux hardis dardent quelque objet invisible, au loin,
dans l'espace. Il ne doit pas avoir plus de huit ans, et, cependant, il
ne s'amuse pas, comme il serait convenable. Tout au moins il devrait
rire et se promener avec quelque camarade, au lieu de rester seul; mais,
ce n'est pas son caractère.

Cet enfant, qui est assis sur un banc du jardin des Tuileries, comme il
est gentil! Un homme, mû par un dessein caché, vient s'asseoir à côté de
lui, sur le même banc, avec des allures équivoques. Qui est-ce? Je n'ai
pas besoin de vous le dire; car, vous le reconnaîtrez à sa conversation
tortueuse. Écoutons-les, ne les dérangeons pas:

--A quoi pensais-tu, enfant?

--Je pensais au ciel.

--Il n'est pas nécessaire que tu penses au ciel; c'est déjà assez de
penser à la terre. Es-tu fatigué de vivre, toi qui viens à peine de
naître?

--Non, mais chacun préfère le ciel à la terre.

--Eh bien, pas moi. Car, puisque le ciel a été fait par Dieu, ainsi que
la terre, sois sûr que tu y rencontreras les mêmes maux qu'ici-bas.
Après ta mort, tu ne seras pas récompensé d'après tes mérites; car, si
l'on te commet des injustices sur cette terre (comme tu l'éprouveras,
par expérience, plus tard), il n'y a pas de raison pour que, dans
l'autre vie, on ne t'en commette non plus. Ce que tu as de mieux à
faire, c'est de ne pas penser à Dieu, et de te faire justice toi-même,
puisqu'on te la refuse. Si un de tes camarades t'offensait, est-ce que
tu ne serais pas heureux de le tuer?

--Mais, c'est défendu.

--Ce n'est pas si défendu que tu crois. Il s'agit seulement de ne pas se
laisser attraper. La justice qu'apportent les lois ne vaut rien; c'est
la jurisprudence de l'offensé qui compte. Si tu détestais un de tes
camarades, est-ce que tu ne serais pas malheureux de songer qu'à chaque
instant tu aies sa pensée devant tes yeux?

--C'est vrai.

--Voilà donc un de tes camarades qui te rendrait malheureux toute ta
vie: car, voyant que ta haine n'est que passive, il ne continuera pas
moins de se narguer de toi, et de te causer du mal impunément. Il n'y a
donc qu'un moyen de faire cesser la situation; c'est de se débarrasser
de son ennemi. Voilà où je voulais en venir, pour te faire comprendre
sur quelles bases est fondée la société actuelle. Chacun doit se faire
justice lui-même, sinon il n'est qu'un imbécile. Celui qui remporte la
victoire sur ses semblables, celui-là est le plus rusé et le plus fort.
Est-ce que tu ne voudrais pas un jour dominer tes semblables?

--Oui, oui.

--Sois donc le plus fort et le plus rusé. Tu es encore trop jeune pour
être le plus fort; mais, dès aujourd'hui, tu peux employer la ruse, le
plus bel instrument des hommes de génie. Lorsque le berger David
atteignait au front le géant Goliath d'une pierre lancée par la fronde,
est-ce qu'il n'est pas admirable de remarquer que c'est seulement par
la ruse que David a vaincu son adversaire, et que si, au contraire, ils
s'étaient pris à bras-le-corps, le géant l'aurait écrasé comme une
mouche? Il en est de même pour toi. A guerre ouverte, tu ne pourras
jamais vaincre les hommes, sur lesquels tu es désireux d'étendre ta
volonté; mais, avec la ruse, tu pourras lutter seul contre tous. Tu
désires les richesses, les beaux palais et la gloire? ou m'as-tu trompé
quand tu m'as affirmé ces nobles prétentions?

--Non, non, je ne vous trompais pas. Mais, je voudrais acquérir ce que
je désire par d'autres moyens.

--Alors, tu n'acquerras rien du tout. Les moyens vertueux et bonasses ne
mènent à rien. Il faut mettre à l'oeuvre des leviers plus énergiques et
des trames plus savantes. Avant que tu deviennes célèbre par ta vertu et
que tu atteignes le but, cent autres auront le temps de faire des
cabrioles par dessus ton dos, et d'arriver au bout de la carrière avant
toi, de telle manière qu'il ne s'y trouvera plus de place pour tes idées
étroites. Il faut savoir embrasser, avec plus de grandeur, l'horizon du
temps présent. N'as-tu jamais entendu parler, par exemple, de la gloire
immense qu'apportent les victoires? Et, cependant, les victoires ne se
font pas seules. Il faut verser du sang, beaucoup de sang, pour les
engendrer et les déposer aux pieds des conquérants. Sans les cadavres
et les membres épars que tu aperçois dans la plaine, où s'est opéré
sagement le carnage, il n'y aurait pas de guerre, et, sans guerre, il
n'y aurait pas de victoire. Tu vois que, lorsqu'on veut devenir célèbre,
il faut se plonger avec grâce dans des fleuves de sang, alimentés par
de la chair à canon. Le but excuse le moyen. La première chose, pour
devenir célèbre, est d'avoir de l'argent. Or, comme tu n'en as pas, il
faudra assassiner pour en acquérir; mais, comme tu n'es pas assez fort
pour manier le poignard, fais-toi voleur, en attendant que tes membres
aient grossi. Et, pour qu'ils grossissent plus vite, je te conseille de
faire de la gymnastique deux fois par jour, une heure le matin, une
heure le soir. De cette manière, tu pourras essayer le crime, avec un
certain succès, dès l'âge de quinze ans, au lieu d'attendre jusqu'à
vingt. L'amour de la gloire excuse tout, et peut-être, plus tard, maître
de tes semblables, leur feras-tu presque autant de bien que tu leur as
fait du mal au commencement ...

Maldoror s'aperçoit que le sang bouillonne dans la tête de son jeune
interlocuteur; ses narines sont gonflées, et ses lèvres rejettent une
légère écume blanche. Il lui tâte le pouls; les pulsations sont
précipitées. La fièvre a gagné ce corps délicat. Il craint les suites de
ses paroles; il s'esquive, le malheureux, contrarié de n'avoir pas pu
entretenir cet enfant pendant plus longtemps. Lorsque, dans l'âge mûr,
il est si difficile de maîtriser les passions, balancé entre le bien et
le mal, qu'est-ce dans un esprit, encore plein d'inexpérience? et quelle
somme d'énergie relative ne lui faut-il pas en plus? L'enfant en sera
quitte pour garder le lit trois jours. Plût au ciel que le contact
maternel amène la paix dans cette fleur sensible, fragile enveloppe
d'une belle âme!

      *       *       *       *       *

Là, dans un bosquet entouré de fleurs, dort l'hermaphrodite,
profondément assoupi sur le gazon, mouillé de ses pleurs. La lune a
dégagé son disque de la masse des nuages, et caresse avec ses pâles
rayons cette douce figure d'adolescent. Ses traits expriment l'énergie
la plus virile, en même temps que la grâce d'une vierge céleste. Rien ne
paraît naturel en lui, pas même les muscles de son corps, qui se fraient
un passage à travers les contours harmonieux de formes féminines. Il a
le bras recourbé sur le front, l'autre main appuyée contre la poitrine,
comme pour comprimer les battements d'un coeur fermé à toutes les
confidences, et chargé du pesant fardeau d'un secret éternel. Fatigué de
la vie, et honteux de marcher parmi des êtres qui ne lui ressemblent
pas, le désespoir a gagné son âme, et il s'en va seul, comme le mendiant
de la vallée. Comment se procure-t-il les moyens d'existence? Des âmes
compatissantes veillent de près sur lui, sans qu'il se doute de cette
surveillance, et ne l'abandonnent pas: il est si bon! il est si résigné!
Volontiers il parle quelquefois avec ceux qui ont le caractère sensible,
sans leur toucher la main, et se tient à distance, dans la crainte d'un
danger imaginaire. Si on lui demande pourquoi il a pris la solitude pour
compagne, ses yeux se lèvent vers le ciel, et retiennent avec peine une
larme de reproche contre la Providence; mais, il ne répond pas à cette
question imprudente, qui répand, dans la neige de ses paupières, la
rougeur de la rose matinale. Si l'entretien se prolonge, il devient
inquiet, tourne les yeux vers les quatre points de l'horizon, comme pour
chercher à fuir la présence d'un ennemi invisible qui s'approche, fait
de la main un adieu brusque, s'éloigne sur les ailes de sa pudeur en
éveil, et disparaît dans la forêt. On le prend généralement pour un fou.
Un jour, quatre hommes masqués, qui avaient reçu des ordres, se jetèrent
sur lui et le garrottèrent solidement, de manière qu'il ne put remuer
que les jambes. Le fouet abattit ses rudes lanières sur son dos, et ils
lui dirent qu'il se dirigeât sans délai vers la route qui mène à
Bicêtre. Il se mit à sourire en recevant les coups, et leur parla avec
tant de sentiment, d'intelligence sur beaucoup de sciences humaines
qu'il avait étudiées et qui montraient une grande instruction dans celui
qui n'avait pas encore franchi le seuil de la jeunesse, et sur les
destinées de l'humanité où il dévoila entière la noblesse poétique de
son âme, que ses gardiens, épouvantés jusqu'au sang de l'action qu'ils
avaient commise, délièrent ses membres brisés, se traînèrent à ses
genoux, en demandant un pardon qui fut accordé, et s'éloignèrent, avec
les marques d'une vénération qui ne s'accorde pas ordinairement aux
hommes. Depuis cet événement, dont on parla beaucoup, son secret fut
deviné par chacun, mais on paraît l'ignorer, pour ne pas augmenter ses
souffrances; et le gouvernement lui accorde une pension honorable, pour
lui faire oublier qu'un instant on voulut l'introduire par force, sans
vérification préalable, dans un hospice d'aliénés. Lui, il emploie la
moitié de son argent; le reste, il le donne aux pauvres. Quand il voit
un homme et une femme qui se promènent dans quelque allée de platanes,
il sent son corps se fendre en deux de bas en haut, et chaque partie
nouvelle aller étreindre un des promeneurs; mais, ce n'est qu'une
hallucination, et la raison ne tarde pas à reprendre son empire. C'est
pourquoi il ne mêle sa présence, ni parmi les hommes, ni parmi les
femmes; car sa pudeur excessive, qui a pris jour dans cette idée qu'il
n'est qu'un monstre, l'empêche d'accorder sa sympathie brûlante à qui
que ce soit. Il croirait se profaner, et il croirait profaner les
autres. Son orgueil lui répète cet axiome: «Que chacun reste dans sa
nature.» Son orgueil, ai-je dit, parce qu'il craint qu'en joignant sa
vie à un homme ou à une femme, on ne lui reproche tôt ou tard, comme une
faute énorme, la conformation de son organisation. Alors, il se retranche
dans son amour-propre, offensé par cette supposition impie qui ne vient
que de lui, et il persévère à rester seul, au milieu des tourments,
et sans consolation. Là, dans un bosquet entouré de fleurs, dort
l'hermaphrodite, profondément assoupi sur le gazon, mouillé de ses pleurs.
Les oiseaux, éveillés, contemplent avec ravissement cette figure
mélancolique, à travers les branches des arbres, et le rossignol ne veut
pas faire entendre ses cavatines de cristal. Le bois est devenu auguste
comme une tombe, par la présence nocturne de l'hermaphrodite infortuné.
O voyageur égaré, par ton esprit d'aventure qui t'a fait quitter ton
père et ta mère, dès l'âge le plus tendre: par les souffrances que la
soif t'a causées, dans le désert: par ta patrie que tu cherches
peut-être, après avoir longtemps erré, proscrit, dans des contrées
étrangères; par ton coursier, ton fidèle ami, qui a supporté, avec toi,
l'exil et l'intempérie des climats que te faisait parcourir ton humeur
vagabonde; par la dignité que donnent à l'homme les voyages sur les
terres lointaines et les mers inexplorées, au milieu des glaçons
polaires, ou sous l'influence d'un soleil torride, ne touche pas avec
ta main, comme avec un frémissement de la brise, ces boucles de cheveux,
répandues sur le sol, et qui se mêlent à l'herbe verte. Ecarte-toi de
plusieurs pas, et tu agiras mieux ainsi. Cette chevelure est sacrée;
c'est l'hermaphrodite lui-même qui l'a voulu. Il ne veut pas que des
lèvres humaines embrassent religieusement ses cheveux, parfumés par le
souffle de la montagne, pas plus que son front, qui resplendit, en cet
instant, comme les étoiles du firmament. Mais, il vaut mieux croire
que c'est une étoile elle-même qui est descendue de son orbite, en
traversant l'espace, sur ce front majestueux, qu'elle entoure avec sa
clarté de diamant, comme d'une auréole. La nuit, écartant du doigt sa
tristesse, se revêt de tous ses charmes pour fêter le sommeil de cette
incarnation de la pudeur, de cette image parfaite de l'innocence des
anges: le bruissement des insectes est moins perceptible. Les branches
penchent sur lui leur élévation touffue, afin de le préserver de la
rosée, et la brise, faisant résonner les cordes de sa harpe mélodieuse,
envoie ses accords joyeux, à travers le silence universel, vers ces
paupières baissées, qui croient assister, immobiles, au concert cadencé
des mondes suspendus. Il rêve qu'il est heureux; que sa nature
corporelle a changé: ou que, du moins, il s'est envolé sur un nuage
pourpre, vers une autre sphère, habitée par des êtres de même nature que
lui. Hélas! que son illusion se prolonge jusqu'au réveil de l'aurore!
Il rêve que les fleurs dansent autour de lui en rond, comme d'immenses
guirlandes folles, et l'imprègnent de leurs parfums suaves, pendant
qu'il chante un hymne d'amour, entre les bras d'un être humain d'une
beauté magique. Mais, ce n'est qu'une vapeur crépusculaire que ses bras
entrelacent; et, quand il se réveillera, ses bras ne l'entrelaceront
plus. Ne te réveille pas, hermaphrodite; ne te réveille pas encore, je
t'en supplie. Pourquoi ne veux-tu pas me croire? Dors ... dors toujours.
Que ta poitrine se soulève, en poursuivant l'espoir chimérique du
bonheur, je te le permets; mais, n'ouvre pas tes yeux. Ah! n'ouvre pas
tes yeux! Je veux te quitter ainsi, pour ne pas être témoin de ton
réveil. Peut-être un jour, à l'aide d'un livre volumineux, dans des
pages émues, raconterai-je ton histoire, épouvanté de ce qu'elle
contient, et des enseignements qui s'en dégagent. Jusqu'ici, je ne
l'ai pas pu; car, chaque fois que je l'ai voulu, d'abondantes larmes
tombaient sur le papier, et mes doigts tremblaient, sans que ce fût de
vieillesse. Mais, je veux avoir à la fin ce courage. Je suis indigné
de n'avoir pas plus de nerfs qu'une femme, et de m'évanouir, comme une
petite fille, chaque fois que je réfléchis à ta grande misère. Dors ...
dors toujours; mais n'ouvre pas tes yeux! Adieu, hermaphrodite! Chaque
jour, je ne manquerai pas de prier le ciel pour toi (si c'était pour
moi, je ne le prierais point). Que la paix soit dans ton sein!

       *       *       *       *       *

Quand une femme, à la voix de soprano, émet ses notes vibrantes et
mélodieuses, à l'audition de cette harmonie humaine, mes yeux se
remplissent d'une flamme latente et lancent des étincelles douloureuses,
tandis que dans mes oreilles semble retentir le tocsin de la canonnade.
D'où peut venir cette répugnance profonde pour tout ce qui tient à
l'homme? Si les accords s'envolent des fibres d'un instrument, j'écoute
avec volupté ces notes perlées qui s'échappent en cadence à travers les
ondes élastiques de l'atmosphère. La perception ne transmet à mon ouïe
qu'une impression d'une douceur à fondre les nerfs et la pensée; un
assoupissement ineffable enveloppe de ses pavots magiques, comme d'un
voile qui tamise la lumière du jour, la puissance active de mes sens et
les forces vivaces de mon imagination. On raconte que je naquis entre
les bras de la surdité! Aux premières époques de mon enfance, je
n'entendais pas ce qu'on me disait. Quand, avec les plus grandes
difficultés, on parvint à m'apprendre à parler, c'était seulement, après
avoir lu sur une feuille ce que quelqu'un écrivait, que je pouvais
communiquer, à mon tour, le fil de mes raisonnements. Un jour, jour
néfaste, je grandissais en beauté et en innocence; et chacun admirait
l'intelligence et la bonté du divin adolescent. Beaucoup de consciences
rougissaient quand elles contemplaient ces traits limpides où son âme
avait placé son trône. On ne s'approchait de lui qu'avec vénération,
parce qu'on remarquait dans ses yeux le regard d'un ange. Mais non, je
savais de reste que les roses heureuses de l'adolescence ne devaient pas
fleurir perpétuellement, tressées en guirlandes capricieuses, sur son
front modeste et noble, qu'embrassaient avec frénésie toutes les mères.
Il commençait à me sembler que l'univers, avec sa voûte étoilée de
globes impassibles et agaçants, n'était peut-être pas ce que j'avais
rêvé de plus grandiose. Un jour, donc, fatigué de talonner du pied le
sentier abrupte du voyage terrestre, et de m'en aller, en chancelant
comme un homme ivre, à travers les catacombes obscures de la vie, je
soulevai avec lenteur mes yeux spleenétiques, cernés d'un grand cercle
bleuâtre, vers la concavité du firmament, et j'osai pénétrer, moi, si
jeune, les mystères du ciel! Ne trouvant pas ce que je cherchais, je
soulevai la paupière effarée plus haut, plus haut encore, jusqu'à ce que
j'aperçusse un trône, formé d'excréments humains et d'or, sur lequel
trônait, avec un orgueil idiot, le corps recouvert d'un linceul fait
avec des draps non lavés d'hôpital, celui qui s'intitule lui-même le
Créateur! Il tenait à la main le trône pourri d'un homme mort, et le
portait, alternativement, des yeux au nez et du nez à la bouche; une
fois à la bouche, on devine ce qu'il en faisait. Ses pieds plongeaient
dans une vaste mare de sang en ébullition, à la surface duquel
s'élevaient tout à coup, comme des ténias à travers le contenu d'un pot
de chambre, deux ou trois têtes prudentes, et qui s'abaissaient
aussitôt, avec la rapidité de la flèche: un coup de pied, bien appliqué
sur l'os du nez, était la récompense connue de la révolte au règlement,
occasionnée par le besoin de respirer un autre milieu; car, enfin, ces
hommes n'étaient pas des poissons! Amphibies tout au plus, ils nageaient
entre deux eaux dans ce liquide immonde!... jusqu'à ce que, n'ayant plus
rien dans la main, le Créateur, avec les deux premières griffes du pied,
saisit un autre plongeur par le cou, comme dans une tenaille, et le
soulevât en l'air, en dehors de la vase rougeâtre, sauce exquise! Pour
celui-là, il faisait comme pour l'autre. Il lui dévorait d'abord la
tête, les jambes et les bras, et en dernier lieu le tronc, jusqu'à ce
qu'il ne restât plus rien; car, il croquait les os. Ainsi de suite,
durant les autres heures de son éternité. Quelquefois il s'écriait: «Je
vous ai créés; donc j'ai le droit de faire de vous ce que je veux. Vous
ne m'avez rien fait, je ne dis pas le contraire. Je vous fais souffrir,
et c'est pour mon plaisir.» Et il reprenait son repas cruel, en remuant
sa mâchoire inférieure, laquelle remuait sa barbe pleine de cervelle.
O lecteur, ce dernier détail ne te fait-il pas venir l'eau à la bouche?
N'en mange pas qui vont d'une pareille cervelle, si bonne, toute fraîche
et qui vient d'être pêchée il n'y a qu'un quart d'heure dans le lac aux
_poissons_. Les membres paralysés, et la gorge muette, je contemplai
quelque temps ce spectacle. Trois fois, je faillis tomber à la renverse,
comme un homme qui subit une émotion trop forte; trois fois, je parvins
à me remettre sur les pieds. Pas une fibre de mon corps ne restait
immobile; et je tremblais, comme tremble la lave intérieure d'un volcan.
A la fin, ma poitrine oppressée, ne pouvant chasser avec assez de
vitesse l'air qui donne la vie, les lèvres de ma bouche s'entr'ouvrirent,
et je poussai un cri ... un cri si déchirant ... que je l'entendis! Les
entraves de mon oreille se délièrent d'une manière brusque, le tympan
craqua sous le choc de cette masse d'air sonore repoussée loin de moi
avec énergie, et il se passa un phénomène nouveau dans l'organe condamné
par la nature. Je venais d'entendre un son! Un cinquième sens se révélait
en moi! Mais, quel plaisir eusse-je pu trouver d'une pareille découverte?
Désormais, le son humain n'arriva à mon oreille qu'avec le sentiment de
la douleur qu'engendre la pitié pour une grande injustice. Quand quelqu'un
me parlait, je me rappelais ce que j'avais vu, un jour, au-dessus des
sphères visibles, et la traduction de mes sentiments étouffés en un
hurlement impétueux, dont le timbre était identique à celui de mes
semblables! Je ne pouvais pas lui répondre; car, les supplices exercés
sur la faiblesse de l'homme, dans cette mer hideuse de pourpre, passaient
devant mon front en rugissant comme des éléphants écorchés, et rasaient
de leurs ailes de feu mes cheveux calcinés. Plus tard, quand je connus
davantage l'humanité, à ce sentiment de pitié se joignit une fureur
intense contre cette tigresse marâtre, dont les enfants endurcis ne savent
que maudire et faire le mal. Audace du mensonge! ils disent que le mal
n'est chez eux qu'à l'état d'exception!... Maintenant, c'est fini depuis
longtemps; depuis longtemps, je n'adresse la parole à personne. O vous,
qui que vous soyez, quand vous serez à côté de moi, que les cordes de
votre glotte ne laissent échapper aucune intonation; que votre larynx
immobile n'aille pas s'efforcer de surpasser le rossignol; et vous-même
n'essayez nullement de me faire connaître votre âme à l'aide du langage.
Gardez un silence religieux, que rien n'interrompe; croisez humblement
vos mains sur la poitrine, et dirigez vos paupières sur le bas. Je vous
l'ai dit, depuis la vision qui me fit connaître la vérité suprême, assez
de cauchemars ont sucé avidement ma gorge, pendant les nuits et les jours,
pour avoir encore le courage de renouveler, même par la pensée, les
souffrances que j'éprouvai dans cette heure infernale, qui me poursuit
sans relâche de son souvenir. Oh! quand vous entendez l'avalanche de
neige tomber du haut de la froide montagne; la lionne se plaindre, au
désert aride, de la disparition de ses petits; la tempête accomplir sa
destinée; le condamné mugir, dans la prison, la veille de la guillotine;
et le poulpe féroce raconter, aux vagues de la mer, ses victoires sur
les nageurs et les naufragés, dites-le, ces voix majestueuses ne
sont-elle pas plus belles que le ricanement de l'homme!

       *       *       *       *       *

Il existe un insecte que les hommes nourrissent à leurs frais. Ils ne
lui doivent rien; mais, ils le craignent. Celui-ci, qui n'aime pas le
vin, mais qui préfère le sang, si on ne satisfaisait pas à ses besoins
légitimes, serait capable par un pouvoir occulte, de devenir aussi gros
qu'un éléphant, d'écraser les hommes comme des épis. Aussi faut-il voir
comme on le respecte, comme on l'entoure d'une vénération canine, comme
on le place en haute estime au-dessus des animaux de la création. On lui
donne la tête pour trône, et lui, accroche ses griffes à la racine des
cheveux, avec dignité. Plus tard, lorsqu'il est gras et qu'il entre dans
un âge avancé, en imitant la coutume d'un peuple ancien, on le tue, afin
de ne pas lui faire sentir les atteintes de la vieillesse. On lui fait
des funérailles grandioses, comme à un héros, et la bière, qui le conduit
directement vers le couvercle de la tombe, est portée, sur les épaules,
par les principaux citoyens. Sur la terre humide que le fossoyeur remue
avec sa pelle sagace, on combine des phrases multicolores sur l'immortalité
de l'âme, sur le néant de la vie, sur la volonté inexplicable de la
Providence, et le marbre se referme, à jamais, sur cette existence,
laborieusement remplie, qui n'est plus qu'un cadavre. La foule se disperse,
et la nuit ne tarde pas à couvrir de ses ombres les murailles du cimetière.

Mais, consolez-vous, humains, de sa perte douloureuse. Voici sa famille
innombrable, qui s'avance, et dont il vous a libéralement gratifié, afin
que votre désespoir fût moins amer, et comme adouci par la présence
agréable de ces avortons hargneux, qui deviendront plus tard de
magnifiques poux, ornés d'une beauté remarquable, monstres à allure
de sage. Il a couvé plusieurs douzaines d'oeufs chéris, avec son aile
maternelle, sur vos cheveux, desséchés par la succion acharnée de ces
étrangers redoutables. La période est promptement venue, où les oeufs
ont éclaté. Ne craignez rien, ils ne tarderont pas à grandir, ces
adolescents philosophes, à travers cette vie éphémère. Ils grandiront
tellement, qu'ils vous le feront sentir, avec leurs griffes et leurs
suçoirs.

Vous ne savez pas, vous autres, pourquoi ils ne dévorent pas les os de
votre tête, et qu'ils se contentent d'extraire avec leur pompe, la
quintessence de votre sang. Attendez un instant, je vais vous le dire:
c'est parce qu'ils n'en ont pas la force. Soyez certains que, si leur
mâchoire était conforme à la mesure de leurs voeux infinis, la cervelle,
la rétine des yeux, la colonne vertébrale, tout votre corps y passerait.
Comme une goutte d'eau. Sur la tête d'un jeune mendiant des rues,
observez, avec un microscope, un pou qui travaille; vous m'en donnerez
des nouvelles. Malheureusement ils sont petits, ces brigands de la
longue chevelure. Ils ne seraient pas bons pour être conscrits; car,
ils n'ont pas la taille nécessaire exigée par la loi. Ils appartiennent
au monde lilliputien de ceux de la courte cuisse, et les aveugles
n'hésitent pas à les ranger parmi les infiniment petits. Malheur au
cachalot qui se battrait contre un pou. Il serait dévoré en un clin
d'oeil, malgré sa taille. Il ne resterait pas la queue pour aller
annoncer la nouvelle. L'éléphant se laisse caresser. Le pou, non. Je ne
vous conseille pas de tenter cet essai périlleux. Gare à vous, si votre
main est poilue, ou que seulement elle soit composée d'os et de chair.
C'en est fait de vos doigts. Ils craqueront comme s'ils étaient à la
torture. La peau disparaît par un étrange enchantement. Les poux sont
incapables de commettre autant de mal que leur imagination en médite.
Si vous trouvez un pou dans votre route, passez votre chemin, et ne lui
léchez pas les papilles de la langue. Il vous arriverait quelque
accident. Cela s'est vu. N'importe, je suis déjà content de la quantité
de mal qu'il te fait, ô race humaine; seulement, je voudrais qu'il t'en
fît davantage.

Jusqu'à quand garderas-tu le culte vermoulu de ce dieu, insensible à tes
prières et aux offrandes généreuses que tu lui offres en holocauste
expiatoire? Vois, il n'est pas reconnaissant, ce manitou horrible, des
larges coupes de sang et de cervelle que tu répands sur ses autels,
pieusement décorés de guirlandes de fleurs. Il n'est pas reconnaissant
... car, les tremblements de terre et les tempêtes continuent de sévir
depuis le commencement des choses. Et, cependant, spectacle digne
d'observation, plus il se montre indifférent, plus tu l'admires. On voit
que tu te méfies de ses attributs, qu'il cache; et ton raisonnement
s'appuie sur cette considération, qu'une divinité d'une puissance extrême
peut seule montrer tant de mépris envers les fidèles qui obéissent à sa
religion. C'est pour cela que, dans chaque pays, existent des dieux
divers, ici, le crocodile; là, la vendeuse d'amour; mais, quand il s'agit
du pou, à ce nom sacré, baisant universellement les chaînes de leur
esclavage, tous les peuples s'agenouillent ensemble sur le parvis auguste,
devant le piédestal de l'idole informe et sanguinaire. Le peuple qui
n'obéirait pas à ses propres instincts de rampement, et ferait mine de
révolte, disparaîtrait tôt ou tard de la terre, comme la feuille d'automne,
anéanti par la vengeance du dieu inexorable.

O pou, à la prunelle recroquevillée; tant que les fleuves répandront la
pente de leurs eaux dans les abîmes de la mer; tant que les astres
graviteront sur le sentier de leur orbite; tant que le vide muet n'aura
pas d'horizon; tant que l'humanité déchirera ses propres flancs par des
guerres funestes; tant que la justice divine précipitera ses foudres
vengeresses sur ce globe égoïste; tant que l'homme méconnaîtra son
créateur, et se narguera de lui, non sans raison, en y mêlant du mépris,
ton règne sera assuré sur l'univers, et ta dynastie étendra ses anneaux
de siècle en siècle. Je te salue, soleil levant, libérateur céleste,
toi, l'ennemi invisible de l'homme. Continue de dire à la saleté de
s'unir avec lui dans des embrassements impurs, et de lui jurer, par des
serments, non écrits dans la poudre, qu'elle restera son amante fidèle
jusqu'à l'éternité. Baise de temps en temps la robe de cette grande
impudique, en mémoire des services importants qu'elle ne manque pas de
te rendre. Si elle ne séduisait pas l'homme, avec ses mamelles lascives,
il est probable que tu ne pourrais pas exister, toi, le produit de cet
accouplement raisonnable et conséquent. O fils de la saleté! dis à ta
mère que si elle délaisse la couche de l'homme, marchant à travers des
routes solitaires, seule et sans appui, elle verra son existence
compromise. Que ses entrailles, qui t'ont porté neuf mois dans leurs
parois parfumées, s'émeuvent un instant à la pensée des dangers que
courrait, par suite, leur tendre fruit, si gentil et si tranquille, mais
déjà froid et féroce. Saleté, reine des empires, conserve aux yeux de
ma haine le spectacle de l'accroissement insensible des muscles de ta
progéniture affamée. Pour atteindre ce but, tu sais que tu n'as qu'à te
coller plus étroitement contre les flancs de l'homme. Tu peux le faire,
sans inconvénient pour la pudeur, puisque, tous les deux, vous êtes
mariés depuis longtemps.

Pour moi, s'il m'est permis d'ajouter quelques mots à cet hymne de
glorification, je dirai que j'ai fait construire une fosse, de quarante
lieues carrées, et d'une profondeur relative. C'est là que gît, dans sa
virginité immonde, une mine vivante de poux. Elle remplit les bas-fonds
de la fosse, et serpente ensuite, en larges veines denses, dans toutes
les directions. Voici comment j'ai construit cette mine artificielle.
J'arrachai un pou femelle aux cheveux de l'humanité. On m'a vu se
coucher avec lui pendant trois nuits consécutives, et je le jetai dans
la fosse. La fécondation humaine, qui aurait été nulle dans d'autres
cas pareils, fut acceptée, cette fois, par la fatalité; et, au bout de
quelques jours, des milliers de monstres, grouillant dans un noeud
compacte de matière, naquirent à la lumière. Ce noeud hideux devint,
par le temps, de plus en plus immense, tout en acquérant la propriété
liquide du mercure, et se ramifia en plusieurs branches, qui se
nourrissent, actuellement, en se dévorant elles-mêmes (la naissance est
plus grande que la mortalité), toutes les fois que je ne leur jette pas
en pâture un bâtard qui vient de naître, et dont la mère désirait la
mort, ou un bras que je vais couper à quelque jeune fille, pendant la
nuit, grâce au chloroforme. Tous les quinze ans, les générations de
poux, qui se nourrissent de l'homme, diminuent d'une manière notable,
et prédisent elles-mêmes, infailliblement, l'époque prochaine de leur
complète destruction. Car, l'homme, plus intelligent que son ennemi,
parvient à le vaincre. Alors, avec une pelle infernale qui accroît mes
forces, j'extrais de cette mine inépuisable des blocs de poux, grands
comme des montagnes, je les brise à coups de hache, et je les
transporte, pendant les nuits profondes, dans les artères des cités.
Là, au contact de la température humaine, ils se dissolvent comme aux
premiers jours de leur formation dans les galeries tortueuses de la mine
souterraine, se creusent un lit dans le gravier, et se répandent en
ruisseaux dans les habitations, comme des esprits nuisibles. Le gardien
de la maison aboie sourdement, car il lui semble qu'une légion d'êtres
inconnus perce les pores des murs, et apporte la terreur au chevet du
sommeil. Peut-être n'êtes-vous pas, sans avoir entendu, au moins, une
fois dans votre vie, ces sortes d'aboiements douloureux et prolongés.
Avec ses yeux impuissants, il tâche de percer l'obscurité de la nuit;
car, son cerveau de chien ne comprend pas cela. Ce bourdonnement
l'irrite, et il sent qu'il est trahi. Des millions d'ennemis s'abattent
ainsi, sur chaque cité, comme des nuages de sauterelles. En voilà pour
quinze ans. Ils combattront l'homme, en lui faisant des blessures
cuisantes. Après ce laps de temps, j'en enverrai d'autres. Quand je
concasse les blocs de matière animée, il peut arriver qu'un fragment
soit plus dense qu'un autre. Ses atomes s'efforcent avec rage de séparer
leur agglomération pour aller tourmenter l'humanité; mais, la cohésion
résiste dans sa dureté. Par une suprême convulsion, ils engendrent un
tel effort, que la pierre, ne pouvant pas disperser ses principes
vivants, s'élance elle-même jusqu'au haut des airs comme par un effet de
la poudre, et retombe, en s'enfonçant solidement sous le sol. Parfois,
le paysan rêveur aperçoit un aérolithe fendre verticalement l'espace, en
se dirigeant, du côté du bas, vers un champ de maïs. Il ne sait d'où
vient la pierre. Vous avez maintenant, claire et succinte, l'explication
du phénomène.

Si la terre était couverte de poux, comme de grains de sable le rivage
de la mer, la race humaine serait anéantie, en proie à des douleurs
terribles. Quel spectacle! Moi, avec des ailes d'ange, immobile dans les
airs, pour le contempler!

      *       *       *       *       *

O mathématiques sévères, je ne vous ai pas oubliées, depuis que vos
savantes leçons, plus douces que le miel, filtrèrent dans mon coeur,
comme une onde rafraîchissante. J'aspirais instinctivement, dès le
berceau, à boire à votre source, plus ancienne que le soleil, et je
continue encore de fouler le parvis sacré de votre temple solennel, moi,
le plus fidèle de vos initiés. Il y avait du vague dans mon esprit,
un je ne sais quoi épais comme de la fumée; mais, je sus franchir
religieusement les degrés qui mènent à votre autel, et vous avez chassé
ce voile obscur, comme le vent chasse le damier. Vous avez mis, à la
place, une froideur excessive, une prudence consommée et une logique
implacable. A l'aide de votre lait fortifiant, mon intelligence s'est
rapidement développée, et a pris des proportions immenses, au milieu de
cette clarté ravissante dont vous faites présent, avec prodigalité,
à ceux qui vous aiment d'un sincère amour. Arithmétique! algèbre!
géométrie! trinité grandiose! triangle lumineux! Celui qui ne vous a
pas connues est un insensé! Il mériterait l'épreuve des plus grands
supplices; car, il y a du mépris aveugle dans son insouciance ignorante;
mais, celui qui vous connaît et vous apprécie ne veut plus rien des
biens de la terre; se contente de vos jouissances magiques; et, porté
sur vos ailes sombres, ne désire plus que de s'élever, d'un vol léger,
en construisant une hélice ascendante, vers la voûte sphérique des
cieux. La terre ne lui montre que des illusions et des fantasmagories
morales: mais vous, ô mathématiques concises, par l'enchaînement
rigoureux de vos propositions tenaces et la constance de vos lois de
fer, vous faites luire, aux yeux éblouis, un reflet puissant de cette
vérité suprême dont on remarque l'empreinte dans l'ordre de l'univers.
Mais, l'ordre qui vous entoure, représenté surtout par la régularité
parfaite du carré, l'ami de Pythagore, est encore plus grand; car, le
Tout-Puissant s'est révélé complètement, lui et ses attributs, dans ce
travail mémorable qui consista à faire sortir, des entrailles du chaos,
vos trésors de théorèmes et vos magnifiques splendeurs. Aux époques
antiques et dans les temps modernes, plus d'une grande imagination
humaine vit son génie, épouvanté, à la contemplation de vos figures
symboliques tracées sur le papier brûlant, comme autant de signes
mystérieux, vivants d'une haleine latente, que ne comprend pas le
vulgaire profane et qui n'étaient que la révélation éclatante d'axiomes
et d'hiéroglyphes éternels, qui ont existé avant l'univers et qui se
maintiendront après lui. Elle se demande, penchée vers le précipice d'un
point d'interrogation fatal, comment se fait-il que les mathématiques
contiennent tant d'imposante grandeur et tant de vérité incontestable,
tandis que, si elle les compare à l'homme, elle ne trouve en ce dernier
que faux orgueil et mensonge. Alors, cet esprit supérieur, attristé,
auquel la familiarité noble de vos conseils fait sentir davantage la
petitesse de l'humanité et son incomparable folie, plonge sa tête,
blanchie, sur une main décharnée et reste absorbé dans des méditations
surnaturelles. Il incline ses genoux devant vous, et sa vénération rend
hommage à votre visage divin, comme à la propre image du Tout-Puissant.
Pendant mon enfance, vous m'apparûtes, une nuit de mai, aux rayons de la
lune, sur une prairie verdoyante, aux bords d'un ruisseau limpide, tout
les trois égales en grâce et en pudeur, toutes les trois pleines de
majesté comme des reines. Vous fîtes quelques pas vers moi, avec votre
longue robe, flottante comme une vapeur, et vous m'attirâtes vers vos
frères mamelles, comme un fils béni. Alors, j'accourus avec
empressement, mes mains crispées sur votre blanche gorge. Je me suis
nourri, avec reconnaissance, de votre manne féconde, et j'ai senti que
l'humanité grandissait en moi et devenait meilleure. Depuis ce temps, ô
déesses rivales, je ne vous ai pas abandonnées. Depuis ce temps, que de
projets énergiques, que de sympathies, que je croyais avoir gravées sur
les pages de mon coeur, comme sur du marbre, n'ont-elles pas effacé
lentement, de ma raison désabusée, leurs lignes configuratives, comme
l'aube naissante efface les ombres de la nuit! Depuis ce temps, j'ai vu
la mort, dans l'intention, visible à l'oeil nu, de peupler les tombeaux,
ravager les champs de bataille, engraissés par le sang humain et faire
pousser des fleurs matinales par-dessus les funèbres ossements. Depuis
ce temps, j'ai assisté aux révolutions de notre globe; les tremblements
de terre, les volcans, avec leur lave embrasée, le simoun du désert
et les naufrages de la tempête ont eu ma présence pour spectateur
impassible. Depuis ce temps, j'ai vu plusieurs générations humaines
élever, le matin, ses ailes et ses yeux, vers l'espace, avec la joie
inexpériente de la chrysalide qui salue sa dernière métamorphose, et
mourir, le soir, avant le coucher du soleil, la tête courbée, comme des
fleurs fanées que balance le sifflement plaintif du vent. Mais, vous,
vous restez toujours les mêmes. Aucun changement, aucun air empesté
n'effleure les rocs escarpés et les vallées immenses de votre identité.
Vos pyramides modestes dureront davantage que les pyramides d'Egypte,
fourmilières élevées par la stupidité et l'esclavage. La fin des siècles
verra encore, debout sur les ruines du temps, vos chiffres cabalistiques,
vos équations laconiques et vos lignes sculpturales siéger à la droite
vengeresse du Tout-Puissant, tandis que les étoiles s'enfonceront, avec
désespoir, comme des trombes, dans l'éternité d'une nuit horrible et
universelle, et que l'humanité, grimaçante, songera à faire ses comptes
avec le jugement dernier. Merci, pour les services innombrables que vous
m'avez rendus. Merci, pour les qualités étrangères dont vous avez enrichi
mon intelligence. Sans vous, dans ma lutte contre l'homme, j'aurai
peut-être été vaincu. Sans vous, il m'aurait fait rouler dans le sable et
embrasser la poussière de ses pieds. Sans vous, avec une griffe perfide,
il aurait labouré ma chair et mes os. Mais, je me suis tenu sur mes gardes,
comme un athlète expérimenté. Vous me donnâtes la froideur qui surgit de
vos conceptions sublimes, exemptes de passion. Je m'en servis pour rejeter
avec dédain les jouissances éphémères de mon court voyage et pour renvoyer
de ma porte les offres sympathiques, mais trompeuses, de mes semblables.
Vous me donnâtes la prudence opiniâtre qu'on déchiffre à chaque pas dans
vos méthodes admirables de l'analyse, de la synthèse et de la déduction.
Je m'en servis pour dérouter les ruses pernicieuses de mon ennemi mortel,
pour l'attaquer, à mon tour, avec adresse, et plonger, dans les viscères
de l'homme, un poignard aigu qui restera à jamais enfoncé dans son corps;
car, c'est une blessure dont il ne se relèvera pas. Vous me donnâtes la
logique, qui est comme l'âme elle-même de vos enseignements, pleine de
sagesse; avec ses syllogismes, dont le labyrinthe compliqué n'en est que
plus compréhensible, mon intelligence sentit s'accroître du double ses
forces audacieuses. A l'aide de cet auxiliaire terrible, je découvris,
dans l'humanité, en nageant vers les bas-fonds, en face de l'écueil de
la haine, la méchanceté noire et hideuse, qui croupissait au milieu de
miasmes délétères, en s'admirant le nombril. Le premier, je découvris,
dans les ténèbres de ses entrailles, ce vice néfaste, le mal! supérieur
en lui au bien. Avec cette arme empoisonnée que vous me prêtâtes, je
fis descendre, de son piédestal, construit par la lâcheté de l'homme,
le Créateur lui-même! Il grinça des dents et subit cette injure
ignominieuse; car, il avait pour adversaire quelqu'un de plus fort que
lui. Mais, je le laisserai de côté, comme un paquet de ficelles, afin
d'abaisser mon vol ... Le penseur Descartes faisait, une fois, cette
réflexion que rien de solide n'avait été bâti sur vous. C'était une
manière ingénieuse de faire comprendre que le premier venu ne pouvait
pas sur le coup découvrir votre valeur inestimable. En effet, quoi
de plus solide que les trois qualités principales déjà nommées qui
s'élèvent, entrelacées comme une couronne unique, sur le sommet auguste
de votre architecture colossale? Monument qui grandit sans cesse de
découvertes quotidiennes, dans vos mines de diamant, et d'explorations
scientifiques, dans vos superbes domaines. O mathématiques saintes,
puissiez-vous, par votre commerce perpétuel, consoler le reste de mes
jours de la méchanceté de l'homme et de l'injustice du Grand-Tout!

       *       *       *       *       *

«O lampe au bec d'argent, mes yeux t'aperçoivent dans les airs, compagne
de la voûte des cathédrales, et cherchent la raison de cette suspension.
On dit que tes lueurs éclairent, pendant la nuit, la tourbe de ceux qui
viennent adorer le Tout-Puissant et que tu montres aux repentis le
chemin qui mène à l'autel. Ecoute, c'est fort possible; mais ... est-ce
que tu as besoin de rendre de pareils services à ceux auxquels tu ne
dois rien? Laisse, plongées dans les ténèbres, les colonnes des
basiliques; et, lorsqu'une bouffée de la tempête sur laquelle le démon
tourbillonne, emporté dans l'espace, pénétrera, avec lui, dans le saint
lieu, en y répandant l'effroi, au lieu de lutter, courageusement, contre
la rafale empestée du prince du mal, éteins-toi subitement, sous son
souffle fiévreux, pour qu'il puisse, sans qu'on le voie, choisir ses
victimes parmi les croyants agenouillés. Si tu fais cela, tu peux dire
que je te devrai tout mon bonheur. Quand tu reluis ainsi, en répandant
tes clartés indécises, mais suffisantes, je n'ose pas me livrer aux
suggestions de mon caractère, et je reste, sous le portique sacré, en
regardant par le portail entr'ouvert, ceux qui échappent à ma vengeance,
dans le sein du Seigneur. O lampe poétique! toi qui serais mon amie
si tu pouvais me comprendre, quand mes pieds foulent le basalte des
églises, dans les heures nocturnes, pourquoi te mets-tu à briller d'une
manière qui, je l'avoue, me paraît extraordinaire? Tes reflets se
colorent, alors; des nuances blanches de la lumière électrique; l'oeil
ne peut pas te fixer; et tu éclaires d'une flamme nouvelle et puissante
les moindres détails du chenil du Créateur, comme si tu étais en proie
à une sainte colère. Et, quand je me retire après avoir blasphémé, tu
redeviens inaperçue, modeste et pâle, sûre d'avoir accompli un acte de
justice. Dis-moi, un peu; serait-ce parce que tu connais les détours
de mon coeur, que, lorsqu'il m'arrive d'apparaître où tu veilles, tu
t'empresses de désigner ma présence pernicieuse et de porter l'attention
des adorateurs vers le côté où vient de se montrer l'ennemi des hommes?
Je penche vers cette opinion; car, moi aussi, je commence à te
connaître; et je sais qui tu es, vieille sorcière, qui veille si bien
sur les mosquées sacrées, où se pavane, comme la crête d'un coq, ton
maître curieux. Vigilante gardienne, tu t'es donné une mission folle.
Je t'avertis; la première fois que tu me désigneras à la prudence de mes
semblables, par l'augmentation de tes lueurs phosphorescentes, comme je
n'aime pas ce phénomène d'optique, qui n'est mentionné, du reste, dans
aucun livre de physique, je te prends par la peau de ta poitrine, en
accrochant mes griffes aux escarres de ta nuque teigneuse, et je te
jette dans la Seine. Je ne prétends pas que, lorsque je ne te fais rien,
tu te comportes sciemment d'une manière qui me soit nuisible. Là, je te
permettrai de briller autant qu'il me sera agréable; là, tu me nargueras
avec un sourire inextinguible; là, convaincue de l'incapacité de ton
huile criminelle, tu l'urineras avec amertume.» Après avoir parlé ainsi,
Maldoror ne sort pas du temple, et reste les yeux fixés sur la lampe du
saint lieu ... Il croit voir une espèce de provocation, dans l'attitude
de cette lampe, qui l'irrite au plus haut degré, par sa présence
inopportune. Il se dit que, si quelque âme est renfermée dans cette
lampe, elle est lâche de ne pas répondre, à une attaque loyale, par la
sincérité. Il bat l'air de ses bras nerveux et souhaiterait que la lampe
se transformât en homme; il lui ferait passer un mauvais quart d'heure,
il se le promet. Mais, le moyen qu'une lampe se change en homme; ce
n'est pas naturel. Il ne se résigne pas, et va chercher, sur le parvis
de la misérable pagode, un caillou plat, à tranchant effilé. Il le lance
en l'air avec force ... la chaîne est coupée, par le milieu, comme
l'herbe par la faux, et l'instrument du culte tombe à terre, en
répandant son huile sur les dalles ... Il saisit la lampe pour la porter
dehors, mais elle résiste et grandit. Il lui semble voir des ailes sur
ses flancs, et la partie supérieure revêt la forme d'un buste d'ange. Le
tout veut s'élever en l'air pour prendre son essor; mais il le retient
d'une main ferme. Une lampe et un ange qui forment un même corps, voilà
ce que l'on ne voit pas souvent. Il reconnaît la forme de la lampe; il
reconnaît la forme de l'ange; mais, il ne peut pas les scinder dans son
esprit; en effet, dans la réalité, elles sont collées l'une dans
l'autre, et ne forment qu'un corps indépendant et libre; mais, lui croit
que quelque nuage a voilé ses yeux, et lui a fait perdre un peu de
l'excellence de sa vue. Néanmoins, il se prépare à la lutte avec courage,
car son adversaire n'a pas peur. Les gens naïfs racontent, à ceux qui
veulent les croire, que le portail sacré se referma de lui-même, en
roulant sur ses gonds affligés, pour que personne ne pût assister à cette
lutte impie, dont les péripéties allaient se dérouler dans l'enceinte du
sanctuaire violé. L'homme au manteau, pendant qu'il reçoit des blessures
cruelles avec un glaive invisible, s'efforce de rapprocher de sa bouche
la figure de l'ange; il ne pense qu'à cela, et tous ses efforts se portent
vers ce but. Celui-ci perd son énergie, et paraît pressentir sa destinée.
Il ne lutte plus que faiblement, et l'on voit le moment où son adversaire
pourra l'embrasser à son aise, si c'est ce qu'il veut faire. Eh bien, le
moment est venu. Avec ses muscles, il étrangle la gorge de l'ange, qui ne
peut plus respirer, et lui renverse le visage, en l'appuyant sur sa
poitrine odieuse. Il est un instant touché du sort qui attend cet être
céleste, dont il aurait volontiers fait son ami. Mais, il se dit que c'est
l'envoyé du Seigneur, et il ne peut pas retenir son courroux. C'en est
fait; quelque chose d'horrible va rentrer dans la cage du temps! Il se
penche, et porte la langue, imbibée de salive, sur cette joue angélique,
qui jette des regards suppliants. Il promène quelque temps sa langue sur
cette joue. Oh!... voyez!... voyez donc!... la joue blanche et rose est
devenue noire, comme un charbon! Elle exhale des miasmes putrides. C'est
la gangrène; il n'est plus permis d'en douter. Le mal rongeur s'étend sur
toute la figure, et de là, exerce ses furies sur les parties basses;
bientôt, tout le corps n'est qu'une vaste plaie immonde. Lui-même,
épouvanté (car, il ne croyait pas que sa langue contînt un poison d'une
telle violence), il ramasse la lampe et s'enfuit de l'église. Une fois
dehors, il aperçoit dans les airs une forme noirâtre, aux ailes brûlées,
qui dirige péniblement son vol vers les régions du ciel. Ils se regardent
tous les deux, pendant que l'ange monte vers les hauteurs sereines du
bien, et que lui, Maldoror, au contraire, descend vers les abîmés
vertigineux du mal ... Quel regard! Tout ce que l'humanité a pensé
depuis soixante siècles, et ce qu'elle pensera encore, pendant les
siècles suivants, pourrait y contenir aisément, tant de choses se
dirent-ils, dans cet adieu suprême! Mais, on comprend que c'étaient des
pensées plus élevées que celles qui jaillissent de l'intelligence
humaine; d'abord, à cause des deux personnages, et puis, à cause de la
circonstance. Ce regard les noua d'une amitié éternelle. Il s'étonne
que le Créateur puisse avoir des missionnaires d'une âme si noble. Un
instant, il croit s'être trompé, et se demande s'il aurait dû suivre la
route du mal, comme il l'a fait. Le trouble est passé; il persévère dans
sa résolution; et il est glorieux, d'après lui, de vaincre tôt ou tard
le Grand-Tout, afin de régner à sa place sur l'univers entier, et sur
des légions d'anges aussi beaux. Celui-ci lui fait comprendre; sans
parler, qu'il reprendra sa forme primitive, à mesure qu'il montera vers
le ciel; laisse tomber une larme, qui rafraîchit le front de celui qui
lui a donné la gangrène; et disparaît peu à peu, comme un vautour, en
s'élevant au milieu des nuages. Le coupable regarde la lampe, cause de
ce qui précède. Il court comme un insensé à travers les rues, se dirige
vers la Seine, et lance la lampe par dessus le parapet. Elle
tourbillonne pendant quelques instants, et s'enfonce définitivement dans
les eaux bourbeuses. Depuis ce jour, chaque soir, dès la tombée de la
nuit, l'on voit une lampe brillante qui surgit et se maintient,
gracieusement, sur la surface du fleuve, à la hauteur du pont Napoléon,
en portant, au lieu d'anse, deux mignonnes ailes d'ange. Elle s'avance
lentement, sur les eaux, passe sous les arches du pont de la Gare et du
pont d'Austerlitz, et continue son sillage silencieux, sur la Seine,
jusqu'au pont de l'Alma. Une fois en cet endroit, elle remonte avec
facilité le cours de la rivière, et revient au bout de quatre heures à
son point de départ. Ainsi de suite, pendant toute la nuit. _Ses lueurs,
blanches comme la lumière électrique_, effacent les becs de gaz qui
longent les deux rives, et, entre lesquels, elle s'avance comme une
reine, solitaire, impénétrable, _avec un sourire inextinguible, sans que
son huile se répande avec amertume_. Au commencement, les bateaux lui
faisaient la chasse; mais, elle déjouait ces vains efforts, échappait
à toutes les poursuites, en plongeant, comme une coquette, et
reparaissait, plus loin, à une grande distance. Maintenant, les marins
superstitieux, lorsqu'ils la voient, rament vers une direction opposée,
et retiennent leurs chansons. Quand vous passez sur un pont, pendant la
nuit, faites bien attention: vous êtes sûr de voir briller la lampe, ici
ou là; mais, on dit qu'elle ne se montre pas à tout le monde. Quand il
passe sur les ponts un être humain qui a quelque chose sur la conscience,
elle éteint subitement ses reflets, et le passant, épouvanté, fouille en
vain, d'un regard désespéré, la surface et le limon du fleuve. Il sait ce
que cela signifie. Il voudrait croire qu'il a vu la céleste lueur; mais,
il se dit que la lumière venait du devant des bateaux ou de la réflexion
des becs de gaz; et il a raison ... Il sait que, cette disparition, c'est
lui qui en est la cause; et, plongé dans de tristes réflexions, il hâte
le pas pour gagner sa demeure. Alors, la lampe au bec d'argent reparaît
à la surface, et poursuit sa marche, à travers des arabesques élégantes
et capricieuses.

       *       *       *       *       *

Écoutez les pensées de mon enfance, quand je me réveillais, humains,
à la verge rouge: «Je viens de me réveiller; mais, ma pensée est encore
engourdie. Chaque matin, je ressens un poids dans la tête. Il est rare
que je trouve le repos dans la nuit; car, des rêves affreux me
tourmentent, quand je parviens à m'endormir. Le jour, ma pensée se
fatigue dans des méditations bizarres, pendant que mes yeux errent au
hasard dans l'espace; et, la nuit, je ne peux pas dormir. Quand faut-il
alors que je dorme? Cependant la nature a besoin de réclamer ses droits.
Comme je la dédaigne, elle rend ma figure pâle et fait luire mes yeux
avec la flamme aigre de la fièvre. Au reste, je ne demanderais pas mieux
que de ne pas épuiser mon esprit à réfléchir continuellement; mais,
quand même je ne le voudrais pas, mes sentiments consternés m'entraînent
invinciblement vers cette pente. Je me suis aperçu que les autres
enfants sont comme moi; mais, ils sont plus pâles encores, et leurs
sourcils sont froncés, comme ceux des hommes, nos frères aînés. O
Créateur de l'univers, je ne manquerai pas, ce matin, de t'offrir
l'encens de ma prière enfantine. Quelquefois je l'oublie, et j'ai
remarqué que, ces jours-là, je me sens plus heureux qu'à l'ordinaire;
ma poitrine s'épanouit, libre de toute contrainte, et je respire, plus
à l'aise, l'air embaumé des champs; tandis que, lorsque j'accomplis le
pénible devoir, ordonné par mes parents, de t'adresser quotidiennement
un cantique de louanges, accompagné de l'ennui inséparable que me cause
sa laborieuse invention, alors, je suis triste et irrité, le reste de la
journée, parce qu'il ne me semble pas logique et naturel de dire ce que
je ne pense pas, et je recherche le recul des immenses solitudes. Si je
leur demande l'explication de cet état étrange de mon âme, elles ne me
répondent pas. Je voudrais t'aimer et t'adorer; mais, tu es trop
puissant, et il y a de la crainte dans mes hymnes. Si, par une seule
manifestation de ta pensée, tu peux détruire ou créer des mondes, mes
faibles prières ne te seront pas utiles; si, quand il te plaît, tu
envoies le choléra ravager les cités, ou la mort emporter dans ses
serres, sans aucune distinction, les quatre âges de la vie, je ne veux
pas me lier avec un ami si redoutable. Non pas que la haine conduise le
fil de mes raisonnements; mais, j'ai peur, au contraire, de ta propre
haine, qui, par un ordre capricieux, peut sortir de ton coeur et devenir
immense, comme l'envergure du condor des Andes. Tes amusements
équivoques ne sont pas à ma portée, et j'en serais probablement la
première victime. Tu es le Tout-Puissant; je ne te conteste pas ce
titre, puisque, toi seul, as le droit de le porter, et que tes désirs,
aux conséquences funestes ou heureuses, n'ont de terme que toi-même.
Voilà précisément pourquoi il me serait douloureux de marcher à côté de
ta cruelle tunique de saphir, non pas comme ton esclave, mais pouvant
l'être d'un moment à l'autre. Il est vrai que, lorsque tu descends en
toi-même, pour scruter ta conduite souveraine, si le fantôme d'une
injustice passée, commise envers cette malheureuse humanité, qui t'a
toujours obéi, comme ton ami le plus fidèle, dresse, devant toi, les
vertèbres immobiles d'une épine dorsale vengeresse, ton oeil hagard
laisse tomber la larme épouvantée du remords tardif, et qu'alors, les
cheveux hérissés, tu crois, toi-même, prendre, sincèrement, la
résolution de suspendre, à jamais, aux broussailles du néant, les jeux
inconcevables de ton imagination de tigre, qui serait burlesque, si elle
n'était pas lamentable; mais, je sais aussi que la constance n'a pas
fixé, dans tes os, comme une moelle tenace, le harpon de sa demeure
éternelle, et que tu retombes assez souvent, toi et tes pensées,
recouvertes de la lèpre noire de l'erreur, dans le lac funèbre des
sombres malédictions. Je veux croire que celles-ci sont inconscientes
(quoiqu'elles n'en renferment pas moins leur venin fatal), et que le mal
et le bien, unis ensemble, se répandent en bonds impétueux de ta royale
poitrine gangrenée, comme le torrent du rocher, par le charme secret
d'une force aveugle; mais, rien ne m'en fournit la preuve. J'ai vu, trop
souvent, tes dents immondes claquer de rage, et ton auguste face,
recouverte de la mousse des temps, rougir, comme un charbon ardent, à
cause de quelque futilité microscopique que les hommes avaient commise,
pour pouvoir m'arrêter, plus longtemps, devant le poteau indicateur de
cette hypothèse bonasse. Chaque jour, les mains jointes, j'élèverai vers
toi les accents de mon humble prière, puisqu'il le faut: mais, je t'en
supplie, que ta providence ne pense pas à moi; laisse-moi de côté, comme
le vermisseau qui rampe sous la terre. Sache que je préférerais me
nourrir avidement des plantes marines d'îles inconnues et sauvages, que
les vagues tropicales entraînent, au milieu de ces parages, dans leur
sein écumeux, que de savoir que tu m'observes, et que tu portes, dans ma
conscience, ton scalpel qui ricane. Elle vient de te révéler la totalité
de mes pensées, et j'espère que ta prudence applaudira facilement au bon
sens dont elles gardent l'ineffaçable empreinte. A part ces réserves
faites sur le genre de relations plus ou moins intimes que je dois
garder avec toi, ma bouche est prête, à n'importe quelle heure du jour,
à exhaler, comme un souffle artificiel, le flot de mensonges que ta
gloriole exige sévèrement de chaque humain, dès que l'aurore s'élève
bleuâtre, cherchant la lumière dans les replis de satin du crépuscule,
comme, moi, je recherche la bonté, excité par l'amour du bien. Mes
années ne sont pas nombreuses, et, cependant, je sens déjà que la bonté
n'est qu'un assemblage de syllabes sonores; je ne l'ai trouvée nulle
part. Tu laisses trop percer ton caractère; il faudrait le cacher avec
plus d'adresse. Au reste, peut-être que je me trompe et que tu fais
exprès; car, tu sais mieux qu'un autre comment te conduire. Les hommes,
eux, mettent leur gloire à t'imiter; c'est pourquoi la bonté sainte ne
reconnaît pas son tabernacle dans leurs yeux farouches: tel père, tel
fils. Quoi qu'on doive penser de ton intelligence, je n'en parle que
comme un critique impartial. Je ne demande pas mieux que d'avoir été
induit en erreur. Je ne désire pas te montrer la haine que je te porte
et que je couve avec amour, comme une fille chérie; car, il vaut mieux
la cacher à tes yeux et prendre seulement, devant toi, l'aspect d'un
censeur sévère, chargé de contrôler tes actes impurs. Tu cesseras
ainsi tout commerce actif avec elle, tu l'oublieras et tu détruiras
complètement cette punaise avide qui ronge ton foie. Je préfère plutôt
te faire entendre des paroles de rêverie et de douceur ... Oui, c'est
toi qui as créé le monde et tout ce qu'il renferme. Tu es parfait.
Aucune vertu ne te manque. Tu es très puissant, chacun le sait. Que
l'univers entier entonne, à chaque heure du temps, ton cantique éternel!
Les oiseaux te bénissent, en prenant leur essor dans la campagne. Les
étoiles t'appartiennent ... Ainsi soit-il!» Après ces commencements,
étonnez-vous de me trouver tel que je suis!

       *       *       *       *       *

Je cherchais une âme qui me ressemblât, et je ne pouvais pas la trouver.
Je fouillais tous les recoins de la terre; ma persévérance était
inutile. Cependant, je ne pouvais pas rester seul. Il fallait quelqu'un
qui approuvât mon caractère; il fallait quelqu'un qui eût les mêmes
idées que moi. C'était le matin: le soleil se leva à l'horizon dans
toute sa magnificence, et voilà qu'à mes yeux se lève aussi un jeune
homme, dont la présence engendrait des fleurs sur son passage. Il
s'approcha de moi, et, me tendant la main: «Je suis venu vers toi, toi,
qui me cherches. Bénissons ce jour heureux.» Mais, moi: «Va-t-en; je ne
t'ai pas appelé: je n'ai pas besoin de ton amitié ...» C'était le soir;
la nuit commençait à étendre la noirceur de son voile sur la nature. Une
belle femme, que je ne faisais que distinguer, étendait aussi sur moi
son influence enchanteresse, et me regardait avec compassion; cependant,
elle n'osait me parler. Je dis: «Approche-toi de moi, afin que je
distingue nettement les traits de ton visage; car, la lumière des
étoiles n'est pas assez forte, pour les éclairer à cette distance.»
Alors, avec une démarche modeste, et les yeux baissés, elle foula
l'herbe du gazon, en se dirigeant de mon côté. Dès que je la vis: «Je
vois que la bonté et la justice ont fait résidence dans ton coeur: nous
ne pourrions pas vivre ensemble. Maintenant, tu admires ma beauté, qui
a bouleversé plus d'une; mais, tôt ou tard, tu te repentirais de m'avoir
consacré ton amour; car tu ne connais pas mon âme. Non que je te sois
jamais infidèle: celle qui se livre à moi avec tant d'abandon et de
confiance, avec autant de confiance et d'abandon, je me livre à elle;
mais, mets-te le dans la tête, pour ne jamais l'oublier: les loups et
les agneaux ne se regardent pas avec des yeux doux.» Que me fallait-il
donc, à moi, qui rejetais, avec tant de dégoût, ce qu'il y avait de plus
beau dans l'humanité! ce qu'il me fallait, je n'aurais pas su le dire.
Je n'étais pas encore habitué à me rendre un compte rigoureux des
phénomènes de mon esprit, au moyen des méthodes que recommande la
philosophie. Je m'assis sur un roc, près de la mer. Un navire venait
de mettre toutes voiles dehors pour s'éloigner de ce parage: un point
imperceptible venait de paraître à l'horizon, et s'approchait peu à peu,
poussé par la rafale, en grandissant avec rapidité. La tempête allait
commencer ses attaques, et déjà le ciel s'obscurcissait, en devenant
d'un noir presque aussi hideux que le coeur de l'homme. Le navire, qui
était un grand vaisseau de guerre, venait de jeter toutes ses ancres,
pour ne pas être balayé sur les rochers de la côte. Le vent sifflait
avec fureur des quatre points cardinaux, et mettait les voiles en
charpie. Les coups de tonnerre éclataient au milieu des éclairs, et ne
pouvaient surpasser le bruit des lamentations qui s'entendaient sur la
maison sans bases, sépulcre mouvant. Le roulis de ces masses aqueuses
n'était pas parvenu à rompre les chaînes des ancres; mais, leurs
secousses avaient entr'ouvert une voie d'eau, sur les flancs du navire.
Brèche énorme; car, les pompes ne suffisent pas à rejeter les paquets
d'eau salée qui viennent, en écumant, s'abattre sur le pont, comme des
montagnes. Le navire en détresse tire des coups de canon d'alarme; mais,
il sombre avec lenteur ... avec majesté. Celui qui n'a pas vu un
vaisseau sombrer au milieu de l'ouragan, de l'intermittence des éclairs
et de l'obscurité la plus profonde, pendant que ceux qu'il contient sont
accablés de ce désespoir que vous savez, celui-là ne connaît pas les
accidents de la vie. Enfin, il s'échappe un cri universel de douleur
immense d'entre les flancs du vaisseau, tandis que la mer redouble ses
attaques redoutables. C'est le cri qu'a fait pousser l'abandon des
forces humaines. Chacun s'enveloppe dans le manteau de la résignation,
et remet son sort entre les mains de Dieu. On s'accule comme un troupeau
de moutons. Le navire en détresse tire des coups de canon d'alarme;
mais, il sombre avec lenteur ... avec majesté. Ils ont fait jouer les
pompes pendant tout le jour. Efforts inutiles. La nuit est venue,
épaisse, implacable, pour mettre le comble à ce spectacle gracieux.
Chacun se dit qu'une fois dans l'eau, il ne pourra plus respirer; car,
d'aussi loin qu'il fait revenir sa mémoire, il ne se reconnaît aucun
poisson pour ancêtre: mais, il s'exhorte à retenir son souffle le plus
longtemps possible, afin de prolonger sa vie de deux ou trois secondes;
c'est là l'ironie vengeresse qu'il veut adresser à la mort ... Le navire
en détresse tire des coups de canon d'alarme; mais, il sombre avec
lenteur ... avec majesté. Il ne sait pas que le vaisseau, en s'enfonçant,
occasionne une puissante circonvolution des houles autour d'elles-mêmes;
que le limon bourbeux s'est mêlé aux eaux troublées, et qu'une force qui
vient de dessous, contrecoup de la tempête qui exerce ses ravages en haut,
imprime à l'élément des mouvements saccadés et nerveux. Ainsi, malgré la
provision de sang-froid qu'il ramasse d'avance, le futur noyé, après
réflexion plus ample, devra se sentir heureux, s'il prolonge sa vie, dans
les tourbillons de l'abîme, de la moitié d'une respiration ordinaire, afin
de faire bonne mesure. Il lui sera donc impossible de narguer la mort, son
suprême voeu. Le navire en détresse tire des coups de canon d'alarme; mais,
il sombre avec lenteur ... avec majesté. C'est une erreur. Il ne tire plus
des coups de canon, il ne sombre pas. La coquille de noix s'est engouffrée
complètement. O ciel! comment peut-on vivre, après avoir éprouvé tant de
voluptés! Il venait de m'être donné d'être témoin des agonies de mort de
plusieurs de mes semblables. Minute par minute, je suivais les péripéties
de leurs angoisses. Tantôt, le beuglement de quelque vieille, devenue folle
de peur, faisait prime sur le marché. Tantôt, le seul glapissement d'un
enfant en mamelles empêchait d'entendre le commandement des manoeuvres.
Le vaisseau était trop loin pour percevoir distinctement les gémissements
que m'apportait la rafale; mais, je le rapprochais par la volonté, et
l'illusion d'optique était complète. Chaque quart d'heure, quand un coup
de vent, plus fort que les autres, rendant ses accents lugubres à travers
le cri des pétrels effarés, disloquait le navire dans un craquement
longitudinal, et augmentait les plaintes de ceux qui allaient être offerts
en holocauste à la mort, je m'enfonçais dans la joue la pointe aiguë d'un
fer, et je pensais secrètement: «Ils souffrent davantage!» J'avais au
moins, ainsi, un terme de comparaison. Du rivage, je les apostrophais,
en leur lançant des imprécations et des menaces. Il me semblait qu'ils
devaient m'entendre! Il me semblait que ma haine et mes paroles,
franchissant la distance, anéantissaient les lois physiques du son, et
parvenaient, distinctes, à leurs oreilles, assourdies par les mugissements
de l'océan en courroux! Il me semblait qu'ils devaient penser à moi, et
exhaler leur vengeance en impuissante rage! De temps à autre, je jetais
les yeux vers les cités, endormies sur la terre ferme; et, voyant que
personne ne se doutait qu'un vaisseau allait sombrer, à quelques milles
du rivage, avec une couronne d'oiseaux de proie et un piédestal de géants
aquatiques, au ventre vide, je reprenais courage, et l'espérance me
revenait: j'étais donc sûr de leur perte! Ils ne pouvaient échapper! Par
surcroît de précaution, j'avais été chercher mon fusil à deux coups, afin
que, si quelque naufragé était tenté d'aborder les rochers à la nage, pour
échapper à une mort imminente, une balle sur l'épaule lui fracassât le
bras, et l'empêchât d'accomplir son dessein. Au moment le plus furieux de
la tempête, je vis, surnageant sur les eaux, avec des efforts désespérés,
une tête énergique, aux cheveux hérissés. Il avalait des litres d'eau, et
s'enfonçait dans l'abîme, ballotté comme un liège. Mais, bientôt, il
apparaissait de nouveau, les cheveux ruisselants: et, fixant l'oeil sur
le rivage, il semblait défier la mort. Il était admirable de sang-froid.
Une large blessure sanglante, occasionnée par quelque pointe d'écueil
caché, balafrait son visage intrépide et noble. Il ne devait pas avoir
plus de seize ans; car, à peine, à travers les éclairs qui illuminaient
la nuit, le duvet de la pèche s'apercevait sur sa lèvre. Et maintenant,
il n'était plus qu'à deux cents mètres de la falaise; et je le dévisageais
facilement. Quel courage! Quel esprit indomptable! Comme la fixité de sa
tête semblait narguer le destin, tout en fendant avec vigueur l'onde, dont
les sillons s'ouvraient difficilement devant lui!... Je l'avais décidé
d'avance. Je me devais à moi-même de tenir ma promesse: l'heure dernière
avait sonné pour tous, aucun ne devait en échapper. Voilà ma résolution;
rien ne la changerait ... Un son sec s'entendit, et la tête aussitôt
s'enfonça, pour ne plus reparaître. Je ne pris pas à ce meurtre autant de
plaisir qu'on pourrait le croire; et c'était, précisément, parce que
j'étais rassasié de toujours tuer, que je le faisais dorénavant par simple
habitude, dont on ne peut se passer, mais, qui ne procure qu'une jouissance
légère. Le sens est émoussé, endurci. Quelle volupté ressentir à la mort
de cet être humain, quand il y en avait plus d'une centaine, qui allaient
s'offrir à moi, en spectacle, dans leur lutte dernière contre les flots,
une fois le navire submergé? A cette mort, je n'avais même pas l'attrait
du danger; car, la justice humaine, bercée par l'ouragan de cette nuit
affreuse, sommeillait dans les maisons, à quelques pas de moi. Aujourd'hui
que les années pèsent sur mon corps, je le dis avec sincérité, comme une
vérité suprême et solennelle: je n'étais pas aussi cruel qu'on l'a raconté
ensuite, parmi les hommes; mais, des fois, leur méchanceté exerçait ses
ravages persévérants pendant des années entières. Alors, je ne connaissais
plus de borne à ma fureur; il me prenait des accès de cruauté, et je
devenais terrible pour celui qui s'approchait de mes yeux hagards, si
toutefois il appartenait à ma race. Si c'était un cheval ou un chien,
je le laissais passer: avez-vous entendu ce que je viens de dire?
Malheureusement, la nuit de cette tempête, j'étais dans un de ces accès,
ma raison s'était envolée (car, ordinairement, j'étais aussi cruel, mais
plus prudent); et tout ce qui tomberait, cette fois-là, entre mes mains,
devait périr: je ne prétends pas m'excuser de mes torts. La faute n'en
est pas toute à mes semblables. Je ne fais que constater ce qui est, en
attendant le jugement dernier qui me fait gratter la nuque d'avance ...
Que m'importe le jugement dernier! Ma raison ne s'envole jamais, comme je
le disais pour vous tromper. Et, quand je commets un crime, je sais ce que
je fais: je ne voulais pas faire autre chose! Debout sur le rocher, pendant
que l'ouragan fouettait mes cheveux et mon manteau, j'épiais dans l'extase
cette force de la tempête, s'acharnant sur un navire, sous un ciel sans
étoiles. Je suivis, dans une attitude triomphante, toutes les péripéties
de ce drame, depuis l'instant où le vaisseau jeta ses ancres, jusqu'au
moment où il s'engloutit, habit fatal qui entraîna, dans les boyaux de la
mer, ceux qui s'en étaient revêtus comme d'un manteau. Mais, l'instant
s'approchait, où j'allais, moi-même, me mêler comme acteur à ces scènes
de la nature bouleversée. Quand la place où le vaisseau avait soutenu le
combat montra clairement que celui-ci avait été passer le reste de ses
jours au rez-de-chaussée de la mer, alors, ceux qui avaient été emportés
avec les flots reparurent en partie à la surface. Ils se prirent à
bras-le-corps, deux par deux, trois par trois; c'était le moyen de ne pas
sauver leur vie; car, leurs mouvements devenaient embarrassés, et ils
coulaient bas comme des cruches percées ... Quelle est cette armée de
monstres marins qui fend les flots avec vitesse? Ils sont six; leurs
nageoires sont vigoureuses, et s'ouvrent un passage, à travers les vagues
soulevées. De tous ces êtres humains, qui remuent les quatre membres dans
ce continent peu ferme, les requins ne font bientôt qu'une omelette sans
oeufs, et se la partagent d'après la loi du plus fort. Le sang se mêle aux
eaux, et les eaux se mêlent au sang. Leurs yeux féroces éclairent
suffisamment la scène du carnage ... Mais, quel est encore ce tumulte des
eaux, là-bas, à l'horizon? On dirait une trombe qui s'approche. Quels
coups de rame! J'aperçois ce que c'est. Une énorme femelle de requin vient
prendre part au pâté de foie de canard, et manger du bouilli froid. Elle
est furieuse; car, elle arrive affamée. Une lutte s'engage entre elle et
les requins, pour se disputer les quelques membres palpitants qui flottent
par-ci, par-là, sans rien dire, sur la surface de la crème rouge. A droite,
à gauche, elle lance des coups de dent qui engendrent des blessures
mortelles. Mais, trois requins vivants l'entourent encore, et elle est
obligée de tourner en tous sens, pour déjouer leurs manoeuvres. Avec une
émotion croissante, inconnue jusqu'alors, le spectateur, placé sur le
rivage, suit cette bataille navale d'un nouveau genre. Il a les yeux fixés
sur cette courageuse femelle de requin, aux dents si fortes. Il n'hésite
plus, il épaule son fusil, et, avec son adresse habituelle, il loge sa
deuxième balle dans l'ouïe d'un des requins, au moment où il se montrait
au-dessus d'une vague. Restent deux requins qui n'en témoignent qu'un
acharnement plus grand. Du haut du rocher, l'homme à la salive saumâtre,
se jette à la mer, et nage vers le tapis agréablement coloré, en tenant
à la main ce couteau d'acier qui ne l'abandonne jamais. Désormais, chaque
requin a affaire à un ennemi. Il s'avance vers son adversaire fatigué, et,
prenant son temps, lui enfonce dans le ventre sa lame aiguë. La citadelle
mobile se débarrasse facilement du dernier adversaire ... Se trouvent en
présence le nageur et la femelle de requin, sauvée par lui. Ils se
regardèrent entre les yeux pendant quelques minutes: et chacun s'étonna
de trouver tant de férocité dans les regards de l'autre. Ils tournent en
rond en nageant, ne se perdent pas de vue, et se disent à part soi: «Je
me suis trompé jusqu'ici; en voilà un qui est plus méchant.» Alors, d'un
commun accord, entre deux eaux, ils glissèrent l'un vers l'autre, avec
une admiration mutuelle, la femelle de requin écartant l'eau de ses
nageoires, Maldoror battant l'onde avec ses bras: et retinrent leur
souffle, dans une vénération profonde, chacun désireux de contempler,
pour la première fois, son portrait vivant. Arrivés à trois mètres de
distance, sans faire aucun effort, ils tombèrent brusquement l'un contre
l'autre, comme deux aimants, et s'embrassèrent avec dignité et
reconnaissance, dans, une étreinte aussi tendre que celle d'un frère ou
d'une soeur. Les désirs charnels suivirent de près cette démonstration
d'amitié. Deux cuisses nerveuses se collèrent étroitement à la peau
visqueuse du monstre, comme deux sangsues; et, les bras et les nageoires
entrelacés autour du corps de l'objet aimé qu'ils entourèrent avec amour,
tandis que leurs gorges et leurs poitrines ne faisaient bientôt plus
qu'une masse glauque aux exhalaisons de goëmon; au milieu de la tempête
qui continuait de sévir; à la lueur des éclairs; ayant pour lit d'hyménée
la vague écumeuse, emportés par un courant sous-marin comme dans un
berceau, et roulant sur eux-mêmes, vers les profondeurs de l'abîme, ils
se réunirent dans un accouplement long, chaste et hideux!... Enfin, je
venais de trouver quelqu'un qui me ressemblât!... Désormais, je n'étais
plus seul dans la vie!... Elle avait les mêmes idées que moi!... J'étais
en face de mon premier amour!

       *       *       *       *       *

La Seine entraîne un corps humain. Dans ces circonstances, elle prend
des allures solennelles. Le cadavre gonflé se soutient sur les eaux; il
disparaît sous l'arche d'un pont; mais, plus loin, on le voit apparaître
de nouveau, tournant lentement sur lui-même, comme une roue de moulin,
et s'enfonçant par intervalles. Un maître de bateau, à l'aide d'une
perche, l'accroche au passage, et le ramène à terre. Avant de
transporter le corps à la Morgue, on le laisse quelque temps sur la
berge, pour le ramener à la vie. La foule compacte se rassemble autour
du corps. Ceux qui ne peuvent pas voir, parce qu'ils sont derrière,
poussent, tant qu'ils peuvent, ceux qui sont devant. Chacun se dit: «Ce
n'est pas moi qui me serais noyé.» On plaint le jeune homme qui s'est
suicidé; on l'admire; mais, on ne l'imite pas. Et, cependant, lui, a
trouvé très naturel de se donner la mort, ne jugeant rien sur la terre
capable de le contenter, et aspirant plus haut. Sa figure est distinguée,
et ses habits sont riches. A-t-il encore dix-sept ans? C'est mourir jeune!
La foule paralysée continue de jeter sur lui ses yeux immobiles ... Il
se fait nuit. Chacun se retire silencieusement. Aucun n'ose renverser le
noyé, pour lui faire rejeter l'eau qui remplit son corps. On a craint de
passer pour sensible, et aucun n'a bougé, retranché dans le col de sa
chemise. L'un s'en va, en sifflotant aigrement une tyrolienne absurde;
l'autre fait claquer ses doigts comme des castagnettes ... Harcelé par
sa pensée sombre, Maldoror, sur son cheval, passe près de cet endroit,
avec la vitesse de l'éclair. Il aperçoit le noyé; cela suffit. Aussitôt,
il a arrêté son coursier, et est descendu de l'étrier. Il soulève le
jeune homme sans dégoût, et lui fait rejeter l'eau avec abondance. A la
pensée que ce corps inerte pourrait revivre sous sa main, il sent son
coeur bondir, sous cette impression excellente, et redouble de courage.
Vains efforts! Vains efforts, ai-je dit, et c'est vrai. Le cadavre reste
inerte, et se laisse tourner en tous sens. Il frotte les tempes; il
frictionne ce membre-ci, ce membre-là: il souffle pendant une heure, dans
la bouche, en pressant ses lèvres contre les lèvres de l'inconnu. Il lui
semble enfin sentir sous sa main, appliquée contre la poitrine, un léger
battement. Le noyé vit! A ce moment suprême, on put remarquer que
plusieurs rides disparurent du front du cavalier, et le rajeunirent de
dix ans. Mais, hélas! les rides reviendront, peut-être demain, peut-être
aussitôt qu'il se sera éloigné des bords de la Seine. En attendant, le
noyé ouvre des yeux ternes, et, par un sourire blafard, remercie son
bienfaiteur; mais, il est faible encore, et ne peut faire aucun mouvement.
Sauver la vie à quelqu'un, que c'est beau! Et comme cette action rachète
de fautes! L'homme aux lèvres de bronze, occupé jusque-là à l'arracher
de la mort, regarde le jeune homme avec plus d'attention, et ses traits
ne lui paraissent pas inconnus. Il se dit qu'entre l'asphyxié, aux cheveux
blonds, et Holzer, il n'y a pas beaucoup de différence. Les voyez-vous
comme ils s'embrassent avec effusion! N'importe! L'homme à la prunelle
de jaspe tient à conserver l'apparence d'un rôle sévère. Sans rien dire,
il prend son ami qu'il met en croupe, et le coursier s'éloigne au galop.
O toi, Holzer, qui te croyais si raisonnable et si fort, n'as-tu pas vu,
par ton exemple même, comme il est difficile, dans un accès de désespoir,
de conserver le sang-froid dont tu te vantes? J'espère que tu ne me
causeras plus un pareil chagrin, et moi, de mon côte, je t'ai promis de ne
jamais attenter à ma vie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Il y a des heures dans la vie où l'homme, à la chevelure pouilleuse,
jette, l'oeil fixe, des regards fauves sur les membranes vertes de
l'espace; car, il lui semble entendre, devant lui, les ironiques huées
d'un fantôme. Il chancelle et courbe la tête: ce qu'il a entendu, c'est
la voix de la conscience. Alors, il s'élance de la maison, avec la
vitesse d'un fou, prend la première direction qui s'offre à sa stupeur,
et dévore les plaines rugueuses de la campagne. Mais, le fantôme jaune
ne le perd pas de vue, et le poursuit avec une égale vitesse.
Quelquefois, dans une nuit d'orage, pendant que des légions de poulpes
ailés, ressemblant de loin à des corbeaux, planent au-dessus des nuages,
en se dirigeant d'une rame raide vers les cités des humains, avec la
mission de les avertir de changer de conduite, le caillou, à l'oeil
sombre, voit deux êtres passer à la lueur de l'éclair, l'un derrière
l'autre; et, essuyant une furtive larme de compassion, qui coule de sa
paupière glacée, il s'écrie: «Certes, il le mérite; et ce n'est que
justice.» Après avoir dit cela, il se replace dans son attitude
farouche, et continue de regarder, avec un tremblement nerveux, la
chasse à l'homme, et les grandes lèvres du vagin d'ombre, d'où
découlent, sans cesse, comme un fleuve, d'immenses spermatozoïdes
ténébreux qui prennent leur essor dans l'éther lugubre, en cachant, avec
le vaste déploiement de leurs ailes de chauve-souris, la nature entière,
et les légions solitaires de poulpes, devenues mornes à l'aspect de ces
fulgurations sourdes et inexprimables. Mais, pendant ce temps, le
steeple-chase continue entre les deux infatigables coureurs, et le
fantôme lance par sa bouche des torrents de feu sur le dos calciné de
l'antilope humain. Si, dans l'accomplissement de ce devoir, il rencontre
en chemin la pitié qui veut lui barrer le passage, il cède avec
répugnance à ses supplications, et laisse l'homme s'échapper. Le fantôme
fait claquer sa langue, comme pour se dire à lui-même qu'il va cesser la
poursuite, et retourne vers son chenil, jusqu'à nouvel ordre. Sa voix de
condamné s'entend jusque dans les couches les plus lointaines de l'espace;
et, lorsque son hurlement épouvantable pénètre dans le coeur humain,
celui-ci préférerait avoir, dit-on, la mort pour mère que le remords pour
fils. Il enfonce la tête jusqu'aux épaules dans les complications terreuses
d'un trou; mais, la conscience volatilise cette ruse d'autruche.
L'excavation s'évapore, goutte d'éther; la lumière apparaît, avec son
cortège de rayons, comme un vol de courlis qui s'abat sur les lavandes; et
l'homme se retrouve en face de lui-même, les yeux ouverts et blêmes. Je
l'ai vu se diriger du côté de la mer, monter sur un promontoire déchiqueté
et battu par le sourcil de l'écume; et, comme une flèche, se précipiter
dans les vagues. Voici le miracle: le cadavre reparaissait, le lendemain,
sur la surface de l'océan, qui reportait au rivage cette épave de chair.
L'homme se dégageait du moule que son corps avait creusé dans le sable,
exprimait l'eau de ses cheveux mouillés, et reprenait, le front muet et
penché, le chemin de la vie. La conscience juge sévèrement nos pensées et
nos actes les plus secrets, et ne se trompe pas. Comme elle est souvent
impuissante à prévenir le mal, elle ne cesse de traquer l'homme comme un
renard, surtout pendant l'obscurité. Des yeux vengeurs, que la science
ignorante appelle _météores_, répandent une flamme livide, passent en
roulant sur eux-mêmes, et articulent des paroles de mystère ... qu'il
comprend! Alors, son chevet est broyé par les secousses de son corps,
accablé sous le poids de l'insomnie, et il entend la sinistre respiration
des rumeurs vagues de la nuit. L'ange du sommeil, lui-même, mortellement
atteint au front d'une pierre inconnue, abandonne sa tâche, et remonte
vers les cieux. Eh bien, je me présente pour défendre l'homme, cette fois;
moi, le contempteur de toutes les vertus; moi, celui que n'a pu oublier le
Créateur, depuis le jour glorieux où, renversant de leur socle les annales
du ciel, où, par je ne sais quel tripotage infâme, étaient consignées _sa_
puissance et _son_ éternité, j'appliquai mes quatre cents ventouses sur le
dessous de son aisselle, et lui fis pousser des cris terribles ... Ils se
changèrent en vipères, en sortant par sa bouche, et allèrent se cacher dans
les broussailles, les murailles en ruine, aux aguets le jour, aux aguets
la nuit. Ces cris, devenus rampants, et doués d'anneaux innombrables, avec
une tête petite et aplatie, des yeux perfides, ont juré d'être en arrêt
devant l'innocence humaine; et, quand celle-ci se promène dans les
enchevêtrements des maquis, ou au revers des talus ou sur les sables
des dunes, elle ne tarde pas à changer d'idée. Si, cependant, il en est
temps encore; car, des fois, l'homme aperçoit le poison s'introduire
dans les veines de sa jambe, par une morsure presque imperceptible,
avant qu'il ait eu le temps de rebrousser chemin, et de gagner le large.
C'est ainsi que le Créateur, conservant un sang-froid admirable, jusque
dans les souffrances les plus atroces, sait retirer, de leur propre
sein, des germes nuisibles aux habitants de la terre. Quel ne fut pas
son étonnement, quand il vit Maldoror, changé en poulpe, avancer contre
son corps ses huit pattes monstrueuses, dont chacune, lanière solide,
aurait pu embrasser facilement la circonférence d'une planète! Pris au
dépourvu, il se débattit, quelques instants, contre cette étreinte
visqueuse, qui se resserrait de plus en plus ... je craignais quelque
mauvais coup de sa part; après m'être nourri abondamment des globules de
ce sang sacré, je me détachai brusquement de son corps majestueux, et je
me cachai dans une caverne, qui, depuis lors, resta ma demeure. Après
des recherches infructueuses, il ne put m'y trouver. Il y a longtemps de
ça; mais, je crois que maintenant il sait où est ma demeure; il se garde
d'y rentrer; nous vivons, tous les deux, comme deux monarques voisins,
qui connaissent leurs forces respectives, ne peuvent se vaincre l'un
l'autre, et sont fatigués des batailles inutiles du passé. Il me craint,
et je le crains; chacun, sans être vaincu, a éprouvé les rudes coups
de son adversaire, et nous en restons là. Cependant, je suis prêt à
recommencer la lutte, quand il le voudra. Mais, qu'il n'attende pas
quelque moment favorable à ses desseins cachés. Je me tiendrai toujours
sur mes gardes, en ayant l'oeil sur lui. Qu'il n'envoie plus sur la
terre la conscience et ses tortures. J'ai enseigné aux hommes les armes
avec lesquelles on peut la combattre avec avantage. Ils ne sont pas
encore familiarisés avec elle; mais, tu sais que, pour moi, elle est
comme la paille qu'emporte le vent. J'en fais autant de cas. Si je
voulais profiter de l'occasion, qui se présente, de subtiliser ces
discussions poétiques, j'ajouterais que je fais même plus de cas de la
paille que de la conscience; car, la paille est utile pour le boeuf qui
la rumine, tandis que la conscience ne sait montrer que ses griffes
d'acier. Elles subirent un pénible échec, le jour où elles se placèrent
devant moi. Comme la conscience avait été envoyée par le Créateur, je
crus convenable de ne pas me laisser barrer le passage par elle. Si elle
s'était présentée avec la modestie et l'humilité propres à son rang, et
dont elle n'aurait jamais dû se départir, je l'aurais écoutée. Je
n'aimais pas son orgueil. J'étendis une main, et sous mes doigts broyai
les griffes; elles tombèrent en poussière, sous la pression croissante
de ce mortier de nouvelle espèce. J'étendis l'autre main, et lui
arrachai la tête. Je chassai ensuite, hors de ma maison, cette femme, à
coups de fouet, et je ne la revis plus. J'ai gardé sa tête en souvenir
de ma victoire ... Une tête à la main, dont je rongeais le crâne, je me
suis tenu sur un pied, comme le héron, au bord du précipice creusé dans
les flancs de la montagne. On m'a vu descendre dans la vallée, pendant
que la peau de ma poitrine était immobile et calme, comme le couvercle
d'une tombe! Une tête à la main, dont je rongeais le crâne, j'ai nagé
dans les gouffres les plus dangereux, longé les écueils mortels, et
plongé plus bas que les courants, pour assister, comme un étranger, aux
combats des monstres marins; je me suis écarté du rivage, jusqu'à le
perdre de ma vue perçante; et, les crampes hideuses, avec leur magnétisme
paralysant, rôdaient autour de mes membres, qui fendaient les vagues avec
des mouvements robustes, sans oser approcher. On m'a vu revenir, sain et
sauf, dans la plage, pendant que la peau de ma poitrine était immobile et
calme, comme le couvercle d'une tombe! Une tête à la main, dont je
rongeais le crâne, j'ai franchi les marches ascendantes d'une tour élevée.
Je suis parvenu, les jambes lasses, sur la plate-forme vertigineuse. J'ai
regardé la campagne, la mer; j'ai regardé le soleil, le firmament;
repoussant du pied le granit qui ne recula pas, j'ai défié la mort et la
vengeance divine par une huée suprême, et me suis précipité, comme un pavé,
dans la bouche de l'espace. Les hommes entendirent le choc douloureux et
retentissant qui résulta de la rencontre du sol avec la tête de la
conscience, que j'avais abandonnée dans ma chute. On me vit descendre,
avec la lenteur de l'oiseau, porté par un nuage invisible, et ramasser
la tête, pour la forcer à être témoin d'un triple crime, que je devais
commettre le jour même, pendant que la peau de ma poitrine était immobile
et calme, comme le couvercle d'une tombe! Une tête à la main, dont je
rongeais le crâne, je me suis dirigé vers l'endroit où s'élèvent les
poteaux qui soutiennent la guillotine. J'ai placé la grâce suave des cous
de trois jeunes filles sous le couperet. Exécuteur des hautes-oeuvres, je
lâchai le cordon avec l'expérience apparente d'une vie entière; et, le fer
triangulaire, s'abattant obliquement, trancha trois têtes qui me
regardaient avec douceur. Je mis ensuite la mienne sous le rasoir pesant,
et le bourreau prépara l'accomplissement de son devoir. Trois fois, le
couperet redescendit entre les rainures avec une nouvelle vigueur; trois
fois, ma carcasse matérielle, surtout au siège du cou, fut remuée jusqu'en
ses fondements, comme lorsqu'on se figure en rêve être écrasé par une
maison qui s'effondre. Le peuple stupéfait me laissa passer, pour m'écarter
de la place funèbre; il m'a vu ouvrir avec mes coudes ses flots
ondulatoires, et me remuer, plein de vie, avançant devant moi, la tête
droite, pendant que la peau de ma poitrine était immobile et calme, comme
le couvercle d'une tombe! J'avais dit que je voulais défendre l'homme,
cette fois; mais, je crains que mon apologie ne soit pas l'expression de la
vérité: et, par conséquent, je préfère me taire. C'est avec reconnaissance
que l'humanité applaudira à cette mesure!

       *       *       *       *       *

Il est temps de serrer les freins à mon inspiration, et de m'arrêter, un
instant, en route, comme quand on regarde le vagin d'une femme; il est
bon d'examiner la carrière parcourue, et de s'élancer, ensuite, les
membres reposés, d'un bond impétueux. Fournir une traite d'une seule
haleine n'est pas facile; et les ailes se fatiguent beaucoup, dans un
vol élevé, sans espérance et sans remords. Non ... ne conduisons pas
plus profondément la meute hagarde des pioches et des fouilles, à
travers les mines explosibles de ce chant impie! Le crocodile ne
changera pas un mot au vomissement sorti de dessous son crâne. Tant pis,
si quelque ombre furtive, excitée par le but louable de venger l'humanité,
injustement attaquée par moi, ouvre subrepticement la porte de ma chambre
en frôlant la muraille comme l'aile d'un goëland, et enfonce un poignard,
dans les côtes du pilleur d'épaves célestes! Autant vaut que l'argile
dissolve ses atomes, de cette manière que d'une autre.


FIN DU DEUXIÈME CHANT




CHANT TROISIÈME


Rappelons les noms de ces êtres imaginaires, à la nature d'ange, que ma
plume, pendant le deuxième chant, a tirés d'un cerveau, brillant d'une
lueur émanée d'eux-mêmes. Ils meurent, dès leur naissance, comme ces
étincelles dont l'oeil a de la peine à suivre l'effacement rapide, sur
du papier brûlé. Léman!... Lohengrin!... Lombano!... Holzer!... un
instant, vous apparûtes, recouverts des insignes de la jeunesse, à mon
horizon charmé; comme des cloches de plongeur. Vous n'en sortirez plus.
Il me suffit que j'aie gardé votre souvenir; vous devez céder la place à
d'autres substances, peut-être moins belles, qu'enfantera le débordement
orageux d'un amour qui a résolu de ne pas apaiser sa soif auprès de la
race humaine. Amour affamé, qui se dévorerait lui-même, s'il ne
cherchait sa nourriture dans des fictions célestes: créant, à la longue,
une pyramide de séraphins, plus nombreux que les insectes qui
fourmillent dans une goutte d'eau, il les entrelacera dans une ellipse
qu'il fera tourbillonner autour de lui. Pendant ce temps, le voyageur,
arrêté contre l'aspect d'une cataracte, s'il relève le visage, verra,
dans le lointain, un être humain, emporté vers la cave de l'enfer par
une guirlande de camélias vivants! Mais ... silence! l'image flottante
du cinquième idéal se dessine lentement, comme les replis indécis d'une
aurore boréale, sur le plan vaporeux de mon intelligence, et prend de
plus en plus une consistance déterminée ... Mario et moi nous longions
la grève. Nos chevaux, le cou tendu, fendaient les membranes de
l'espace, et arrachaient des étincelles aux galets de la plage. La bise,
qui nous frappait en plein visage, s'engouffrait dans nos manteaux, et
faisait voltiger en arrière les cheveux de nos têtes jumelles. La
mouette, par ses cris et ses mouvements d'aile, s'efforçait en vain de
nous avertir de la proximité possible de la tempête, et s'écriait: «Où
s'en vont-ils, de ce galop insensé?» Nous ne disions rien; plongés dans
la rêverie, nous nous laissions emporter sur les ailes de cette course
furieuse; le pêcheur, nous voyant passer, rapides comme l'albatros, et
croyant apercevoir, fuyant devant lui, _les deux frères mystérieux_,
comme on les avait ainsi appelés, parce qu'ils étaient toujours
ensemble, s'empressait de faire le signe de la croix, et se cachait,
avec son chien paralysé, sous quelque roche profonde. Les habitants
de la côte avaient entendu raconter des choses étranges sur ces deux
personnages, qui apparaissaient sur la terre, au milieu des nuages,
aux grandes époques de calamité, quand une guerre affreuse menaçait
de planter son harpon sur la poitrine de deux pays ennemis, ou que le
choléra s'apprêtait à lancer, avec sa fronde, la pourriture et la mort
dans des cités entières. Les plus vieux pilleurs d'épaves fronçaient le
sourcil, d'un air grave, affirmant que les deux fantômes, dont chacun
avait remarqué la vaste envergure des ailes noires, pendant les
ouragans, au-dessus des bancs de sable et des écueils, étaient le génie
de la terre et le génie de la mer, qui promenaient leur majesté, au
milieu des airs, pendant les grandes révolutions de la nature, unis
ensemble par une amitié éternelle, dont la rareté et la gloire ont
enfanté l'étonnement du câble indéfini des générations. On disait que,
volant côte à côte comme deux condors des Andes, ils aimaient à planer,
en cercles concentriques, parmi les couches d'atmosphères qui avoisinent
le soleil; qu'ils se nourrissaient, dans ces parages, des plus pures
essences de la lumière; mais, qu'ils ne se décidaient qu'avec peine à
rabattre l'inclinaison de leur vol vertical, vers l'orbite épouvanté où
tourne le globe humain en délire, habité par des esprits cruels qui se
massacrent entre eux dans les champs où rugit la bataille (quand ils ne
se tuent pas perfidement, en secret, dans le centre des villes, avec le
poignard de la haine ou de l'ambition), et qui se nourrissent d'êtres
pleins de vie comme eux et placés quelques degrés plus bas dans
l'échelle des existences. Ou bien, quand ils prenaient la ferme
résolution, afin d'exciter les hommes au repentir par les strophes de
leurs prophéties, de nager, en se dirigeant à grandes brassées, vers les
régions sidérales où une planète se mouvait au milieu des exhalaisons
épaisses d'avarice, d'orgueil, d'imprécation et de ricanement qui se
dégageaient, comme des vapeurs pestilentielles, de sa surface hideuse et
paraissait petite comme une boule, étant presque invisible, à cause de
la distance, ils ne manquaient pas de trouver des occasions où ils se
repentaient amèrement de leur bienveillance, méconnue et conspuée, et
allaient se cacher au fond des volcans, pour converser avec le feu
vivace qui bouillonne dans les cuves des souterrains centraux, ou au
fond de la mer, pour reposer agréablement leur vue désillusionnée sur
les monstres les plus féroces de l'abîme, qui leur paraissaient des
modèles de douceur, en comparaison des bâtards de l'humanité. La nuit
venue, avec son obscurité propice, ils s'élançaient des cratères, à la
crête de porphyre, des courants sous-marins et laissaient, bien loin
derrière eux, le pot de chambre rocailleux où se démène l'anus constipé
des kakatoès humains, jusqu'à ce qu'ils ne pussent plus distinguer la
silhouette suspendue de la planète immonde. Alors, chagrinés de leur
tentative infructueuse, au milieu des étoiles qui compatissaient à leur
douleur et sous l'oeil de Dieu, s'embrassaient, en pleurant, l'ange de
la terre et l'ange de la mer!... Mario et celui qui galopait auprès de
lui n'ignoraient pas les bruits vagues et superstitieux que racontaient,
dans les veillées, les pêcheurs de la côte, en chuchotant autour de
l'âtre, portes et fenêtres fermées; pendant que le vent de la nuit, qui
désire se réchauffer, fait entendre ses sifflements autour de la cabane
de paille, et ébranle, par sa vigueur, ces frêles murailles, entourées à
la base de fragments de coquillage, apportés par les replis mourants des
vagues. Nous ne parlions pas. Que se disent deux coeurs qui s'aiment?
Rien. Mais nos yeux exprimaient tout. Je l'avertis de serrer davantage
son manteau autour de lui, et lui me fait observer que mon cheval
s'éloigne trop du sien; chacun prend autant d'intérêt à la vie de
l'autre qu'à sa propre vie; nous ne rions pas. Il s'efforce de me
sourire; mais, j'aperçois que son visage porte le poids des terribles
impressions qu'y a gravées la réflexion, constamment penchée sur les
sphynx qui déroutent, avec un oeil oblique, les grandes angoisses de
l'intelligence des mortels. Voyant ses manoeuvres inutiles, il détourne
les yeux, mord son frein terrestre avec la bave de la rage, et regarde
l'horizon, qui s'enfuit à notre approche. A mon tour, je m'efforce de
lui rappeler sa jeunesse dorée, qui ne demande qu'à s'avancer dans les
palais des plaisirs, comme une reine; mais, il remarque que mes paroles
sortent difficilement de ma bouche amaigrie, et que les années de mon
propre printemps ont passé, tristes et glaciales, comme un rêve
implacable qui promène sur les tables des banquets, et sur les lits de
satin, où sommeille la pâle prêtresse d'amour, payée avec les
miroitements de l'or, les voluptés amères du désenchantement, les rides
pestilentielles de la vieillesse, les effarements de la solitude et les
flambeaux de la douleur. Voyant mes manoeuvres inutiles, je ne m'étonne
pas ne pas pouvoir le rendre heureux; le Tout-Puissant m'apparaît revêtu
de ses instruments de torture, dans toute l'auréole resplendissante de
son horreur; je détourne les yeux et regarde l'horizon qui s'enfuit à
notre approche ... Nos chevaux galopaient le long du rivage, comme s'ils
fuyaient l'oeil humain ... Mario est plus jeune que moi; l'humidité du
temps et l'écume salée qui rejaillit jusqu'à nous amènent le contact du
froid sur ses lèvres. Je lui dis: «Prends garde!... prends garde!...
ferme tes lèvres, les unes contre les autres; ne vois-tu pas les griffes
aiguës de la gerçure, qui sillonne ta peau de blessures cuisantes?» Il
fixe mon front, et me réplique, avec les mouvements de sa langue: «Oui,
je les vois, ces griffes vertes; mais, je ne dérangerai pas la situation
naturelle de ma bouche pour les faire fuir. Regarde, si je mens.
Puisqu'il paraît que c'est la volonté de la Providence, je veux m'y
conformer. Sa volonté aurait pu être meilleure.» Et moi, je m'écriai:
«J'admire cette vengeance noble.» Je voulus m'arracher les cheveux;
mais, il me le défendit avec un regard sévère, et je lui obéis avec
respect. Il se faisait tard, et l'aigle regagnait son nid, creusé dans
les anfractuosités de la roche. Il me dit: «Je vais te prêter mon
manteau, pour te garantir du froid; je n'en ai pas besoin.» Je lui
répliquai: «Malheur à toi, si tu fais ce que tu dis. Je ne veux pas
qu'un autre souffre à ma place, et surtout toi.» Il ne répondit pas,
parce que j'avais raison; mais, moi, je me mis à le consoler, à cause de
l'accent trop impétueux de mes paroles ... Nos chevaux galopaient le
long du rivage, comme s'ils fuyaient l'oeil humain ... Je relevai la
tête, comme la proue d'un vaisseau soulevée par une vague énorme, et je
lui dis: «Est-ce que tu pleures? Je te le demande, roi des neiges et des
brouillards. Je ne vois pas des larmes sur ton visage, beau comme la
fleur du cactus, et tes paupières sont sèches, comme le lit du torrent;
mais, je distingue, au fond de tes yeux, une cuve pleine de sang, où
bout ton innocence mordue au cou par un scorpion de la grande espèce. Un
vent violent s'abat sur le feu qui réchauffe la chaudière, et en répand
les flammes obscures jusqu'en dehors de ton orbite sacré. J'ai approché
mes cheveux de ton front rosé, et j'ai senti une odeur de roussi, parce
qu'ils se brûlèrent. Ferme tes yeux; car, sinon, ton visage, calciné
comme la lave du volcan, tombera en cendres sur le creux de ma main.»
Et, lui, se retournait vers moi, sans faire attention aux rênes qu'il
tenait dans la main, et me contemplait avec attendrissement, tandis que
lentement il baissait et relevait ses paupières de lis, comme le flux et
le reflux de la mer. Il voulut bien répondre à ma question audacieuse,
et voici comme il le fit: «Ne fais pas attention à moi. De même que les
vapeurs des fleuves rampent le long des flancs de la colline, et, une
fois arrivées au sommet, s'élancent dans l'atmosphère, en formant des
nuages; de même, tes inquiétudes sur mon compte se sont insensiblement
accrues, sans motif raisonnable, et forment au-dessus de ton
imagination, le corps trompeur d'un mirage désolé. Je t'assure qu'il n'y
a pas de feu dans mes yeux, quoique j'y ressente la même impression que
si mon crâne était plongé dans un casque de charbons ardents. Comment
veux-tu que les chairs de mon innocence bouillent dans la cuve, puisque
je n'entends que des cris très faibles et confus, qui, pour moi, ne sont
que les gémissements du vent qui passe au-dessus de nos têtes? Il est
impossible qu'un scorpion ait fixé sa résidence et ses pinces aiguës au
fond de mon orbite haché; je crois plutôt que ce sont des tenailles
vigoureuses qui broient les nerfs optiques. Cependant, je suis d'avis,
avec toi, que le sang, qui remplit la cuve, a été extrait de mes veines
par un bourreau invisible, pendant le sommeil de la dernière nuit. Je
t'ai attendu longtemps, fils aimé de l'océan; et mes bras assoupis ont
engagé un vain combat avec Celui qui s'était introduit dans le vestibule
de ma maison ... Oui, je sens que mon âme est cadenassée dans le verrou
de mon corps, et qu'elle ne peut se dégager, pour fuir loin des rivages
que frappe la mer humaine, et n'être plus témoin du spectacle de la
meute livide des malheurs, poursuivant sans relâche, à travers les
fondrières et les gouffres de l'abattement immense, les isards humains.
Mais, je ne me plaindrai pas. J'ai reçu la vie comme une blessure, et
j'ai défendu au suicide de guérir la cicatrice. Je veux que le Créateur
en contemple, à chaque heure de son éternité, la crevasse béante. C'est
le châtiment que je lui inflige. Nos coursiers ralentissent la vitesse
de leurs pieds d'airain; leurs corps tremblent, comme le chasseur
surpris par un troupeau de peccaris. Il ne faut pas qu'ils se mettent
à écouter ce que nous disons. A force d'attention, leur intelligence
grandirait, et ils pourraient peut-être nous comprendre. Malheur à eux;
car, ils souffriraient davantage! En effet, ne pense qu'aux marcassins
de l'humanité: le degré d'intelligence qui les sépare des autres êtres
de la création ne semble-t-il pas ne leur être accordé qu'au prix
irrémédiable de souffrances incalculables? Imite mon exemple, et que ton
éperon d'argent s'enfonce dans les flancs de ton coursier ...» Nos
chevaux galopaient le long du rivage, comme s'ils fuyaient l'oeil
humain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Voici la folle qui passe en dansant, tandis qu'elle se rappelle
vaguement quelque chose. Les enfants la poursuivent à coups de pierre,
comme si c'était un merle. Elle brandit un bâton et fait mine de les
poursuivre, puis reprend sa course. Elle a laissé un soulier en chemin,
et ne s'en aperçoit pas. De longues pattes d'araignée circulent sur sa
nuque; ce ne sont autre chose que ses cheveux. Son visage ne ressemble
plus au visage humain, et elle lance des éclats de rire comme l'hyène.
Elle laisse échapper des lambeaux de phrases dans lesquels, en les
recousant, très peu trouveraient une signification claire. Sa robe,
percée en plus d'un endroit, exécute des mouvements saccadés autour de
ses jambes osseuses et pleines de boue. Elle va devant soi, comme la
feuille du peuplier, emportée, elle, sa jeunesse, ses illusions et son
bonheur passé, qu'elle revoit à travers les brumes d'une intelligence
détruite, par le tourbillon des facultés inconscientes. Elle a perdu sa
grâce et sa beauté primitives; sa démarche est ignoble, et son haleine
respire l'eau-de-vie. Si les hommes étaient heureux sur cette terre,
c'est alors qu'il faudrait s'étonner. La folle ne fait aucun reproche,
elle est trop fière pour se plaindre, et mourra, sans avoir révélé son
secret à ceux qui s'intéressent à elle, mais auxquels elle a défendu de
ne jamais lui adresser la parole. Les enfants la poursuivent à coups de
pierre, comme si c'était un merle. Elle a laissé tomber de son sein un
rouleau de papier. Un inconnu le ramasse, s'enferme chez lui toute la
nuit et lit le manuscrit, qui contenait ce qui suit: «Après bien des
années stériles, la Providence m'envoya une fille. Pendant trois jours,
je m'agenouillai dans les églises, et ne cessai de remercier le grand
nom de Celui qui avait enfin exaucé mes voeux. Je nourrissais de mon
propre lait celle qui était plus que ma vie et que je voyais grandir
rapidement, douée de toutes les qualités de l'âme et du corps. Elle me
disait: «Je voudrais avoir une petite soeur pour m'amuser avec elle;
recommande au bon Dieu de m'en envoyer une; et, pour le récompenser,
j'entrelacerai, pour lui, une guirlande de violettes, de menthes et
de géraniums.» Pour toute réponse, je l'enlevais sur mon sein et
l'embrassais avec amour. Elle savait déjà s'intéresser aux animaux, et
me demandait pourquoi l'hirondelle se contente de raser de l'aile les
chaumières humaines, sans oser y rentrer. Mais, moi, je mettais un doigt
sur ma bouche, comme pour lui dire de garder le silence sur cette grave
question, dont je ne voulais pas encore lui faire comprendre les
éléments, afin de ne pas frapper, par une sensation excessive, son
imagination enfantine; et, je m'empressais de détourner la conversation
de ce sujet, pénible à traiter pour tout être appartenant à la race qui
a étendu une domination injuste sur les autres animaux de la création.
Quand elle me parlait des tombes du cimetière, en me disant qu'on
respirait dans cette atmosphère les agréables parfums des cyprès et des
immortelles, je me gardai de la contredire; mais, je lui disais que
c'était la ville des oiseaux, que, là, ils chantaient depuis l'aurore
jusqu'au crépuscule du soir, et que les tombes étaient leurs nids, où
ils couchaient la nuit avec leur famille, en soulevant le marbre. Tous
les mignons vêtements qui la couvraient, c'est moi qui les avais cousus,
ainsi que les dentelles, aux mille arabesques, que je réservais pour le
dimanche. L'hiver, elle avait sa place légitime autour de la grande
cheminée; car elle se croyait une personne sérieuse, et, pendant l'été,
la prairie reconnaissait la suave pression de ses pas, quand elle
s'aventurait, avec son filet de soie, attaché au bout d'un jonc, après
les colibris, pleins d'indépendance, et les papillons, aux zigzags
agaçants. «Que fais-tu, petite vagabonde, quand la soupe t'attend depuis
une heure, avec la cuillère qui s'impatiente?» Mais, elle s'écriait, en
me sautant au cou, qu'elle n'y reviendrait plus. Le lendemain, elle
s'échappait de nouveau, à travers les marguerites et les résédas; parmi
les rayons du soleil et le vol tournoyant des insectes éphémères; ne
connaissant que la coupe prismatique de la vie, pas encore le fiel;
heureuse d'être plus grande que la mésange; se moquant de la fauvette,
qui ne chante pas si bien que le rossignol; tirant sournoisement la
langue au vilain corbeau, qui la regardait paternellement; et gracieuse
comme un jeune chat. Je ne devais pas longtemps jouir de sa présence;
le temps s'approchait, où elle devait, d'une manière inattendue, faire
ses adieux aux enchantements de la vie, abandonnant pour toujours
la compagnie des tourterelles, des gelinottes et des verdiers, les
babillements de la tulipe et de l'anémone, les conseils des herbes
du marécage, l'esprit incisif des grenouilles et la fraîcheur des
ruisseaux. On me raconta ce qui s'était passé; car, moi, je ne fus pas
présente à l'événement qui eut pour conséquence la mort de ma fille.
Si je l'avais été, j'aurais défendu cet ange au prix de mon sang ...
Maldoror passait avec son bouledogue; il voit une jeune fille qui dort
à l'ombre d'un platane, il la prend d'abord pour une rose ... On ne peut
dire qui s'éleva le plus tôt dans son esprit, ou la vue de cette enfant,
ou la résolution qui en fut la suite. Il se déshabille rapidement, comme
un homme qui sait ce qu'il va faire. Nu comme une pierre, il s'est jeté
sur le corps de la jeune fille, et lui a levé la robe pour commettre un
attentat à la pudeur ... à la clarté du soleil! Il ne se gênera pas,
allez!... N'insistons pas sur cette action impure. L'esprit mécontent,
il se rhabille avec précipitation, jette un regard de prudence sur la
route poudreuse, où personne ne chemine, et ordonne au bouledogue
d'étrangler avec le mouvement de ses mâchoires, la jeune fille
ensanglantée. Il indique au chien de la montagne la place où respire et
hurle la victime souffrante, et se retire à l'écart, pour ne pas être
témoin de la rentrée des dents pointues dans les veines roses.
L'accomplissement de cet ordre put paraître sévère au bouledogue. Il
crut qu'on lui demanda ce qui avait été déjà fait, et se contenta, ce
loup, au mufle monstrueux, de violer à son tour la virginité de cette
enfant délicate. De son ventre déchiré, le sang coule de nouveau le long
de ses jambes, à travers la prairie. Ses gémissements se joignent aux
pleurs de l'animal. La jeune fille lui présente la croix d'or qui ornait
son cou, afin qu'il l'épargne; elle n'avait pas osé la présenter aux
yeux farouches de celui qui, d'abord, avait eu la pensée de profiter
de la faiblesse de son âge. Mais le chien n'ignorait pas que, s'il
désobéissait à son maître, un couteau lancé de dessous une manche,
ouvrirait brusquement ses entrailles, sans crier gare. Maldoror (comme
ce nom répugne à prononcer!) entendait les agonies de la douleur, et
s'étonnait que la victime eût la vie si dure, pour ne pas être encore
morte. Il s'approche de l'autel sacrificatoire, et voit la conduite
de son bouledogue, livré à de bas penchants, et qui élevait sa tête
au-dessus de la jeune fille, comme un naufragé élève la sienne au-dessus
des vagues en courroux. Il lui donne un coup de pied et lui fend un
oeil. Le bouledogue, en colère, s'enfuit dans la campagne, entraînant
après lui, pendant un espace de route qui est toujours trop long pour
si court qu'il fût, le corps de la jeune fille suspendue, qui n'a été
dégagé que grâce aux mouvements saccadés de la fuite; mais, il craint
d'attaquer son maître, qui ne le reverra plus. Celui-ci tire de sa poche
un canif américain, composé de dix à douze lames qui servent à divers
usages. Il ouvre les pattes anguleuses de cet hydre d'acier; et, muni
d'un pareil scalpel, voyant que le gazon n'avait pas encore disparu sous
la couleur de tant de sang versé, s'apprête, sans pâlir, à fouiller
courageusement le vagin de la malheureuse enfant. De ce trou élargi, il
retire successivement les organes intérieurs; les boyaux, les poumons,
le foie et enfin le coeur lui-même sont arrachés de leurs fondements
et entraînés à la lumière du jour, par l'ouverture épouvantable. Le
sacrificateur s'aperçoit que la jeune fille, poulet vidé, est morte
depuis longtemps; il cesse la persévérance croissante de ses ravages,
et laisse le cadavre redormir à l'ombre du platane. On ramassa le canif,
abandonné à quelques pas. Un berger, témoin du crime, dont on n'avait
pas découvert l'auteur, ne le raconta que longtemps après, quand il se
fut assuré que le criminel avait gagné en sûreté les frontières, et
qu'il n'avait plus à redouter la vengeance certaine proférée contre lui,
en cas de révélation. Je plaignis l'insensé qui avait commis ce forfait,
que le législateur n'avait pas prévu, et qui n'avait pas eu de
précédents. Je le plaignis, parce qu'il est probable qu'il n'avait pas
gardé l'usage de la raison, quand il mania le poignard à la lame quatre
fois triple, labourant de fond en comble les parois des viscères. Je le
plaignis, parce que, s'il n'était pas fou, sa conduite honteuse devait
couver une haine bien grande contre ses semblables, pour s'acharner
ainsi sur les chairs et les artères d'un enfant inoffensif, qui fut ma
fille. J'assistai à l'enterrement de ces décombres humains, avec une
résignation muette; et chaque jour, je viens prier sur une tombe.»
A la fin de cette lecture, l'inconnu ne peut plus garder ses forces et
s'évanouit. Il reprend ses sens, et brûle le manuscrit. Il avait oublié
ce souvenir de sa jeunesse, l'habitude émousse la mémoire; et après
vingt ans d'absence, il revenait dans ce pays fatal. Il n'achètera pas
de bouledogue!... Il ne conversera pas avec les bergers!... Il n'ira pas
dormir à l'ombre des platanes!... Les enfants la poursuivent à coups de
pierre, comme si c'était un merle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tremdall a touché la main pour la dernière fois, à celui qui s'absente
volontairement, toujours fuyant devant lui, toujours l'image de l'homme
le poursuivant. Le juif errant se dit que, si le sceptre de la terre
appartenait à la race des crocodiles, il ne fuirait pas ainsi. Tremdall,
debout sur la vallée, a mis une main devant ses yeux, pour concentrer
les rayons solaires, et rendre sa vue plus perçante, tandis que l'autre
palpe le sein de l'espace, avec le bras horizontal et immobile. Penché
en avant, statue de l'amitié, il regarde, avec des yeux mystérieux comme
la mer, grimper sur la pente de la côte, les guêtres du voyageur, aidé
de son bâton ferré. La terre semble manquer à ses pieds, et quand même
il le voudrait, il ne pourrait retenir ses larmes et ses sentiments:

«Il est loin; je vois sa silhouette cheminer sur un étroit sentier. Où
s'en va-t-il, de ce pas pesant? Il ne le sait lui-même ... Cependant, je
suis persuadé que je ne dors pas; qu'est-ce qui s'approche, et va à la
rencontre de Maldoror? Comme il est grand, le dragon ... plus qu'un
chêne! On dirait que ses ailes blanchâtres, nouées par de fortes
attaches, ont des nerfs d'acier, tant elles fendent l'air avec aisance.
Son corps commence par un buste de tigre, et se termine par une longue
queue de serpent. Je n'étais pas habitué à voir ces choses. Qu'a-t-il
donc sur le front? J'y vois écrit, dans une langue symbolique, un mot
que je ne puis déchiffrer. D'un dernier coup d'aile, il s'est transporté
auprès de celui dont je connais le timbre de voix. Il lui a dit: «Je
t'attendais, et toi aussi. L'heure est arrivée; me voilà. Lis, sur mon
front, mon nom écrit en signes hiéroglyphiques.» Mais lui, à peine
a-t-il vu venir l'ennemi, s'est changé en aigle immense, et se prépare
au combat, en faisant claquer de contentement son bec recourbé, voulant
dire par là qu'il se charge, à lui seul, de manger la partie postérieure
du dragon. Les voilà qui tracent des cercles dont la concentricité
diminue, espionnant leurs moyens réciproques, avant de combattre; ils
font bien. Le dragon me paraît plus fort; je voudrais qu'il remportât
la victoire sur l'aigle. Je vais éprouver de grandes émotions, à ce
spectacle où une partie de mon être est engagée. Puissant dragon, je
t'exciterai de mes cris, s'il est nécessaire; car, il est de l'intérêt
de l'aigle qu'il soit vaincu. Qu'attendent-ils pour s'attaquer? Je suis
dans des transes mortelles. Voyons, dragon, commence, toi, le premier,
l'attaque. Tu viens de lui donner un coup de griffe sec: ce n'est pas
trop mal. Je t'assure que l'aigle l'aura senti; le vent emporte la
beauté de ses plumes, tachées de sang. Ah! l'aigle t'arrache un oeil
avec son bec, et, toi, tu ne lui avais arraché que la peau; il fallait
faire attention à cela. Bravo, prends ta revanche, et casse-lui une
aile; il n'y a pas à dire, tes dents de tigres sont très bonnes. Si tu
pouvais approcher de l'aigle, pendant qu'il tournoie dans l'espace,
lancé en bas vers la campagne! Je le remarque, cet aigle t'inspire de
la retenue, même quand il tombe. Il est par terre, il ne pourra pas se
relever. L'aspect de toutes ces blessures béantes m'enivre. Vole à fleur
de terre autour de lui, et, avec les coups de ta queue écaillée de
serpent, achève-le, si tu peux. Courage, beau dragon; enfonce-lui tes
griffes vigoureuses, et que le sang se mêle au sang, pour former des
ruisseaux où il n'y ait pas d'eau. C'est facile à dire, mais non à
faire. L'aigle vient de combiner un nouveau plan stratégique de défense,
occasionné par les chances malencontreuses de cette lutte mémorable; il
est prudent. Il s'est assis solidement, dans une position inébranlable,
sur l'aile restante, sur ses deux cuisses, et sur sa queue, qui lui
servait auparavant de gouvernail. Il défie des efforts plus
extraordinaires que ceux qu'on lui a opposés jusqu'ici. Tantôt, il
tourne aussi vite que le tigre, et n'a pas l'air de se fatiguer; tantôt,
il se couche sur le dos, avec ses deux fortes pattes en l'air, et, avec
sang-froid, regarde ironiquement son adversaire. Il faudra, à bout de
compte, que je sache qui sera le vainqueur; le combat ne peut pas
s'éterniser. Je songe aux conséquences qu'il en résultera! L'aigle est
terrible, et fait des sauts énormes qui ébranlent la terre, comme s'il
allait prendre son vol; cependant, il sait que cela lui est impossible.
Le dragon ne s'y fie pas; il croit qu'à chaque instant l'aigle va
l'attaquer par le côté où il manque d'oeil ... Malheureux que je suis!
C'est ce qui arrive. Comment le dragon s'est laissé prendre à la
poitrine? Il a beau user de la ruse et de la force; je m'aperçois que
l'aigle, collé à lui par tous ses membres, comme une sangsue, enfonce
de plus en plus son bec, malgré de nouvelles blessures qu'il reçoit,
jusqu'à la racine du cou, dans le ventre du dragon. On ne lui voit que
le corps. Il paraît être à l'aise; il ne se presse pas d'en sortir. Il
cherche sans doute quelque chose, tandis que le dragon, à la tête de
tigre, pousse des beuglements qui réveillent les forêts. Voilà l'aigle,
qui sort de cette caverne. Aigle, comme tu es horrible! Tu es plus rouge
qu'une mare de sang! Quoique tu tiennes dans ton bec nerveux un coeur
palpitant, tu es si couvert de blessures, que tu peux à peine te
soutenir sur tes pattes emplumées; et que tu chancelles, sans desserrer
le bec, à côté du dragon qui meurt dans d'effroyables agonies. La
victoire a été difficile; n'importe, tu l'as remportée: il faut, au
moins, dire la vérité ... Tu agis d'après les règles de la raison, en te
dépouillant de la forme d'aigle, pendant que tu t'éloignes du cadavre du
dragon. Ainsi donc, Maldoror, tu as été vainqueur! Ainsi donc, Maldoror,
tu as vaincu l'_Espérance_! Désormais, le désespoir se nourrira de ta
substance la plus pure! Désormais. tu rentres, à pas délibérés, dans la
carrière du mal! Malgré que je sois, pour ainsi dire, blasé sur la
souffrance, le dernier coup que tu as porté au dragon n'a pas manqué de
se faire sentir en moi. Juge toi-même si je souffre! Mais tu me fais
peur. Voyez, voyez, dans le lointain, cet homme qui s'enfuit. Sur lui,
terre excellente, la malédiction a poussé son feuillage touffu; il est
maudit et il maudit. Où portes-tu tes sandales? Où t'en vas-tu, hésitant
comme un somnambule, au-dessus d'un toit? Que ta destinée perverse
s'accomplisse! Maldoror, adieu! Adieu, jusqu'à l'éternité, où nous ne
nous retrouverons pas ensemble!»

       *       *       *       *       *

C'était une journée de printemps. Les oiseaux répandaient leurs
cantiques en gazouillements, et les humains, rendus à leurs différents
devoirs, se baignaient dans la sainteté de la fatigue. Tout travaillait
à sa destinée: les arbres, les planètes, les squales. Tout, excepté le
Créateur! Il était étendu sur la route, les habits déchirés. Sa lèvre
inférieure pendait comme un câble somnifère: ses dents n'étaient pas
lavées, et la poussière se mêlait aux ondes blondes de ses cheveux.
Engourdi par un assoupissement pesant, broyé contre les cailloux, son
corps faisait des efforts inutiles pour se relever. Ses forces l'avaient
abandonné, et il gisait, là, faible comme le ver de terre, impassible
comme l'écorce. Des flots de vin remplissaient les ornières, creusées
par les soubresauts nerveux de ses épaules. L'abrutissement, au groin
de porc, le couvrait de ses ailes protectrices, et lui jetait un regard
amoureux. Ses jambes, aux muscles détendus, balayaient le sol, comme
deux mâts aveugles. Le sang coulait de ses narines: dans sa chute, sa
figure avait frappé contre un poteau ... Il était soûl! Horriblement
soûl! Soûl comme une punaise qui a mâché pendant la nuit trois tonneaux
de sang! Il remplissait l'écho de paroles incohérentes, que je me
garderai de répéter ici; si l'ivrogne suprême ne se respecte pas, moi,
je dois respecter les hommes. Saviez-vous que le Créateur ... se soûlât!
Pitié pour cette lèvre, souillée dans les coupes de l'orgie! Le
hérisson, qui passait, lui enfonça ses pointes dans le dos, et dit: «Ça,
pour toi. Le soleil est à la moitié de sa course: travaille, fainéant,
et ne mange pas le pain des autres. Attends un peu, et tu vas voir, si
j'appelle le kakatoès, au bec crochu.» Le pivert et la chouette, qui
passaient, lui enfoncèrent le bec entier dans le ventre, et dirent: «Ça,
pour toi. Que viens-tu faire sur cette terre? Est-ce pour offrir cette
lugubre comédie aux animaux? Mais, ni la taupe ni le casoar, ni le
flammant ne t'imiteront, je te le jure.» L'âne, qui passait, lui donna
un coup de pied sur la tempe, et dit: «Ça, pour toi. Que t'avais-je fait
pour me donner des oreilles si longues? Il n'y a pas jusqu'au grillon
qui ne me méprise.» Le crapaud, qui passait, lança un jet de bave sur
son front, et dit: «Ça, pour toi. Si tu ne m'avais fait l'oeil si gros,
et que je t'eusse aperçu dans l'état où je te vois, j'aurais chastement
caché la beauté de tes membres sous une pluie de renoncules, de myosotis
et de camélias, afin que nul ne te vît.» Le lion, qui passait, inclina
sa face royale, et dit: «Pour moi, je le respecte, quoique sa splendeur
nous paraisse pour le moment éclipsée. Vous autres, qui faites les
orgueilleux, et n'êtes que des lâches, puisque vous l'avez attaqué quand
il dormait, seriez-vous contents, si, mis à sa place, vous supportiez,
de la part des passants, les injures que vous ne lui avez pas
épargnées?» L'homme, qui passait, s'arrêta devant le Créateur méconnu;
et, aux applaudissements du morpion et de la vipère, fienta, pendant
trois jours, sur son visage auguste! Malheur à l'homme, à cause de cette
injure; car, il n'a pas respecté l'ennemi, étendu dans le mélange de
boue, de sang et de vin; sans défense et presque inanimé!... Alors, le
Dieu souverain, réveillé enfin, par toutes ces insultes mesquines, se
releva comme il put; en chancelant, alla s'asseoir sur une pierre, les
bras pendants, comme les deux testicules du poitrinaire; et jeta un
regard vitreux, sans flamme, sur la nature entière, qui lui appartenait.
O humains, vous êtes les enfants terribles; mais, je vous en supplie,
épargnons cette grande existence, qui n'a pas encore fini de cuver la
liqueur immonde, et, n'ayant pas conservé assez de force pour se tenir
droite, est retombée, lourdement, sur cette roche, où elle s'est assise,
comme un voyageur. Faites attention à ce mendiant qui passe; il a vu que
le derviche tendait un bras affamé, et, sans savoir à qui il faisait
l'aumône, il a jeté un morceau de pain dans cette main qui implore
la miséricorde. Le Créateur lui a exprimé sa reconnaissance par un
mouvement de tête. Oh! vous ne saurez jamais comme de tenir constamment
les rênes de l'univers devient une chose difficile! Le sang monte
quelquefois à la tête, quand on s'applique à tirer du néant une dernière
comète, avec une nouvelle race d'esprits. L'intelligence, trop remuée de
fond en comble, se retire comme un vaincu, et peut tomber, une fois dans
la vie, dans les égarements dont vous avez été témoins!

       *       *       *       *       *

Une lanterne rouge, drapeau du vice, suspendue à l'extrémité d'une
tringle, balançait sa carcasse au fouet des quatre vents, au-dessus
d'une porte massive et vermoulue. Un corridor sale, qui sentait la
cuisse humaine, donnait sur un préau, où cherchaient leur pâture des
coqs et des poules, plus maigres que leurs ailes. Sur la muraille qui
servait d'enceinte au préau, et située du côté de l'ouest, étaient
parcimonieusement pratiquées diverses ouvertures, fermées par un guichet
grillé. La mousse recouvrait ce corps de logis, qui sans doute, avait
été un couvent et servait, à l'heure actuelle, avec le reste du
bâtiment, comme demeure de toutes ces femmes qui montraient, chaque
jour, à ceux qui entraient, l'intérieur de leur vagin, en échange d'un
peu d'or. J'étais sur un pont, dont les piles plongeaient dans l'eau
fangeuse d'un fossé de ceinture. De sa surface élevée, je contemplais
dans la campagne cette construction penchée sur sa vieillesse et les
moindres détails de son architecture intérieure. Quelquefois, la grille
d'un guichet s'élevait sur elle-même en grinçant, comme par l'impulsion
ascendante d'une main qui violentait la nature du fer; un homme
présentait sa tète à l'ouverture dégagée à moitié, avançait ses épaules,
sur lesquelles tombait le plâtre écaillé, faisant suivre, dans cette
extraction laborieuse, son corps couvert de toiles d'araignées. Mettant
ses mains, ainsi qu'une couronne, sur les immondices de toutes sortes
qui pressaient le sol de leur poids, tandis qu'il avait encore la jambe
engagée dans les torsions de la grille, il reprenait ainsi sa posture
naturelle, allait tremper ses mains dans un baquet boiteux, dont l'eau
savonnée avait vu s'élever, tomber des générations entières, et
s'éloignait ensuite, le plus vite possible, de ces ruelles faubouriennes,
pour aller respirer l'air pur vers le centre de la ville. Lorsque le
client était sorti, une femme toute nue se portait au dehors, de la même
manière, et se dirigeait vers le même baquet. Alors, les coqs et les
poules accouraient en foule des divers points du préau, attirés par
l'odeur séminale, la renversaient par terre, malgré ses efforts vigoureux,
trépignaient la surface de son corps comme un fumier, et déchiquetaient,
à coups de bec, jusqu'à ce qu'il sortit du sang, les lèvres flasques de
son vagin gonflé. Les poules et les coqs, avec leur gosier rassasié,
retournaient gratter l'herbe du préau; la femme, devenue propre, se
relevait, tremblante, couverte de blessures, comme lorsqu'on s'éveille
après un cauchemar. Elle laissait tomber le torchon qu'elle avait
apporté pour essuyer ses jambes; n'ayant plus besoin du baquet commun,
elle retournait dans sa tanière, comme elle en était sortie, pour
attendre une autre pratique. A ce spectacle, moi, aussi, je voulus
pénétrer dans cette maison! J'allais descendre du pont, quand je vis,
sur l'entablement d'un pilier, cette inscription, en caractères hébreux:
«Vous qui passez sur ce pont, n'y allez pas. Le crime y séjourne avec
le vice; un jour, ses amis attendirent en vain un jeune homme qui avait
franchi la porte fatale.» La curiosité l'emporta sur la crainte; au bout
de quelques instants, j'arrivai devant un guichet, dont la grille
possédait de solides barreaux, qui s'entre-croisaient étroitement. Je
voulus regarder dans l'intérieur, à travers ce tamis épais. D'abord,
je ne pus rien voir; mais, je ne tardai pas à distinguer les objets
qui étaient dans la chambre obscure, grâce aux rayons du soleil qui
diminuait sa lumière et allait bientôt disparaître à l'horizon. La
première et la seule chose qui frappa ma vue fut un bâton blond, composé
de cornets, s'enfonçant les uns dans les autres. Ce bâton se mouvait!
Il marchait dans la chambre! Ses secousses étaient si fortes que le
plancher chancelait; avec ses deux bouts, il faisait des brèches énormes
dans la muraille et paraissait un bélier qu'on ébranle contre la porte
d'une ville assiégée. Ses efforts étaient inutiles; les murs étaient
construits avec de la pierre de taille, et, quand il choquait la paroi,
je le voyais se recourber en lame d'acier et rebondir comme une balle
élastique. Ce bâton n'était donc pas fait en bois! Je remarquai,
ensuite, qu'il se roulait et se déroulait avec facilité comme une
anguille. Quoique haut comme un homme, il ne se tenait pas droit.
Quelquefois, il l'essayait, et montrait un de ses bouts, devant le
grillage du guichet. Il faisait des bonds impétueux, retombait à terre
et ne pouvait défoncer l'obstacle. Je me mis à le regarder de plus en
plus attentivement et je vis que c'était un cheveu! Après une grande
lutte, avec la matière qui l'entourait comme une prison, il alla
s'appuyer contre le lit qui était dans cette chambre, la racine reposant
sur un tapis et la pointe adossée au chevet. Après quelques instants de
silence, pendant lesquels j'entendis des sanglots entrecoupés, il éleva
la voix et parla ainsi: «Mon maître m'a oublié dans cette chambre; il ne
vient pas me chercher. Il s'est levé de ce lit, où je suis appuyé, il
a peigné sa chevelure parfumée et n'a pas songé qu'auparavant j'étais
tombé à terre. Cependant, s'il m'avait ramassé, je n'aurais pas trouvé
étonnant cet acte de simple justice. Il m'abandonne, dans cette chambre
claquemurée, après s'être enveloppé dans les bras d'une femme. Et quelle
femme! Les draps sont encore moites de leur contact attiédi et portent,
dans leur désordre, l'empreinte d'une nuit passée dans l'amour ...» Et
je me demandais qui pouvait être son maître! Et mon oeil se recollait
à la grille avec plus d'énergie!... «Pendant que la nature entière
sommeillait dans sa chasteté, lui, il s'est accouplé avec une femme
dégradée, dans des embrassements lascifs et impurs. Il s'est abaissé
jusqu'à laisser approcher, de sa face auguste, des joues méprisables par
leur impudence habituelle, flétries dans leur sève. Il ne rougissait
pas, mais, moi, je rougissais pour lui. Il est certain qu'il se sentait
heureux de dormir avec une telle épouse d'une nuit. La femme, étonnée
de l'aspect majestueux de cet hôte, semblait éprouver des voluptés
incomparables, lui embrassait le cou avec frénésie.» Et je me demandais
qui pouvait être son maître! Et mon oeil se recollait à la grille avec
plus d'énergie!... «Moi, pendant ce temps, je sentais des pustules
envenimées qui croissaient plus nombreuses, en raison de son ardeur
inaccoutumée pour les jouissances de la chair, entourer ma racine
de leur fiel mortel, absorber, avec leurs ventouses, la substance
génératrice de ma vie. Plus ils s'oubliaient, dans leurs mouvements
insensés, plus je sentais mes forces décroître. Au moment où les désirs
corporels atteignaient au paroxysme de la fureur, je m'aperçus que ma
racine s'affaissait sur elle-même, comme un soldat blessé par une balle.
Le flambeau de la vie s'étant éteint en moi, je me détachai, de sa tête
illustre, comme une branche morte; je tombai à terre, sans courage, sans
force, sans vitalité; mais, avec une profonde pitié pour celui auquel
j'appartenais; mais, avec une éternelle douleur pour son égarement
volontaire!...» Et je me demandais qui pouvait être son maître! Et mon
oeil se recollait à la grille avec plus d'énergie!... «S'il avait, au
moins, entouré de son âme le sein innocent d'une vierge. Elle aurait été
plus digne de lui et la dégradation aurait été moins grande. Il
embrasse, avec ses lèvres, ce front couvert de boue, sur lequel les
hommes ont marché avec le talon, plein de poussière!... Il aspire, avec
des narines effrontées, les émanations de ces deux aisselles humides!...
J'ai vu la membrane des dernières se contracter de honte, pendant que,
de leur côté, les narines se refusaient à cette respiration infâme. Mais
lui, ni elle, ne faisaient aucune attention aux avertissements solennels
des aisselles, à la répulsion morne et blême des narines. Elle levait
davantage ses bras, et lui, avec une poussée plus forte, enfonçait son
visage dans leur creux. J'étais obligé d'être le complice de cette
profanation. J'étais obligé d'être le spectateur de ce déhanchement
inouï; d'assister à l'alliage forcé de ces deux êtres, dont un abîme
incommensurable séparait les natures diverses ...» Et je me demandais
qui pouvait être son maître! Et mon oeil se recollait à la grille avec
plus d'énergie!... «Quand il fut rassasié de respirer cette femme, il
voulut lui arracher ses muscles un par un; mais, comme c'était une
femme, il lui pardonna et préféra faire souffrir un être de son sexe. Il
appela, dans la cellule voisine, un jeune homme qui était venu dans
cette maison pour passer quelques moments d'insouciance avec une de ces
femmes, et lui enjoignit de venir se placer à un pas de ses yeux. Il y
avait longtemps que je gisais sur le sol. N'ayant pas la force de me
lever sur ma racine brûlante, je ne pus voir ce qu'ils firent. Ce que je
sais, c'est qu'à peine le jeune homme fut à portée de sa main, que des
lambeaux de chair tombèrent aux pieds du lit et vinrent se placer à mes
côtés. Ils me racontaient tout bas que les griffes de mon maître les
avaient détachés des épaules de l'adolescent. Celui-ci, au bout de
quelques heures, pendant lesquelles il avait lutté contre une force plus
grande, se leva du lit et se retira majestueusement. Il était
littéralement écorché des pieds jusqu'à la tête; il traînait, à travers
les dalles delà chambre, sa peau retournée. Il se disait que son
caractère était plein de bonté; qu'il aimait à croire ses semblables
bons aussi; que pour cela il avait acquiescé au souhait de l'étranger
distingué qui l'avait appelé auprès de lui; mais que, jamais, au grand
jamais, il ne se serait attendu à être torturé par un bourreau. Par un
pareil bourreau, ajoutait-il après une pause. Enfin, il se dirigea vers
le guichet, qui se fendit avec pitié jusqu'au nivellement du sol, en
présence de ce corps dépourvu d'épiderme. Sans abandonner sa peau, qui
pouvait encore lui servir, ne serait-ce que comme manteau, il essaya de
disparaître de ce coupe-gorge; une fois éloigné de la chambre, je ne pus
voir s'il avait eu la force de regagner la porte de sortie. Oh! comme
les poules et les coqs s'éloignaient avec respect, malgré leur faim, de
cette longue traînée de sang, sur la terre imbibée!» Et je me demandais
qui pouvait être son maître! Et mes yeux se recollaient à la grille avec
plus d'énergie!... «Alors, celui qui aurait dû penser davantage à sa
dignité et à sa justice, se releva, péniblement, sur son coude fatigué.
Seul, sombre, dégoûté et hideux!... Il s'habilla lentement. Les nonnes,
ensevelies depuis des siècles dans les catacombes du couvent, après
avoir été réveillées en sursaut par les bruits de cette nuit horrible,
qui s'entre-choquaient entre eux dans une cellule située au-dessus des
caveaux, se prirent par la main, et vinrent former une ronde funèbre
autour de lui. Pendant qu'il recherchait les décombres de son ancienne
splendeur; qu'il lavait ses mains avec du crachat en les essuyant
ensuite sur ses cheveux (il valait mieux les laver avec du crachat, que
de ne pas les laver du tout, après le temps d'une nuit entière passée
dans le vice et le crime), elles entonnèrent les prières lamentables
pour les morts, quand quelqu'un est descendu dans la tombe. En effet, le
jeune homme ne devait pas survivre à ce supplice, exercé sur lui par une
main divine, et ses agonies se terminèrent pendant le chant des nonnes
...» Je me rappelai l'inscription du pilier; je compris ce qu'était
devenu le rêveur pubère que ses amis attendaient encore chaque jour
depuis le moment de sa disparition ... Et je me demandais qui pouvait
être son maître! Et mes yeux se recollaient à la grille avec plus
d'énergie!... «Les murailles s'écartèrent pour le laisser passer; les
nonnes, le voyant prendre son essor, dans les airs, avec des ailes qu'il
avait cachées jusque-là dans sa robe d'émeraude, se replacèrent en
silence dessous le couvercle de la tombe. Il est parti dans sa demeure
céleste, en me laissant ici; cela n'est pas juste. Les autres cheveux
sont restés sur sa tête; et, moi, je gis, dans cette chambre lugubre,
sur le parquet couvert de sang caillé, de lambeaux de viande sèche;
cette chambre est devenue damnée, depuis qu'il s'y est introduit;
personne n'y entre; cependant, j'y suis enfermé. C'en est donc fait! Je
ne verrai plus les légions des anges marcher en phalanges épaisses, ni
les astres se promener dans les jardins de l'harmonie. Eh bien, soit ...
je saurai supporter mon malheur avec résignation. Mais, je ne manquerai
pas de dire aux hommes ce qui s'est passé dans cette cellule. Je leur
donnerai la permission de rejeter leur dignité, comme un vêtement
inutile, puisqu'ils ont l'exemple de mon maître; je leur conseillerai de
sucer la verge du crime, puisqu'_un autre_ l'a déjà fait ...» Le cheveu
se tut ... Et je me demandais qui pouvait être son maître! Et mes yeux
se recollaient à la grille avec plus d'énergie!... Aussitôt le tonnerre
éclata; une lueur phosphorique pénétra dans la chambre. Je reculai,
malgré moi, par je ne sais quel instinct d'avertissement; quoique je
fusse éloigné du guichet, j'entendis une autre voix, mais, celle-ci
rampante et douce, de crainte de se faire entendre: «Ne fais pas de
pareils bonds! Tais-toi ... tais-toi ... si quelqu'un t'entendait! je te
replacerai parmi les autres cheveux; mais, laisse d'abord le soleil se
coucher à l'horizon, afin que la nuit couvre tes pas ... je ne t'ai pas
oublié; mais, on t'aurait vu sortir, et j'aurais été compromis. Oh! si
tu savais comme j'ai souffert depuis ce moment! Revenu au ciel, mes
archanges m'ont entouré avec curiosité; ils n'ont pas voulu me demander
le motif de mon absence. Eux, qui n'avaient jamais osé élever leur vue
sur moi, jetaient, s'efforçant de deviner l'énigme, des regards
stupéfaits sur ma face abattue, quoiqu'ils n'aperçussent pas le fond de
ce mystère, et se communiquaient tout bas des pensées qui redoutaient
en moi quelque changement inaccoutumé. Ils pleuraient des larmes
silencieuses; ils sentaient vaguement que je n'étais plus le même,
devenu inférieur à mon identité. Ils auraient voulu connaître quelle
funeste résolution m'avait fait franchir les frontières du ciel, pour
venir m'abattre sur la terre, et goûter des voluptés éphémères,
qu'eux-mêmes méprisent profondément. Ils remarquèrent sur mon front une
goutte de sperme, une goutte de sang. La première avait jailli des
cuisses de la courtisane! La deuxième s'était élancée des veines du
martyr! Stigmates odieux! Rosaces inébranlables! Mes archanges ont
retrouvé, pendus aux halliers de l'espace, les débris flamboyants de ma
tunique d'opale, qui flottaient sur les peuples béants. Ils n'ont pas pu
la reconstruire, et mon corps reste nu devant leur innocence; châtiment
mémorable de la vertu abandonnée. Vois les sillons qui se sont tracé un
lit sur mes joues décolorées: c'est la goutte de sperme et la goutte de
sang, qui filtrent lentement le long de mes rides sèches. Arrivées à la
lèvre supérieure, elles font un effort immense, et pénètrent dans le
sanctuaire de ma bouche, attirées, comme un aimant, par le gosier
irrésistible. Elles m'étouffent, ces deux gouttes implacables. Moi,
jusqu'ici, je m'étais cru le Tout-Puissant; mais, non; je dois abaisser
le cou devant le remords qui me crie: «Tu n'es qu'un misérable!» Ne fais
pas de pareils bonds! Tais-toi ... tais-toi ... si quelqu'un t'entendait!
je te replacerai parmi les autres cheveux; mais, laisse d'abord le soleil
se coucher à l'horizon, afin que la nuit couvre tes pas ... J'ai vu Satan,
le grand ennemi, redresser les enchevêtrements osseux de la charpente,
au-dessus de son engourdissement de larve, et, debout, triomphant, sublime,
haranguer ses troupes rassemblées; comme je le mérite, me tourner en
dérision. Il a dit qu'il s'étonnait beaucoup que son orgueilleux rival,
pris en flagrant délit par le succès, enfin réalisé, d'un espionnage
perpétuel, pût ainsi s'abaisser jusqu'à baiser la robe de la débauche
humaine, par un voyage de long cours à travers les récifs de l'éther, et
faire périr, dans les souffrances, un membre de l'humanité. Il a dit que
ce jeune homme, broyé dans l'engrenage de mes supplices raffinés, aurait
peut-être pu devenir une intelligence de génie; consoler les hommes, sur
cette terre, par des chants admirables de poésie, de courage, contre les
coups de l'infortune. Il a dit que les nonnes du couvent-lupanar ne
retrouvent plus leur sommeil; rôdent dans le préau, gesticulant comme
des automates, écrasant avec le pied les renoncules et les lilas;
devenues folles d'indignation, mais, non assez, pour ne pas se rappeler
la cause qui engendra cette maladie dans leur cerveau ... (Les voici qui
s'avancent, revêtues de leur linceul blanc; elles ne se parlent pas;
elles se tiennent par la main. Leurs cheveux tombent en désordre sur
leurs épaules nues; un bouquet de fleurs noires est penché sur leur
sein. Nonnes, retournez dans vos caveaux; la nuit n'est pas encore
complètement arrivée; ce n'est que le crépuscule du soir ... O cheveu,
tu le vois toi-même; de tous les côtés, je suis assailli par le
sentiment déchaîné de ma dépravation!) Il a dit que le Créateur, qui se
vante d'être la Providence de tout ce qui existe, s'est conduit avec
beaucoup de légèreté, pour ne pas dire plus, en offrant un pareil
spectacle aux mondes étoilés; car, il a affirmé clairement le dessein
qu'il avait d'aller rapporter dans les planètes orbiculaires comment
je maintiens, par mon propre exemple, la vertu et la bonté dans la
vastitude de mes royaumes. Il a dit que la grande estime, qu'il avait
pour un ennemi si noble, s'était envolée de son imagination, et qu'il
préférait porter la main sur le sein d'une jeune fille, quoique cela
soit un acte de méchanceté exécrable, que de cracher sur ma figure,
recouverte de trois couches de sang et de sperme mêlés, afin de ne pas
salir son crachat baveux. Il a dit qu'il se croyait, à juste titre,
supérieur à moi, non par le vice, mais par la vertu et la pudeur; non
par le crime, mais par la justice. Il a dit qu'il fallait m'attacher à
une claie, à cause de mes fautes innombrables; me faire brûler à petit
feu dans un brasier ardent, pour me jeter ensuite dans la mer, si
toutefois la mer voudrait me recevoir. Que, puisque je me vantais d'être
juste, moi, qui l'avais condamné aux peines éternelles pour une révolte
légère qui n'avait pas eu de suites graves, je devais donc faire justice
sévère sur moi-même, et juger impartialement ma conscience, chargée
d'iniquités ... Ne fais pas de pareils bonds! Tais-toi ... tais-toi ...
si quelqu'un t'entendait! je te replacerai parmi les autres cheveux;
mais, laisse d'abord le soleil se coucher à l'horizon, afin que la nuit
couvre tes pas.» Il s'arrêta un instant; quoique je ne le visse point,
je compris, par ce temps d'arrêt nécessaire, que la houle de l'émotion
soulevait sa poitrine, comme un cyclone giratoire soulève une famille de
baleines. Poitrine divine, souillée, un jour, par l'amer contact des
tétons d'une femme sans pudeur! Ame royale, livrée, dans un moment
d'oubli, au crabe de la débauche, au poulpe de la faiblesse de
caractère, au requin de l'abjection individuelle, au boa de la morale
absente, et au colimaçon monstrueux de l'idiotisme! Le cheveu et son
maître s'embrassèrent étroitement, comme deux amis qui se revoient après
une longue absence. Le Créateur continua, accusé reparaissant devant son
propre tribunal: «Et les hommes, que penseront-ils de moi, dont ils
avaient une opinion si élevée, quand ils apprendront les errements de ma
conduite, la marche hésitante de ma sandale, dans les labyrinthes boueux
de la matière, et la direction de ma route ténébreuse à travers les eaux
stagnantes et les humides joncs de la mare où, recouvert de brouillards,
bleuit et mugit le crime, à la patte sombre!... Je m'aperçois qu'il faut
que je travaille beaucoup à ma réhabilitation, dans l'avenir, afin de
reconquérir leur estime. Je suis le Grand-Tout: et cependant, par un
côté, je reste inférieur aux hommes, que j'ai créés avec un peu de
sable! Raconte-leur un mensonge audacieux, et dis-leur que je ne suis
jamais sorti du ciel, constamment enfermé, avec les soucis du trône,
entre les marbres, les statues et les mosaïques de mes palais. Je me
suis présenté devant les célestes fils de l'humanité; je leur ai dit:
«Chassez le mal de vos chaumières, et laissez entrer au foyer le manteau
du bien. Celui qui portera la main sur un de ses semblables, en lui
faisant au sein une blessure mortelle, avec le fer homicide, qu'il
n'espère point les effets de ma miséricorde, et qu'il redoute les
balances de la justice. Il ira cacher sa tristesse dans les bois; mais,
le bruissement des feuilles, à travers les clairières, chantera à ses
oreilles la ballade du remords; et il s'enfuira de ces parages, piqué
à la hanche par le buisson, le houx et le chardon bleu, ses pas rapides
entrelacés par la souplesse des lianes et les morsures des scorpions.
Il se dirigera vers les galets de la plage; mais, la marée montante,
avec ses embruns et son approche dangereuse, lui raconteront qu'ils
n'ignorent pas son passé; et il précipitera sa course aveugle vers le
couronnement de la falaise, tandis que les vents stridents d'équinoxe,
en s'enfonçant dans les grottes naturelles du golfe et les carrières
pratiquées sous la muraille des rochers retentissants, beugleront comme
les troupeaux immenses des buffles des pampas. Les phares de la côte
le poursuivront, jusqu'aux limites du septentrion, de leurs reflets
sarcastiques, et les feux follets des maremmes, simples vapeurs en
combustion, dans leurs danses fantastiques, feront frissonner les poils
de ses pores, et verdir l'iris de ses yeux. Que la pudeur se plaise dans
vos cabanes, et soit en sûreté à l'ombre de vos champs. C'est ainsi que
vos fils deviendront beaux, et s'inclineront devant leurs parents avec
reconnaissance; sinon, malingres, et rabougris comme le parchemin des
bibliothèques, ils s'avanceront à grands pas, conduits par la révolte,
contre le jour de leur naissance et le clitoris de leur mère impure.»
Comment les hommes voudront-ils obéir à ces lois sévères, si le
législateur lui-même se refuse le premier à s'y astreindre?... Et ma
honte est immense comme l'éternité!» J'entendis le cheveu qui lui
pardonnait, avec humilité, sa séquestration, puisque son maître avait
agi par prudence et non par légèreté; et le pâle dernier rayon de soleil
qui éclairait mes paupières se retira des ravins de la montagne. Tourné
vers lui, je le vis se replier ainsi qu'un linceul ... Ne fais pas de
pareils bonds! Tais-toi ... tais-toi ... si quelqu'un t'entendait! Il te
replacera parmi les autres cheveux. Et, maintenant que le soleil est
couché à l'horizon, vieillard cynique et cheveu doux, rampez, tous les
deux, vers l'éloignement du lupanar, pendant que la nuit, étendant son
ombre sur le couvent, couvre l'allongement de vos pas furtifs dans la
plaine ... Alors, le pou, sortant subitement de derrière un promontoire,
me dit, en hérissant ses griffes: «Que penses-tu de cela?» Mais, moi, je
ne voulus pas lui répliquer. Je me retirai, et j'arrivai sur le pont.
J'effaçai l'inscription primordiale, je la remplaçai par celle-ci:
«Il est douloureux de garder, comme un poignard, un tel secret dans son
coeur; mais, je jure de ne jamais révéler ce dont j'ai été témoin, quand
je pénétrai, pour la première fois, dans ce donjon terrible.» Je jetai,
par dessus le parapet, le canif qui m'avait servi à graver les lettres;
et, faisant quelques rapides réflexions sur le caractère du Créateur en
enfance, qui devait encore, hélas! pendant bien de temps, faire souffrir
l'humanité (l'éternité est longue), soit par les cruautés exercées, soit
par le spectacle ignoble des chancres qu'occasionne un grand vice, je
fermai les yeux, comme un homme ivre, à la pensée d'avoir un tel être
pour ennemi, et je repris, avec tristesse, mon chemin à travers les
dédales des rues.


FIN DU TROISIÈME CHANT




CHANT QUATRIÈME


C'est un homme ou une pierre ou un arbre qui va commencer le quatrième
chant. Quand le pied glisse sur une grenouille, l'on sent une sensation
de dégoût; mais quand on effleure, à peine, le corps humain, avec la
main, la peau des doigts se fend, comme les écailles d'un bloc de mica
qu'on brise à coups de marteau; et, de même que le coeur d'un requin,
mort depuis une heure, palpite encore, sur le pont, avec une vitalité
tenace, ainsi nos entrailles se remuent de fond en comble, longtemps
après l'attouchement. Tant l'homme inspire de l'horreur à son propre
semblable! Peut-être que, lorsque j'avance cela, je me trompe; mais:
peut-être qu'aussi je dis vrai. Je connais, je conçois une maladie plus
terrible que les yeux gonflés par les longues méditations sur le
caractère étrange de l'homme; mais, je la cherche encor ... et je n'ai
pas pu la trouver! Je ne me crois pas moins intelligent qu'un autre, et,
cependant, qui oserait affirmer que j'ai réussi dans mes investigations?
Quel mensonge sortirait de sa bouche! Le temple antique de Denderah est
situé à une heure et demie de la rive gauche du Nil. Aujourd'hui, des
phalanges innombrables de guêpes se sont emparées des rigoles et des
corniches. Elles voltigent autour des colonnes, comme les ondes épaisses
d'une chevelure noire. Seuls habitants du froid portique, ils gardent
l'entrée des vestibules, comme un droit héréditaire. Je compare le
bourdonnement de leurs ailes métalliques, au choc incessant des glaçons,
précipités les uns contre les autres, pendant la débâcle des mers
polaires. Mais, si je considère la conduite de celui auquel la
providence donna le trône sur cette terre, les trois ailerons de ma
douleur font entendre un plus grand murmure! Quand une comète, pendant
la nuit, apparaît subitement dans une région du ciel, après quatre-vingts
ans d'absence, elle montre aux habitants terrestres et aux grillons sa
queue brillante et vaporeuse. Sans doute, elle n'a pas conscience de ce
long voyage; il n'en est pas ainsi de moi: accoudé sur le chevet de mon
lit, pendant que les dentelures d'un horizon aride et morne s'élèvent en
vigueur sur le fond de mon âme, je m'absorbe dans les rêves de la
compassion et je rougis pour l'homme! Coupé en deux par la bise, le
matelot, après avoir fait son quart de nuit, s'empresse de regagner son
hamac: pourquoi cette consolation ne m'est-elle pas offerte? L'idée que
je suis tombé volontairement, aussi bas que mes semblables, et que j'ai
le droit moins qu'un autre de prononcer des plaintes, sur notre sort, qui
reste enchaîné à la croûte durcie d'une planète, et sur l'essence de notre
âme perverse, me pénètre comme un clou de forge. On a vu des explosions de
feu grisou anéantir des familles entières; mais, elles connurent l'agonie
peu de temps, parce que la mort est presque subite, au milieu des décombres
et des gaz délétères: moi ... j'existe toujours comme le basalte! Au
milieu, comme au commencement de la vie, les anges se ressemblent à
eux-mêmes: n'y a-t-il pas longtemps que je ne me ressemble plus! L'homme
et moi, claquemurés dans les limites de notre intelligence, comme souvent
un lac dans une ceinture d'îles de corail, au lieu d'unir nos forces
respectives pour nous défendre contre le hasard et l'infortune, nous
nous écartons, avec le tremblement de la haine, en prenant deux routes
opposées, comme si nous nous étions réciproquement blessés avec la
pointe d'une dague! On dirait que l'un comprend le mépris qu'il inspire
à l'autre; poussés par le mobile d'une dignité relative, nous nous
empressons de ne pas induire en erreur notre adversaire; chacun reste
de son côté et n'ignore pas que la paix proclamée serait impossible à
conserver. Eh bien, soit! que ma guerre contre l'homme s'éternise,
puisque chacun reconnaît dans l'autre sa propre dégradation ... puisque
les deux sont ennemis mortels. Que je doive remporter une victoire
désastreuse ou succomber, le combat sera beau: moi, seul, contre
l'humanité. Je ne me servirai pas d'armes construites avec le bois ou
le fer; je repousserai du pied les couches de minéraux extraites de la
terre: la sonorité puissante et séraphique de la harpe deviendra, sous
mes doigts, un talisman redoutable. Dans plus d'une embuscade, l'homme,
ce singe sublime, a déjà percé ma poitrine de sa lance de porphyre: un
soldat ne montre pas ses blessures, pour si glorieuses qu'elles soient.
Cette guerre terrible jettera la douleur dans les deux partis: deux amis
qui cherchent obstinément à se détruire, quel drame!

       *       *       *       *       *

Deux piliers, qu'il n'était pas difficile et encore moins possible de
prendre pour des baobabs, s'apercevaient dans la vallée, plus grands que
deux épingles. En effet, c'étaient deux tours énormes. Et, quoique deux
baobabs, au premier coup d'oeil, ne ressemblent pas à deux épingles, ni
même à deux tours, cependant, en employant habilement les ficelles de
la prudence, on peut affirmer, sans crainte d'avoir tort (car, si cette
affirmation était accompagnée d'une seule parcelle de crainte, ce ne
serait plus une affirmation; quoiqu'un même nom exprime ces deux
phénomènes de l'âme qui présentent des caractères assez tranchés pour
ne pas être confondus légèrement) qu'un baobab ne diffère pas tellement
d'un pilier, que la comparaison soit défendue entre ces formes
architecturales ... ou géométriques ... ou l'une et l'autre ... ou ni
l'une ni l'autre ... ou plutôt formes élevées et massives. Je viens de
trouver, je n'ai pas la prétention de dire le contraire, les épithètes
propres aux substantifs pilier et baobab: que l'on sache bien que ce
n'est pas, sans une joie mêlée d'orgueil, que j'en fais la remarque à
ceux qui, après avoir relevé leurs paupières, ont pris la très louable
résolution de parcourir ces pages, pendant que la bougie brûle, si c'est
la nuit, pendant que le soleil éclaire, si c'est le jour. Et encore,
quand même une puissance supérieure nous ordonnerait, dans les termes
le plus clairement précis, de rejeter, dans les abîmes du chaos, la
comparaison judicieuse que chacun a certainement pu savourer avec
impunité, même alors, et surtout alors, que l'on ne perde pas de vue cet
axiome principal, les habitudes contractées par les ans, les livres, le
contact de ses semblables, et le caractère inhérent à chacun qui se
développe dans une efflorescence rapide, imposeraient, à l'esprit
humain, l'irréparable stigmate de la récidive, dans l'emploi criminel
(criminel, en se plaçant momentanément et spontanément au point de vue
de la puissance supérieure) d'une figure de rhétorique que plusieurs
méprisent, mais que beaucoup encensent. Si le lecteur trouve cette
phrase trop longue, qu'il accepte mes excuses; mais, qu'il ne s'attende
pas de ma part à des bassesses. Je puis avouer mes fautes; mais non les
rendre plus graves par ma lâcheté. Mes raisonnements se choqueront
quelquefois contre les grelots de la folie et l'apparence sérieuse de ce
qui n'est en somme que grotesque (quoique, d'après certains philosophes,
il soit assez difficile de distinguer le bouffon du mélancolique, la vie
elle-même étant un drame comique ou une comédie dramatique); cependant,
il est permis à chacun de tuer des mouches et même des rhinocéros, afin
de se reposer de temps en temps d'un travail trop escarpé. Pour tuer des
mouches, voici la manière la plus expéditive, quoique ce ne soit pas la
meilleure: on les écrase entre les deux premiers doigts de la main. La
plupart des écrivains qui ont traité ce sujet à fond ont calculé, avec
beaucoup de vraisemblance, qu'il est préférable, dans plusieurs cas,
de leur couper la tête. Si quelqu'un me reproche de parler d'épingles,
comme d'un sujet radicalement frivole, qu'il remarque sans parti pris,
que les plus grands effets ont été souvent produits par les plus petites
causes. Et, pour ne pas m'éloigner davantage du cadre de cette feuille
de papier, ne voit-on pas que le laborieux morceau de littérature que
je suis à composer, depuis le commencement de cette strophe, serait
peut-être moins goûté, s'il prenait son point d'appui dans une question
épineuse de chimie ou de pathologie interne? Au reste, tous les goûts
sont dans la nature; et, quand au commencement j'ai comparé les piliers
aux épingles avec tant de justesse (certes, je ne croyais pas qu'on
viendrait, un jour, me le reprocher), je me suis basé sur les lois de
l'optique, qui ont établi que, plus le rayon visuel est éloigné d'un
objet, plus l'image se reflète à diminution dans la rétine.

C'est ainsi que ce que l'inclinaison de notre esprit à la farce prend
pour un misérable coup d'esprit, n'est, la plupart du temps, dans la
pensée de l'auteur, qu'une vérité importante, proclamée avec majesté!
Oh! ce philosophe insensé qui éclata de rire, en voyant un âne manger
une figue! Je n'invente rien: les livres antiques ont raconté, avec les
plus amples détails, ce volontaire et honteux dépouillement de la
noblesse humaine. Moi, je ne sais pas rire. Je n'ai jamais pu rire,
quoique plusieurs fois j'aie essayé de le faire. C'est très difficile
d'apprendre à rire. Ou, plutôt, je crois qu'un sentiment de répugnance
à cette monstruosité forme une marque essentielle de mon caractère. Eh
bien, j'ai été témoin de quelque chose de plus fort: j'ai vu une figue
manger un âne! Et, cependant, je n'ai pas ri; franchement, aucune partie
buccale n'a remué. Le besoin de pleurer s'empara de moi si fortement,
que mes yeux laissèrent tomber une larme. «Nature! nature! m'écriai-je
en sanglotant, l'épervier déchire le moineau, la figue mange l'âne et
le ténia dévore l'homme!» Sans prendre la résolution d'aller plus loin,
je me demande en moi-même si j'ai parlé de la manière dont on tue les
mouches. Oui, n'est-ce pas? Il n'en est pas moins vrai que je n'avais
pas parlé de la destruction des rhinocéros! Si certains amis me
prétendaient le contraire, je ne les écouterais pas et je me
rappellerais que la louange et la flatterie sont deux grandes pierre
d'achoppement. Cependant, afin de contenter ma conscience autant que
possible, je ne puis m'empêcher de faire remarquer que cette
dissertation sur le rhinocéros m'entraînerait hors des frontières de la
patience et du sang-froid, et, de son côté, découragerait probablement
(ayons, même, la hardiesse de dire certainement) les générations
présentes. N'avoir pas parlé du rhinocéros après la mouche! Au moins,
pour excuse passable, aurai-je dû mentionner avec promptitude (et je ne
l'ai pas fait!) cette omission non préméditée, qui n'étonnera pas ceux
qui ont étudié à fond les contradictions réelles et inexplicables qui
habitent les lobes du cerveau humain. Rien n'est indigne pour une
intelligence grande et simple; le moindre phénomène de la nature, s'il
y a mystère en lui, deviendra, pour le sage, inépuisable matière à
réflexion. Si quelqu'un voit un âne manger une figue ou une figue manger
un âne (ces deux circonstances ne se présentent pas souvent, à moins que
ce ne soit en poésie), soyez certain qu'après avoir réfléchi deux ou
trois minutes, pour savoir quelle conduite prendre, il abandonnera le
sentier de la vertu et se mettra à rire comme un coq! Encore, n'est-il
pas exactement prouvé que les coqs ouvrent exprès leur bec pour imiter
l'homme et faire une grimace tourmentée. J'appelle grimace dans les
oiseaux ce qui porte le même nom dans l'humanité! Le coq ne sort pas de
sa nature, moins par incapacité que par orgueil. Apprenez-leur à lire,
ils se révoltent. Ce n'est pas un perroquet qui s'extasierait ainsi
devant sa faiblesse, ignorante ou impardonnable! Oh! avilissement
exécrable! comme on ressemble à une chèvre quand on rit! Le calme du
front a disparu pour faire place à deux énormes yeux de poissons qui
(n'est-ce pas déplorable?) ... qui ... qui se mettent à briller comme
des phares! Souvent, il m'arrivera d'énoncer, avec solennité, les
propositions les plus bouffonnes, je ne trouve pas que cela devienne
un motif péremptoirement suffisant pour élargir la bouche! Je ne puis
m'empêcher de rire, me répondrez-vous; j'accepte cette explication
absurde, mais, alors, que ce soit un rire mélancolique. Riez, mais
pleurez en même temps. Si vous ne pouvez pas pleurer par les yeux,
pleurez par la bouche. Est-ce encore impossible, urinez; mais, j'avertis
qu'un liquide quelconque est ici nécessaire, pour atténuer la sécheresse
que porte, dans ses flancs, le rire, aux traits fendus en arrière.
Quant à moi, je ne me laisserai pas décontenancer par les gloussements
cocasses et les beuglements originaux de ceux qui trouvent toujours
quelque chose à redire dans un caractère qui ne ressemble pas au leur,
parce qu'il est une des innombrables modifications intellectuelles
que Dieu, sans sortir d'un type primordial, créa pour gouverner les
charpentes osseuses. Jusqu'à nos temps, la poésie fit une route fausse;
s'élevant jusqu'au ciel ou rampant jusqu'à terre, elle a méconnu les
principes de son existence, et a été, non sans raison, constamment
bafouée par les honnêtes gens. Elle n'a pas été modeste ... qualité
la plus belle qui doive exister dans un être imparfait! Moi, je veux
montrer mes qualités; mais, je ne suis pas assez hypocrite pour cacher
mes vices! Le rire, le mal, l'orgueil, la folie, paraîtront, tour à
tour, entre la sensibilité et l'amour de la justice, et serviront
d'exemple à la stupéfaction humaine; chacun s'y reconnaîtra, non pas
tel qu'il devrait être, mais tel qu'il est. Et, peut-être que ce simple
idéal, conçu par mon imagination, surpassera, cependant, tout ce que la
poésie a trouvé jusqu'ici de plus grandiose et de plus sacré. Car, si je
laisse mes vices transpirer dans ces pages, on ne croira que mieux aux
vertus que j'y fais resplendir, et dont je placerai l'auréole si haut
que les plus grands génies de l'avenir témoigneront, pour moi, une
sincère reconnaissance. Ainsi donc, l'hypocrisie sera chassée carrément
de ma demeure. Il y aura, dans mes chants, une preuve imposante de
puissance, pour mépriser ainsi les opinions reçues. Il chante pour lui
seul, et non pas pour ses semblables. Il ne place pas la mesure de son
inspiration dans la balance humaine. Libre comme la tempête, il est venu
échouer, un jour, sur les plages indomptables de sa terrible volonté! Il
ne craint rien, si ce n'est lui-même! Dans ses combats surnaturels, il
attaquera l'homme et le Créateur, avec avantage, comme quand l'espadon
enfonce son épée dans le ventre de la baleine: qu'il soit maudit, par
ses enfants et par ma main décharnée, celui qui persiste à ne pas
comprendre les kanguroos implacables du rire et les poux audacieux de la
caricature!... Deux tours énormes s'apercevaient dans la vallée; je l'ai
dit au commencement. En les multipliant par deux, le produit était quatre
... mais je ne distinguai pas très bien la nécessité de cette opération
d'arithmétique. Je continuai ma route, avec la fièvre au visage, et je
m'écriai sans cesse: «Non ... non ... je ne distingue pas très bien la
nécessité de cette opération d'arithmétique!» J'avais entendu des
craquements de chaînes, et des gémissements douloureux. Que personne ne
trouve possible, quand il passera dans cet endroit, de multiplier les
tours par deux, afin que le produit soit quatre! Quelques-uns soupçonnent
que j'aime l'humanité comme si j'étais sa propre mère, et que je l'eusse
portée, neuf mois, dans mes flancs parfumés; c'est pourquoi, je ne repasse
plus dans la vallée où s'élèvent les deux unités du multiplicande!

       *       *       *       *       *

Une potence s'élevait sur le sol; à un mètre de celui-ci, était suspendu
par les cheveux un homme, dont les bras étaient attachés par derrière.
Ses jambes avaient été laissées libres, pour accroître ses tortures, et
lui faire désirer davantage n'importe quoi de contraire à l'enlacement
de ses bras. La peau du front était tellement tendue par le poids de la
pendaison, que son visage, condamné par la circonstance à l'absence de
l'expression naturelle, ressemblait à la concrétion pierreuse d'un
stalagtite. Depuis trois jours, il subissait ce supplice. Il s'écriait:
«Qui me dénouera les bras? qui me dénouera les cheveux? Je me disloque
dans des mouvements qui ne font que séparer davantage de ma tête la
racine des cheveux; la soif et la faim ne sont pas les causes
principales qui m'empêchent de dormir. Il est impossible que mon
existence enfonce son prolongement au delà des bornes d'une heure.
Quelqu'un pour m'ouvrir la gorge, avec un caillou acéré!» Chaque mot
était précédé, suivi de hurlements intenses. Je m'élançai du buisson
derrière lequel j'étais abrité, et je me dirigeai vers le pantin ou
morceau de lard attaché au plafond. Mais, voici que, du côté opposé,
arrivèrent en dansant deux femmes ivres. L'une tenait un sac, et deux
fouets, aux cordes de plomb, l'autre, un baril plein de goudron et deux
pinceaux. Les cheveux grisonnants de la plus vieille flottaient au vent,
comme les lambeaux d'une voile déchirée, et les chevilles de l'autre
claquaient entre elles, comme les coups de queue d'un thon sur la
dunette d'un vaisseau. Leurs yeux brillaient d'une flamme si noire et si
forte, que je ne crus pas d'abord que ces deux femmes appartinssent à
mon espèce. Elles riaient avec un aplomb tellement égoïste, et leurs
traits inspiraient tant de répugnance, que je ne doutai pas un seul
instant que je n'eusse devant les yeux les deux spécimens les plus
hideux de la race humaine. Je me recachai derrière le buisson, et je me
tins tout coi, comme l'acantophorus serraticornis, qui ne montre que la
tête en dehors de son nid. Elles approchaient avec la vitesse de la
marée; appliquant l'oreille sur le sol, le son, distinctement perçu,
m'apportait l'ébranlement lyrique de leur marche. Lorsque les deux
femelles d'orang-outang furent arrivées sous la potence, elles
reniflèrent l'air pendant quelques secondes; elles montrèrent, par leurs
gestes saugrenus, la quantité vraiment remarquable de stupéfaction qui
résulta de leur expérience, quand elles s'aperçurent que rien n'était
changé dans ces lieux: le dénoûment de la mort, conforme à leurs voeux,
n'était pas survenu. Elles n'avaient pas daigné lever la tête, pour
savoir si la mortadelle était encore à la même place. L'une dit: «Est-ce
possible que tu sois encore respirant? Tu as la vie dure, mon mari
bien-aimé.» Comme quand deux chantres, dans une cathédrale, entonnent
alternativement les versets d'un psaume, la deuxième répondit: «Tu ne
veux donc pas mourir, ô mon gracieux fils? Dis-moi donc comment tu as
fait (sûrement c'est par quelque maléfice) pour épouvanter les vautours?
En effet, ta carcasse est devenue si maigre! Le zéphyr la balance comme
une lanterne.» Chacune prit un pinceau et goudronna le corps du pendu
... chacune prit un fouet et leva les bras ... J'admirais (il était
absolument impossible de ne pas faire comme moi) avec quelle exactitude
énergique les lames de métal, au lieu de glisser à la surface, comme
quand on se bat contre un nègre et qu'on fait des efforts inutiles,
propres au cauchemar, pour l'empoigner aux cheveux, s'appliquaient,
grâce au goudron, jusqu'à l'intérieur des chairs, marquées par des
sillons aussi creux que l'empêchement des os pouvait raisonnablement le
permettre. Je me suis préservé de la tentation de trouver de la volupté
dans ce spectacle excessivement curieux, mais moins profondément comique
qu'on n'était en droit de l'attendre. Et, cependant, malgré les bonnes
résolutions prises d'avance, comment ne pas reconnaître la force de ces
femmes, les muscles de leur bras? Leur adresse, qui consistait à frapper
sur les parties les plus sensibles, comme le visage et le bas-ventre, ne
sera mentionnée par moi, que si j'aspire à l'ambition de raconter la
totale vérité! A moins que, appliquant mes lèvres, l'une contre l'autre,
surtout dans la direction horizontale (mais, chacun n'ignore pas que
c'est la manière la plus ordinaire d'engendrer cette pression), je ne
préfère garder un silence gonflé de larmes et de mystères, dont la
manifestation pénible sera impuissante à cacher, non seulement aussi
bien mais encore mieux que mes paroles (car, je ne crois pas me tromper,
quoiqu'il ne faille pas certainement nier en principe, sous peine de
manquer aux règles les plus élémentaires de l'habileté, les possibilités
hypothétiques d'erreur) les résultats funestes occasionnés par la fureur
qui met en oeuvre les métacarpes secs et les articulations robustes;
quand même on ne se mettrait pas au point de vue de l'observateur
impartial et du moraliste expérimenté (il est presque assez important
que j'apprenne que je n'admets pas, au moins entièrement, cette
restriction plus ou moins fallacieuse), le doute, à cet égard, n'aurait
pas la faculté d'étendre ses racines; car, je ne le suppose pas, pour
l'instant, entre les mains d'une puissance surnaturelle, et périrait
immanquablement, pas subitement peut-être, faute d'une sève remplissant
les conditions simultanées de nutrition et d'absence de matières
vénéneuses. Il est entendu, sinon ne me lisez pas, que je ne mets en
scène que la timide personnalité de mon opinion: loin de moi, cependant,
la pensée de renoncer à des droits qui sont incontestables! Certes, mon
intention n'est pas de combattre cette affirmation, où brille le
critérium de la certitude, qu'il est un moyen plus simple de s'entendre;
il consisterait, je le traduis avec quelques mots seulement, mais, qui
en valent plus de mille, à ne pas discuter: il est plus difficile à
mettre en pratique que ne le veut bien penser généralement le commun des
mortels. Discuter est le mot grammatical, et beaucoup de personnes
trouveront qu'il ne faudrait pas contredire, sans un volumineux dossier
de preuves, ce que je viens de coucher sur le papier; mais, la chose
diffère notablement, s'il est permis d'accorder à son propre instinct
qu'il emploie une rare sagacité au service de sa circonspection, quand
il formule des jugements qui paraîtraient autrement, soyez-en persuadé,
d'une hardiesse qui longe les rivages de la fanfaronnade. Pour clore ce
petit incident, qui s'est lui-même dépouillé de sa gangue par une
légèreté aussi irrémédiablement déplorable que fatalement pleine
d'intérêt (ce que chacun n'aura pas manqué de vérifier, à la condition
qu'il ait ausculté ses souvenirs les plus récents), il est bon, si l'on
possède des facultés en équilibre parfait, ou mieux, si la balance de
l'idiotisme ne l'emporte pas de beaucoup sur le plateau dans lequel
reposent les nobles et magnifiques attributs de la raison, c'est-à-dire,
afin d'être plus clair (car, jusqu'ici je n'ai été que concis, ce que
même plusieurs n'admettront pas, à cause de mes longueurs, qui ne sont
qu'imaginaires, puisqu'elles remplissent leur but, de traquer, avec le
scalpel de l'analyse, les fugitives apparitions de la vérité, jusqu'en
leurs derniers retranchements), si l'intelligence prédomine suffisamment
sur les défauts sous le poids desquels l'ont étouffée en partie
l'habitude, la nature et l'éducation, il est bon, répèté-je pour la
deuxième et la dernière fois, car, à force de répéter, on finirait,
le plus souvent ce n'est pas faux, par ne plus s'entendre, de revenir
la queue basse (si même, il est vrai que j'aie une queue) au sujet
dramatique cimenté dans cette strophe. Il est utile de boire un verre
d'eau, avant d'entreprendre la suite de mon travail. Je préfère en boire
deux, plutôt que de m'en passer. Ainsi, dans une chasse contre un nègre
marron, à travers la forêt, à un moment convenu, chaque membre de la
troupe suspend son fusil aux lianes, et l'on se réunit en commun, à
l'ombre d'un massif, pour étancher la soif et apaiser la faim. Mais,
la halte ne dure que quelques secondes, la poursuite est reprise avec
acharnement et le hallali ne tarde pas à résonner. Et, de même que
l'oxygène est reconnaissable à la propriété qu'il possède, sans orgueil,
de rallumer une allumette présentant quelques points en ignition, ainsi,
l'on reconnaîtra l'accomplissement de mon devoir à l'empressement que
je montre à revenir à la question. Lorsque les femelles se virent dans
l'impossibilité de retenir le fouet, que la fatigue laissa tomber de
leurs mains, elles mirent judicieusement fin au travail gymnastique
qu'elles avaient entrepris pendant près de deux heures, et se
retirèrent, avec une joie qui n'était pas dépourvue de menaces pour
l'avenir. Je me dirigeai vers celui qui m'appelait au secours, avec
un oeil glacial (car, la perte de son sang était si grande, que la
faiblesse l'empêchait de parler, et que mon opinion était, quoique je
ne fusse pas médecin, que l'hémorragie s'était déclarée au visage et au
bas-ventre), et je coupai ses cheveux avec une paire de ciseaux, après
avoir dégagé ses bras. Il me raconta que sa mère l'avait, un soir,
appelé dans sa chambre, et lui avait ordonné de se déshabiller, pour
passer la nuit avec elle dans un lit, et que, sans attendre aucune
réponse, la maternité s'était dépouillée de tous ses vêtements, en
entre-croisant, devant lui, les gestes les plus impudiques. Qu'alors il
s'était retiré. En outre, par ses refus perpétuels, il s'était attiré la
colère de sa femme, qui s'était bercée de l'espoir d'une récompense, si
elle eût pu réussir à engager son mari à ce qu'il prêtât son corps aux
passions de la vieille. Elles résolurent, par un complot, de le suspendre
à une potence, préparée d'avance dans quelque parage non fréquenté, et de
le laisser périr insensiblement, exposé à toutes les misères et à tous
les dangers. Ce n'était pas sans de très mûres et de nombreuses réflexions,
pleines de difficultés presque insurmontables, qu'elles étaient enfin
parvenues à guider leur choix sur le supplice raffiné qui n'avait trouvé
la disparition de son terme que dans le secours inespéré de mon
intervention. Les marques les plus vives de la reconnaissance soulignaient
chaque expression, et ne donnaient pas à ses confidences leur moindre
valeur. Je le portai dans la chaumière la plus voisine; car, il venait de
s'évanouir, et je ne quittai les laboureurs que lorsque je leur eu laissé
ma bourse, pour donner des soins au blessé, et que je leur eusse fait
promettre qu'ils prodigueraient au malheureux, comme à leur propre fils,
les marques d'une sympathie persévérante. A mon tour, je leur racontai
l'événement, et je m'approchai de la porte, pour remettre le pied sur le
sentier; mais, voilà qu'après avoir fait une centaine de mètres, je revins
machinalement sur mes pas, j'entrai de nouveau dans la chaumière et,
m'adressant à leurs propriétaires naïfs, je m'écriai: «Non, non ... ne
croyez pas que cela m'étonne!» Cette fois-ci, je m'éloignai
définitivement; mais, la plante des pieds ne pouvait pas se poser d'une
manière sûre: un autre aurait pu ne pas s'en apercevoir! Le loup ne
passe plus sous la potence qu'élevèrent, un jour de printemps, les mains
entrelacées d'une épouse et d'une mère, comme quand il faisait prendre,
à son imagination charmée, le chemin d'un repas illusoire. Quand il
voit, à l'horizon, cette chevelure noire, balancée par le vent, il
n'encourage pas sa force d'inertie, et prend la fuite avec une vitesse
incomparable! Faut-il voir, dans ce phénomène psychologique, une
intelligence supérieure à l'ordinaire instinct des mammifères? Sans rien
certifier et même sans rien prévoir, il me semble que l'animal a compris
ce que c'est que le crime! Comment ne le comprendrait-il pas, quand des
êtres humains, eux-mêmes, ont rejeté, jusqu'à ce point indescriptible,
l'empire de la raison, pour ne laisser subsister, à la place de cette
reine détrônée, qu'une vengeance farouche!

       *       *       *       *       *

Je suis sale. Les poux me rongent. Les pourceaux, quand ils me regardent,
vomissent. Les croûtes et les escarres de la lèpre ont écaillé ma peau,
couverte de pus jaunâtre. Je ne connais pas l'eau des fleuves, ni la
rosée des nuages. Sur ma nuque, comme sur un fumier, pousse un énorme
champignon, aux pédoncules ombellifères. Assis sur un meuble informe,
je n'ai pas bougé mes membres depuis quatre siècles. Mes pieds ont pris
racine dans le sol et composent, jusqu'à mon ventre, une sorte de
végétation vivace, remplie d'ignobles parasites, qui ne dérive pas
encore de la plante, et qui n'est plus de la chair. Cependant mon coeur
bat. Mais comment battrait-il, si la pourriture et les exhalaisons de
mon cadavre (je n'ose pas dire corps) ne le nourrissaient abondamment?
Sous mon aisselle gauche, une famille de crapauds a pris résidence et,
quand l'un d'eux remue, il me fait des chatouilles. Prenez garde qu'il
ne s'en échappe un, et ne vienne gratter, avec sa bouche, le dedans de
votre oreille: il serait ensuite capable d'entrer dans votre cerveau.
Sous mon aisselle droite, il y a un caméléon qui leur fait une chasse
perpétuelle, afin de ne pas mourir de faim: il faut que chacun vive.
Mais quand un parti déjoue complètement les ruses de l'autre, ils ne
trouvent rien de mieux que de ne pas se gêner, et sucent la graisse
délicate qui couvre mes côtes: j'y suis habitué. Une vipère méchante
a dévoré ma verge et a pris sa place: elle m'a rendu eunuque, cette
infâme. Oh! si j'avais pu me défendre avec mes bras paralysés; mais, je
crois plutôt qu'ils se sont changés en bûches. Quoi qu'il en soit, il
importe de constater que le sang ne vient plus y promener sa rougeur.
Deux petits hérissons, qui ne croissent plus, ont jeté à un chien, qui
n'a pas refusé, l'intérieur de mes testicules: l'épiderme soigneusement
lavé, ils ont logé dedans. L'anus a été intercepté par un crabe;
encouragé par mon inertie, il garde l'entrée avec ses pinces, et me fait
beaucoup de mal! Deux méduses ont franchi les mers, immédiatement
alléchées par un espoir qui ne fut pas trompé. Elles ont regardé avec
attention les deux parties charnues qui forment le derrière humain, et,
se cramponnant à leur galbe convexe, elles les ont tellement écrasées
par une pression constante, que les deux morceaux de chair ont disparu,
tandis qu'il est resté deux monstres, sortis du royaume de la viscosité,
égaux par la couleur, la forme et la férocité. Ne parlez pas de ma
colonne vertébrale, puisque c'est un glaive. Oui, oui ... je n'y faisais
pas attention ... votre demande est juste. Vous désirez savoir, n'est-ce
pas, comment il se trouve implanté verticalement dans mes reins?
Moi-même, je ne me le rappelle pas très clairement; cependant, si je me
décide à prendre pour un souvenir ce qui n'est peut-être qu'un rêve,
sachez que l'homme, quand il a su que j'avais fait voeu de vivre avec
la maladie et l'immobilité jusqu'à ce que j'eusse vaincu le Créateur,
marcha, derrière moi, sur la pointe des pieds, mais, non pas si
doucement, que je ne l'entendisse. Je ne perçus plus rien, pendant un
instant qui ne fut pas long. Ce poignard aigu s'enfonça jusqu'au manche,
entre les deux épaules du taureau des fêtes, et son ossature frissonna,
comme un tremblement de terre. La lame adhère si fortement au corps, que
personne, jusqu'ici, n'a pu l'extraire. Les athlètes, les mécaniciens,
les philosophes, les médecins ont essayé, tour à tour, les moyens les
plus divers. Ils ne savaient pas que le mal qu'a fait l'homme ne peut
plus se défaire! J'ai pardonné à la profondeur de leur ignorance native,
et je les ai salués des paupières de mes yeux. Voyageur, quand tu
passeras près de moi, ne m'adresse pas, je t'en supplie, le moindre mot
de consolation: tu affaiblirais mon courage. Laisse-moi réchauffer ma
ténacité à la flamme du martyre volontaire. Va-t'en ... que je ne
t'inspire aucune pitié. La haine est plus bizarre que tu ne le penses;
sa conduite est inexplicable, comme l'apparence brisée d'un bâton
enfoncé dans l'eau. Tel que tu me vois, je puis encore faire des
excursions jusqu'aux murailles du ciel, à la tête d'une légion
d'assassins, et revenir prendre cette posture, pour méditer, de nouveau,
sur les nobles projets de la vengeance. Adieu, je ne te retarderai pas
davantage; et, pour t'instruire et te préserver, réfléchis au sort fatal
qui m'a conduit à la révolte, quand peut-être j'étais né bon! Tu
raconteras à ton fils ce que tu as vu; et, le prenant par la main,
fais-lui admirer la beauté des étoiles et les merveilles de l'univers,
le nid du rouge-gorge et les temples du Seigneur. Tu seras étonné de le
voir si docile aux conseils de la paternité, et tu le récompenseras par
un sourire. Mais, quand il apprendra qu'il n'est pas observé, jette les
yeux sur lui, et tu le verras cracher sa bave sur la vertu; il t'a
trompé, celui qui est descendu de la race humaine, mais il ne te
trompera plus: tu sauras désormais ce qu'il deviendra. O père infortuné,
prépare, pour accompagner les pas de ta vieillesse, l'échafaud
ineffaçable qui tranchera la tête d'un criminel précoce, et la douleur
qui te montrera le chemin qui conduit à la tombe.

      *       *       *       *       *

Sur le mur de ma chambre, quelle ombre dessine, avec une puissance
incomparable, la fantasmagorique projection de sa silhouette racornie?
Quand je place sur mon coeur cette interrogation délirante et muette,
c'est moins pour la majesté de la forme, pour le tableau de la réalité,
que la sobriété du style se conduit de la sorte. Qui que tu sois,
défends-toi; car, je vais diriger vers toi la fronde d'une terrible
accusation: ces yeux ne t'appartiennent pas ... où les as-tu pris? Un
jour, je vis passer devant moi une femme blonde; elle les avait pareils
aux tiens: tu les lui as arrachés. Je vois que tu veux faire croire à ta
beauté; mais, personne ne s'y trompe; et moi, moins qu'un autre. Je te
le dis, afin que tu ne me prennes pas pour un sot. Toute une série
d'oiseaux rapaces, amateurs de la viande d'autrui et défenseurs de
l'utilité de la poursuite, beaux comme des squelettes qui effeuillent
des panoccos de l'Arkansas, voltigent autour de ton front, comme des
serviteurs soumis et agréés. Mais, est-ce un front? Il n'est pas
difficile de mettre beaucoup d'hésitation à le croire. Il est si bas,
qu'il est impossible de vérifier les preuves, numériquement exiguës, de
son existence équivoque. Ce n'est pas pour m'amuser que je te dis cela.
Peut-être que tu n'as pas de front, toi, qui promènes, sur la muraille,
comme le symbole mal réfléchi d'une danse fantastique, le fiévreux
ballottement de tes vertèbres lombaires. Qui donc alors t'a scalpé? si
c'est un être humain, parce que tu l'as enfermé, pendant vingt ans, dans
une prison, et qui s'est échappé pour préparer une vengeance digne de
ses représailles, il a fait comme il devait, et je l'applaudis;
seulement, il y a un seulement, il ne fut pas assez sévère. Maintenant,
tu ressembles à un Peau-Rouge prisonnier, du moins (notons-le
préalablement) par le manque expressif de chevelure. Non pas qu'elle ne
puisse repousser, puisque les physiologistes ont découvert que même les
cerveaux enlevés reparaissent à la longue, chez les animaux; mais, ma
pensée, s'arrêtant à une simple constatation, qui n'est pas dépourvue,
d'après le peu que j'en aperçois, d'une volupté énorme, ne va pas, même
dans ses conséquences les plus hardies, jusqu'aux frontières d'un voeu
pour ta guérison, et reste, au contraire, fondée, par la mise en oeuvre
de sa neutralité plus que suspecte, à regarder (ou du moins à
souhaiter), comme le présage de malheurs plus grands, ce qui ne peut
être pour toi qu'une privation momentanée de la peau qui recouvre le
dessus de ta tête. J'espère que tu m'as compris. Et même, si le hasard
te permettait, par un miracle absurde, mais non pas, quelquefois,
raisonnable, de retrouver cette peau précieuse qu'a gardée la religieuse
vigilance de ton ennemi, comme le souvenir enivrant de sa victoire, il
est presque extrêmement possible que, quand même on n'aurait étudié la
loi des probabilités que sous le rapport des mathématiques (or, on sait
que l'analogie transporte facilement l'application de cette loi dans les
autres domaines de l'intelligence), ta crainte légitime, mais un peu
exagérée, d'un refroidissement partiel ou total, ne refuserait pas
l'occasion importante, et même unique, qui se présenterait d'une manière
si opportune, quoique brusque, de préserver les diverses parties de ta
cervelle du contact de l'atmosphère, surtout pendant l'hiver, par une
coiffure qui, à bon droit, t'appartient, puisqu'elle est naturelle, et
qu'il te serait permis, en outre (il serait incompréhensible que tu le
niasses), de garder constamment sur la tête, sans courir les risques
toujours désagréables, d'enfreindre les règles les plus simples d'une
convenance élémentaire. N'est-il pas vrai que tu m'écoutes avec
attention? Si tu m'écoutes davantage, ta tristesse sera loin de se
détacher de l'intérieur de tes narines rouges. Mais, comme je suis très
impartial, et que je ne te déteste pas autant que je le devrais (si je
me trompe, dis-le moi), tu prêtes, malgré toi, l'oreille à mes discours,
comme poussé par une force supérieure. Je ne suis pas si méchant que
toi: voilà pourquoi tort génie s'incline de lui-même devant le mien ...
En effet, je ne suis pas si méchant que toi! Tu viens de jeter un regard
sur la cité bâtie sur le flanc de cette montagne. Et maintenant, que
vois-je?... Tous les habitants sont morts! J'ai de l'orgueil comme un
autre, et c'est un vice de plus, que d'en avoir peut-être davantage.
Eh bien, écoute ... écoute, si l'aveu d'un homme, qui se rappelle
avoir vécu un demi-siècle sous la forme de requin dans les courants
sous-marins qui longent les côtes de l'Afrique, t'intéresse assez
vivement pour lui prêter ton attention, sinon avec amertume, du moins
sans la faute irréparable de montrer le dégoût que je t'inspire. Je ne
jetterai pas à tes pieds le masque de la vertu, pour paraître à tes yeux
tel que je suis; car, je ne l'ai jamais porté (si, toutefois, c'est là
une excuse); et, dès les premiers instants, si tu remarques mes traits
avec attention, tu me reconnaîtras comme ton disciple respectueux dans
la perversité, mais, non pas, comme ton rival redoutable. Puisque je ne
te dispute pas la palme du mal, je ne crois pas qu'un autre le fasse: il
devrait s'égaler auparavant à moi, ce qui n'est pas facile ... Écoute,
à moins que tu ne sois la faible condensation d'un brouillard (tu caches
ton corps quelque part, et je ne puis le rencontrer): un matin, que je
vis une petite fille qui se penchait sur un lac, pour cueillir un lotus
rose, elle affermit ses pas, avec une expérience précoce; elle se
penchait vers les eaux, quand ses yeux rencontrèrent mon regard (il est
vrai que, de mon côté, ce n'était pas sans préméditation). Aussitôt,
elle chancela comme le tourbillon qu'engendre la marée autour d'un roc,
ses jambes fléchirent, et chose merveilleuse à voir, phénomène qui
s'accomplit avec autant de véracité que je cause avec toi, elle tomba
jusqu'au fond du lac: conséquence étrange, elle ne cueillit plus aucune
nymphéacée. Que fait-elle au dessous?... je ne m'en suis pas informé.
Sans doute, sa volonté, qui s'est rangée sous le drapeau de la
délivrance, livre des combats acharnés contre la pourriture! Mais toi,
ô mon maître, sous ton regard, les habitants des cités sont subitement
détruits, comme un tertre de fourmis qu'écrase le talon de l'éléphant.
Ne viens-je pas d'être témoin d'un exemple démonstrateur? Vois ... la
montagne n'est plus joyeuse ... elle restent isolée comme un vieillard.
C'est vrai, les maisons existent; mais ce n'est pas un paradoxe
d'affirmer, à voix basse, que tu ne pourrais en dire autant de ceux qui
n'y existent plus. Déjà, les émanations des cadavres viennent jusqu'à
moi. Ne les sens-tu pas? Regarde ces oiseaux de proie, qui attendent que
nous nous éloignions, pour commencer ce repas géant; il en vient un
nuage perpétuel des quatre coins de l'horizon. Hélas! ils étaient déjà
venus, puisque je vis leurs ailes rapaces tracer, au-dessus de toi, le
monument des spirales, comme pour t'exciter de hâter le crime. Ton
odorat ne reçoit-il donc pas le moindre effluve? L'imposteur n'est pas
autre chose ... Tes nerfs olfactifs sont enfin ébranlés par la
perception d'atomes aromatiques: ceux-ci s'élèvent de la cité anéantie,
quoique je n'aie pas besoin de te l'apprendre ... Je voudrais embrasser
tes pieds, mais mes bras n'entrelacent qu'une transparente vapeur.
Cherchons ce corps introuvable, que cependant mes yeux aperçoivent: il
mérite, de ma part, les marques les plus nombreuses d'une admiration
sincère. Le fantôme se moque de moi: il m'aide à chercher son propre
corps. Si je lui fais signe de rester à sa place, voilà qu'il me renvoie
le même signe ... Le secret est découvert; mais, ce n'est pas, je le dis
avec franchise, à ma plus grande satisfaction. Tout est expliqué, les
grands comme les petits détails; ceux-ci sont indifférents à remettre
devant l'esprit, comme, par exemple, l'arrachement des yeux à la femme
blonde: cela n'est presque rien!... Ne me rappelais-je donc pas que, moi
aussi, j'avais été scalpé, quoique ce ne fût que pendant cinq ans (le
nombre exact du temps m'avait failli), que j'avais enfermé un être
humain dans une prison, pour être témoin du spectacle de ses souffrances,
parce qu'il m'avait refusé, à juste titre, une amitié qui ne s'accorde
pas à des êtres comme moi? Puisque je fais semblant d'ignorer que mon
regard peut donner la mort, même aux planètes qui tournent dans l'espace,
il n'aura pas tort, celui qui prétendra que je ne possède pas la faculté
des souvenirs. Ce qui me reste à faire, c'est de briser cette glace, en
éclats, à l'aide d'une pierre ... Ce n'est pas la première fois que le
cauchemar de la perte momentanée de la mémoire établit sa demeure dans
mon imagination, quand, par les inflexibles lois de l'optique, il m'arrive
d'être placé devant la méconnaissance de ma propre image!

       *       *       *       *       *

Je m'étais endormi sur la falaise. Celui qui, pendant un jour, a
poursuivi l'autruche à travers le désert, sans pouvoir l'atteindre, n'a
pas eu le temps de prendre de la nourriture et de fermer les yeux. Si
c'est lui qui me lit, il est capable de deviner, à la rigueur, quel
sommeil s'appesantit sur moi. Mais, quand la tempête a poussé
verticalement un vaisseau, avec la paume de sa main, jusqu'au fond de la
mer; si, sur le radeau, il ne reste plus de tout l'équipage qu'un seul
homme, rompu par les fatigues et les privations de toute espèce; si la
lame le ballotte, comme une épave, pendant des heures plus prolongées
que la vie d'homme; et, si, une frégate, qui sillonne plus tard ces
parages de désolation d'une carène fendue, aperçoit le malheureux qui
promène sur l'océan sa carcasse décharnée, et lui porte un secours qui
a failli être tardif, je crois que ce naufragé devinera mieux encore à
quel degré fut porté l'assoupissement de mes sens. Le magnétisme et le
chloroforme, quand ils s'en donnent la peine, savent quelquefois
engendrer pareillement de ces catalepsies léthargiques. Elles n'ont
aucune ressemblance avec la mort: ce serait un grand mensonge de le
dire. Mais arrivons tout de suite au rêve, afin que les impatients,
affamés de ces sortes de lectures, ne se mettent pas à rugir, comme
un banc de cachalots macrocéphales qui se battent entre eux pour une
femelle enceinte. Je rêvais que j'étais entré dans le corps d'un
pourceau, qu'il ne m'était pas facile d'en sortir, et que je vautrais
mes poils dans les marécages les plus fangeux. Était-ce comme une
récompense? Objet de mes voeux, je n'appartenais plus à l'humanité! Pour
moi, j'entendis l'interprétation ainsi, et j'en éprouvai une joie plus
que profonde. Cependant, je recherchais activement quel acte de vertu
j'avais accompli pour mériter, de la part de la Providence, cette
insigne faveur. Maintenant que j'ai repassé dans ma mémoire les diverses
phases de cet aplatissement épouvantable contre le ventre du granit,
pendant lequel la marée, sans que je m'en aperçusse, passa, deux fois,
sur ce mélange irréductible de matière morte et de chair vivante, il
n'est peut-être pas sans utilité de proclamer que cette dégradation
n'était probablement qu'une punition, réalisée sur moi par la justice
divine. Mais, qui connaît ses besoins intimes ou la cause de ses joies
pestilentielles? La métamorphose ne parut jamais à mes yeux que comme le
haut et magnanime retentissement d'un bonheur parfait, que j'attendais
depuis longtemps. Il était enfin venu, le jour où je fus un pourceau!
J'essayais mes dents sur l'écorce des arbres; mon groin, je le
contemplais avec délice. Il ne restait plus la moindre parcelle de
divinité: je sus élever mon âme jusqu'à l'excessive hauteur de cette
volupté ineffable. Écoutez-moi donc, et ne rougissez pas, inépuisables
caricatures du beau, qui prenez au sérieux le braiement risible de votre
âme, souverainement méprisable; et qui ne comprenez pas pourquoi le
Tout-Puissant, dans un rare moment de bouffonnerie excellente, qui,
certainement, ne dépasse pas les grandes lois générales du grotesque,
prit, un jour, le mirifique plaisir de faire habiter une planète par des
êtres singuliers et microcosmiques, qu'on appelle _humains_, et dont la
matière ressemble à celle du corail vermeil. Certes, vous avez raison de
rougir, os et graisse, mais écoutez-moi. Je n'invoque pas votre
intelligence; vous la feriez rejeter du sang par l'horreur qu'elle vous
témoigne: oubliez-la, et soyez conséquents avec vous-mêmes ... Là, plus
de contrainte. Quand je voulais tuer, je tuais; cela, même, m'arrivait
souvent, et personne ne m'en empêchait. Les lois humaines me
poursuivaient encore de leur vengeance, quoique je n'attaquasse pas la
race que j'avais abandonnée si tranquillement; mais ma conscience ne me
faisait aucun reproche. Pendant la journée, je me battais avec mes
nouveaux semblables, et le sol était parsemé de nombreuses couches de
sang caillé. J'étais le plus fort, et je remportais toutes les victoires.
Des blessures cuisantes couvraient mon corps; je faisais semblant de ne
pas m'en apercevoir. Les animaux terrestres s'éloignaient de moi, et je
restais seul dans ma resplendissante grandeur. Quel ne fut pas mon
étonnement, quand, après avoir traversé un fleuve à la nage, pour
m'éloigner des contrées que ma rage avait dépeuplées, et gagner d'autres
campagnes pour y planter mes coutumes de meurtre et de carnage, j'essayai
de marcher sur cette rive fleurie! Mes pieds étaient paralysés; aucun
mouvement ne venait trahir la vérité de cette immobilité forcée. Au milieu
d'efforts surnaturels, pour continuer mon chemin, ce fut alors que je me
réveillai, et que je sentis que je redevenais homme. La Providence me
faisait ainsi comprendre, d'une manière qui n'est pas inexplicable, qu'elle
ne voulait pas que, même en rêve, mes projets sublimes s'accomplissent.
Revenir à ma forme primitive fut pour moi une douleur si grande, que,
pendant les nuits, j'en pleure encore. Mes draps sont constamment mouillés,
comme s'ils avaient été passés dans l'eau, et, chaque jour, je les fais
changer. Si vous ne le croyez pas, venez me voir; vous contrôlerez, par
votre propre expérience, non pas la vraisemblance, mais, en outre, la
vérité même de mon assertion. Combien de fois, depuis cette nuit passée
à la belle étoile, sur une falaise, ne me suis-je pas mêlé à des troupeaux
de pourceaux, pour reprendre, comme un droit, ma métamorphose détruite! Il
est temps de quitter ces souvenirs glorieux, qui ne laissent, après leur
suite, que la pâle voie lactée des regrets éternels.

       *       *       *       *       *

Il n'est pas impossible d'être témoin d'une déviation anormale dans le
fonctionnement latent ou visible des lois de la nature. Effectivement,
si chacun se donne la peine ingénieuse d'interroger les diverses phases
de son existence (sans en oublier une seule, car c'était peut-être
celle-là qui était destinée à fournir la preuve de ce que j'avance),
il ne se souviendra pas, sans un certain étonnement, qui serait comique
en d'autres circonstances, que, tel jour, pour parler premièrement de
choses objectives, il fut témoin de quelque phénomène qui semblait
dépasser et dépassait positivement les notions connues fournies par
l'observation et l'expérience, comme, par exemple, les pluies de
crapauds, dont le magique spectacle dut ne pas être d'abord compris par
les savants. Et que, tel autre jour, pour parler en deuxième et dernier
lieu de choses subjectives, son âme présenta au regard investigateur de
la psychologie, je ne vais pas jusqu'à dire une aberration de la raison
(qui cependant, n'en serait pas moins curieuse; au contraire, elle le
serait davantage), mais, du moins, pour ne pas faire le difficile auprès
de certaines personnes froides, qui ne me pardonneraient jamais les
élucubrations flagrantes de mon exagération, un état inaccoutumé, assez
souvent très grave, qui marque que la limite accordée par le bon sens à
l'imagination est quelquefois, malgré le pacte éphémère conclu entre ces
deux puissances, malheureusement dépassée par la pression énergique de
la volonté, mais, la plupart du temps aussi, par l'absence de sa
collaboration effective: donnons à l'appui quelques exemples, dont il
n'est pas difficile d'apprécier l'opportunité; si, toutefois, l'on prend
pour compagne une attentive modération. J'en présente deux: les
emportements de la colère et les maladies de l'orgueil. J'avertis celui
qui me lit qu'il prenne garde à ce qu'il ne se fasse pas une idée vague,
et, à plus forte raison fausse, des beautés de littérature que
j'effeuille, dans le développement excessivement rapide de mes phrases.
Hélas! je voudrais développer mes raisonnements et mes comparaisons
lentement et avec beaucoup de magnificence (mais qui dispose de son
temps?), pour que chacun comprenne davantage, sinon mon épouvante, du
moins ma stupéfaction, quand, un soir d'été, comme le soleil semblait
s'abaisser à l'horizon, je vis nager, sur la mer, avec de larges pattes
de canard à la place des extrémités des jambes et des bras, porteur
d'une nageoire dorsale, proportionnellement aussi longue et aussi
effilée que celle des dauphins, un être humain, aux muscles vigoureux,
et que des bancs nombreux de poissons (je vis, dans ce cortège, entre
autres habitants des eaux, la torpille, l'anarnak groënlandais et la
scorpène-horrible) suivaient avec les marques très ostensibles de la
plus grande admiration. Quelquefois il plongeait, et son corps visqueux
reparaissait presque aussitôt, à deux cents mètres de distance. Les
marsouins, qui n'ont pas volé, d'après mon opinion, la réputation de
bons nageurs, pouvaient à peine suivre de loin cet amphibie de nouvelle
espèce. Je ne crois pas que le lecteur ait lieu de se repentir, s'il
prête à ma narration, moins le nuisible obstacle d'une crédulité
stupide, que le suprême service d'une confiance profonde, qui discute
légalement, avec une secrète sympathie, les mystères poétiques, trop peu
nombreux, à son propre avis, que je me charge de lui révéler, quand,
chaque fois, l'occasion s'en présente, comme elle s'est inopinément
aujourd'hui présentée, intimement pénétrée des toniques senteurs des
plantes aquatiques, que la brise fraîchissante transporte dans cette
strophe, qui contient un monstre, qui s'est approprié les marques
distinctives de la famille des palmipèdes. Qui parle ici
d'appropriation? Que l'on sache bien que l'homme, par sa nature multiple
et complexe, n'ignore pas les moyens d'en élargir encore les frontières;
il vit dans l'eau, comme l'hippocampe; à travers les couches supérieures
de l'air, comme l'orfraie; et sous la terre, comme la taupe, le cloporte
et la sublimité du vermiceau. Tel est dans sa forme, plus ou moins
concise (mais plus, que moins), l'exact critérium de la consolation
extrêmement fortifiante que je m'efforçais de faire naître dans mon
esprit, quand je songeais que l'être humain que j'apercevais à une
grande distance nager des quatre membres, à la surface des vagues, comme
jamais cormoran le plus superbe ne le fit, n'avait, peut-être, acquis le
nouveau changement des extrémités de ses bras et de ses jambes, que
comme l'expiatoire châtiment de quelque crime inconnu. Il n'était pas
nécessaire que je me tourmentasse la tête pour fabriquer d'avance les
mélancoliques pilules de la pitié; car, je ne savais pas que cet homme,
dont les bras frappaient alternativement l'onde amère, tandis que ses
jambes, avec une force pareille à celle que possèdent les défenses en
spirale du narval, engendraient le recul des couches aquatiques, ne
s'était pas plus volontairement approprié ces extraordinaires formes,
qu'elles ne lui avaient été imposées comme supplice. D'après ce que
j'appris plus tard, voici la simple vérité: la prolongation de
l'existence, dans cet élément fluide, avait insensiblement amené, dans
l'être humain qui s'était lui-même exilé des continents rocailleux, les
changements importants, mais non pas essentiels, que j'avais remarqués,
dans l'objet qu'un regard passablement confus m'avait fait prendre,
dès les moments primordiaux de son apparition (par une inqualifiable
légèreté, dont les écarts engendrent le sentiment si pénible que
comprendront facilement les psychologistes et les amants de la prudence)
pour un poisson, à forme étrange, non encore décrit dans les
classifications des naturalistes; mais, peut-être, dans leurs ouvrages
posthumes, quoique je n'eusse pas l'excusable prétention de pencher vers
cette dernière supposition, imaginée dans de trop hypothétiques
conditions. En effet, cet amphibie (puisque amphibie il y a, sans qu'on
puisse affirmer le contraire) n'était visible que pour moi seul,
abstraction faite des poissons et des cétacés; car, je m'aperçus que
quelques paysans, qui s'étaient arrêtés à contempler mon visage, troublé
par ce phénomène surnaturel, et qui cherchaient inutilement à s'expliquer
pourquoi mes yeux étaient constamment fixés, avec une persévérance qui
paraissait invincible, et qui ne l'était pas en réalité, sur un endroit
de la mer où ils ne distinguaient, eux, qu'une quantité appréciable et
limitée de bancs de poissons de toutes les espèces, distendaient
l'ouverture de leur bouche grandiose, peut-être autant qu'une baleine.
«Cela les faisait sourire, mais non, comme à moi, pâlir, disaient-ils
dans leur pittoresque langage; et ils n'étaient pas assez bêtes pour
ne pas remarquer que, précisément, je ne regardais pas les évolutions
champêtres des poissons, mais que ma vue se portait, de beaucoup plus,
en avant.» De telle manière que, quant à ce qui me concerne, tournant
machinalement les yeux du côté de l'envergure remarquable de ces
puissantes bouches, je me disais, en moi-même, qu'à moins qu'on ne
trouvât dans la totalité de l'univers un pélican, grand comme une
montagne ou au moins comme un promontoire (admirez, je vous prie, la
finesse de la restriction qui ne perd aucun pouce de terrain), aucun bec
d'oiseau de proie ou mâchoire d'animal sauvage ne serait jamais capable
de surpasser, ni même d'égaler, chacun de ces cratères béants, mais
trop lugubres. Et, cependant, quoique je réserve une bonne part au
sympathique emploi de la métaphore (cette figure de réthorique rend
beaucoup plus de services aux aspirations humaines vers l'infini que ne
s'efforcent de se le figurer ordinairement ceux qui sont imbus de
préjugés ou d'idées fausses, ce qui est la même chose), il n'en est pas
moins vrai que la bouche risible de ces paysans reste encore assez large
pour avaler trois cachalots. Raccourcissons davantage notre pensée,
soyons sérieux, et contentons-nous de trois petits éléphants qui
viennent à peine de naître. D'une seule brassée, l'amphibie laissait
après lui un kilomètre de sillon écumeux. Pendant le très court moment
où le bras tendu en avant reste suspendu dans l'air, avant qu'il
s'enfonce de nouveau, ses doigts écartés, réunis à l'aide d'un repli de
la peau, à forme de membrane, semblaient s'élancer vers les hauteurs de
l'espace, et prendre les étoiles. Debout sur le roc, je me servis de mes
mains comme d'un porte-voix, et je m'écriai, pendant que les crabes
et les écrevisses s'enfuyaient vers l'obscurité des plus secrètes
crevasses: «O toi, dont la natation l'emporte sur le vol des longues
ailes de la frégate, si tu comprends encore la signification des grands
éclats de voix que, comme fidèle interprétation de sa pensée intime,
lance avec force l'humanité, daigne t'arrêter, un instant, dans ta
marche rapide, et raconte-moi sommairement les phases de ta véridique
histoire. Mais, je t'avertis que tu n'as pas besoin de m'adresser la
parole, si ton dessein audacieux est de faire naître en moi l'amitié
et la vénération que je sentis pour toi, dès que je te vis, pour la
première fois, accomplissant, avec la grâce et la force du requin, ton
pèlerinage indomptable et rectiligne.» Un soupir, qui me glaça les os,
et qui fit chanceler le roc sur lequel je reposai la plante de mes pieds
(à moins que ce ne fût moi-même qui chancelai, par la rude pénétration
des ondes sonores, qui portaient à mon oreille un tel cri de désespoir),
s'étendit jusqu'aux entrailles de la terre: les poissons plongèrent sous
les vagues, avec le bruit de l'avalanche. L'amphibie n'osa pas trop
s'avancer jusqu'au rivage; mais, dès qu'il se fut assuré que sa voix
parvenait assez distinctement jusqu'à mon tympan, il réduisit le
mouvement de ses membres palmés, de manière à soutenir son buste,
couvert de goëmons, au-dessus des flots mugissants. Je le vis incliner
son front, comme pour invoquer, par un ordre solennel, la meute errante
des souvenirs. Je n'osais pas l'interrompre dans cette occupation,
saintement archéologique: plongé dans le passé, il ressemblait à un
écueil. Il prit enfin la parole en ces termes: «Le scolopendre ne manque
pas d'ennemis; la beauté fantastique de ses pattes innombrables, au lieu
de lui attirer la sympathie des animaux, n'est, peut-être, pour eux, que
le puissant stimulant d'une jalouse irritation. Et, je ne serais pas
étonné d'apprendre que cet insecte est en butte aux haines les plus
intenses. Je te cacherai le lieu de ma naissance, qui n'importe pas à
mon récit: mais, la honte qui rejaillirait sur ma famille importe à mon
devoir. Mon père et ma mère (que Dieu leur pardonne!), après un an
d'attente, virent le ciel exaucer leurs voeux: deux jumeaux, mon frère
et moi, parurent à la lumière. Raison de plus pour s'aimer. Il n'en fut
pas ainsi que je parle. Parce que j'étais le plus beau des deux, et le
plus intelligent, mon frère me prit en haine, et ne se donna pas la
peine de cacher ses sentiments: c'est pourquoi, mon père et ma mère
firent rejaillir sur moi la plus grande partie de leur amour, tandis
que, par mon amitié sincère et constante, j'efforçai d'apaiser une âme,
qui n'avait pas le droit de se révolter, contre celui qui avait été tiré
de la même chair. Alors, mon frère ne connut plus de bornes à sa fureur,
et me perdit, dans le coeur de nos parents communs, par les calomnies
les plus invraisemblables. J'ai vécu, pendant quinze ans, dans un
cachot, avec des larves et de l'eau fangeuse pour toute nourriture.
Je ne te raconterai pas en détail les tourments inouïs que j'ai prouvés,
dans cette longue séquestration injuste. Quelquefois, dans un moment de
la journée, un des trois bourreaux, à tour de rôle, entrait brusquement,
chargé de pinces, de tenailles et de divers instruments de supplice. Les
cris que m'arrachaient les tortures les laissaient inébranlables: la
perte abondante de mon sang les faisait sourire. O mon frère, je t'ai
pardonné, toi la cause première de tous mes maux! Se peut-il qu'une rage
aveugle ne puisse enfin dessiller ses propres yeux! J'ai fait beaucoup
de réflexions, dans ma prison éternelle. Quelle devint ma haine générale
contre l'humanité, tu le devines. L'étiolement progressif, la solitude
du corps et de l'âme ne m'avaient pas fait perdre encore toute ma
raison, au point de garder du ressentiment contre ceux que je n'avais
cessé d'aimer: triple carcan dont j'étais l'esclave. Je parvins, par la
ruse, à recouvrer ma liberté! Dégoûté des habitants du continent, qui,
quoiqu'ils s'intitulassent mes semblables, ne paraissaient pas jusqu'ici
me ressembler en rien (s'ils trouvaient que je leur ressemblasse,
pourquoi me faisaient-ils du mal?), je dirigeai ma course vers les
galets de la plage, fermement résolu à me donner la mort, si la mer
devait m'offrir les réminiscences antérieures d'une existence fatalement
vécue. En croiras-tu tes propres yeux? Depuis le jour que je m'enfuis
de la maison paternelle, je ne me plains pas autant que tu le penses
d'habiter la mer et ses grottes de cristal. La Providence, comme tu le
vois, m'a donné en partie l'organisation du cygne. Je vis en paix avec
les poissons, et ils me procurent la nourriture dont j'ai besoin, comme
si j'étais leur monarque. Je vais pousser un sifflement particulier,
pourvu que cela ne te contrarie pas, et tu vas voir comme ils vont
reparaître.» Il arriva comme il le prédit. Il reprit sa royale natation,
entouré de son cortège de sujets. Et, quoiqu'au bout de quelques
secondes, il eût complètement disparu à mes yeux, avec une longue-vue,
je pus encore le distinguer, aux dernières limites de l'horizon. Il
nageait, d'une main, et, de l'autre, essuyait ses yeux, qu'avait
injectés de sang la contrainte terrible de s'être approché de la terre
ferme. Il avait agi ainsi pour me faire plaisir. Je rejetai l'instrument
révélateur contre l'escarpement à pic; il bondit de roche en roche, et
ses fragments épars, ce sont les vagues qui le reçurent: tels furent la
dernière démonstration et le suprême adieu par lesquels je m'inclinai,
comme dans un rêve, devant une noble et infortunée intelligence!
Cependant, tout était réel dans ce qui s'était passé, pendant ce soir
d'été.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chaque nuit, plongeant l'envergure de mes ailes dans ma mémoire
agonisante, j'évoquais le souvenir de Falmer ... chaque nuit. Ses
cheveux blonds, sa figure ovale, ses traits majestueux étaient encore
empreints dans mon imagination, indestructiblement ... surtout ses
cheveux blonds. Éloignez, éloignez donc cette tête sans chevelure, polie
comme la carapace de la tortue. Il avait quatorze ans, et je n'avais
qu'un an de plus. Que cette lugubre voix se taise. Pourquoi vient-elle
me dénoncer? Mais c'est moi-même qui parle. Me servant de ma propre
langue pour émettre ma pensée, je m'aperçois que mes lèvres remuent,
et que c'est moi-même qui parle. Et, c'est moi-même qui, racontant une
histoire de ma jeunesse, et sentant le remords pénétrer dans mon coeur
... c'est moi-même, à moins que je ne me trompe ... c'est moi-même qui
parle. Je n'avais qu'un an de plus. Quel est donc celui auquel je fais
allusion? C'est un ami que je possédais dans les temps passés, je crois.
Oui, oui, j'ai déjà dit comment il s'appelle ... je ne veux pas épeler
de nouveau ces six lettres, non, non. Il n'est pas utile non plus de
répéter que j'avais un an de plus. Qui le sait? Répétons-le, cependant,
mais, avec un pénible murmure: je n'avais qu'un an de plus. Même alors,
la prééminence de ma force physique était plutôt un motif de soutenir, à
travers le rude sentier de ma vie, celui qui s'était donné à moi, que de
maltraiter un être visiblement plus faible. Or, je crois en effet qu'il
était plus faible ... Même alors. C'est un ami que je possédais dans les
temps passés, je crois. La prééminence de ma force physique ... chaque
nuit ... Surtout ses cheveux blonds. Il existe plus d'un être humain qui
a vu des têtes chauves: la vieillesse, la maladie, la douleur (les trois
ensemble ou prises séparément) expliquent ce phénomène négatif d'une
manière satisfaisante. Telle est, du moins, la réponse que me ferait un
savant, si je l'interrogeais là-dessus. La vieillesse, la maladie, la
douleur. Mais je n'ignore pas (moi, aussi, je suis savant) qu'un jour,
parce qu'il m'avait arrêté la main, au moment où je levais mon poignard
pour percer le sein d'une femme, je le saisis par les cheveux avec un
bras de fer, et le fis tournoyer dans l'air avec une telle vitesse, que
la chevelure me resta dans la main, et que son corps, lancé par la force
centrifuge, alla cogner contre le tronc d'un chêne ... Je n'ignore pas
qu'un jour sa chevelure me resta dans la main. Moi, aussi, je suis
savant. Oui, oui, j'ai déjà dit comment il s'appelle. Je n'ignore pas
qu'un jour j'accomplis un acte infâme, tandis que son corps était lancé
par la force centrifuge. Il avait quatorze ans. Quand, dans un accès
d'aliénation mentale, je cours à travers les champs, en tenant, pressée
sur mon coeur, une chose sanglante que je conserve depuis longtemps,
comme une relique vénérée, les petits enfants qui me poursuivent ...
les petits enfants et les vieilles femmes qui me poursuivent à coups de
pierre, poussent ces gémissements lamentables: «Voilà la chevelure de
Falmer.» Éloignez, éloignez donc cette tête chauve, polie comme la
carapace de la tortue. Une chose sanglante. Mais c'est moi-même qui
parle. Sa figure ovale, ses traits majestueux. Or, je crois en effet
qu'il était plus faible. Les vieilles femmes et les petits enfants. Or,
je crois en effet ... qu'est-ce que je voulais dire?... or, je crois en
effet qu'il était plus faible. Avec un bras de fer. Ce choc, ce choc
l'a-t-il tué? Ses os ont-ils été brisés contre l'arbre ...
irréparablement? L'a-t-il tué, ce choc engendré par la vigueur d'un
athlète? A-t-il conservé la vie, quoique ses os se soient
irréparablement brisés ... irréparablement? Ce choc l'a-t-il tué? Je
crains de savoir ce dont mes yeux fermés ne furent pas témoins. En effet
... Surtout ses cheveux blonds. En effet, je m'enfuis au loin avec une
conscience désormais implacable. Il avait quatorze ans. Avec une
conscience désormais implacable. Chaque nuit. Lorsqu'un jeune homme, qui
aspire à la gloire, dans un cinquième étage, penché sur sa table de
travail, à l'heure silencieuse de minuit, perçoit un bruissement qu'il
ne sait à quoi attribuer, il tourne, de tous les côtés, sa tête,
alourdie par la méditation et les manuscrits poudreux; mais, rien, aucun
indice surpris ne lui révèle la cause de ce qu'il entend si faiblement,
quoique cependant il l'entende. Il s'aperçoit, enfin, que la fumée de sa
bougie, prenant son essor vers le plafond, occasionne, à travers l'air
ambiant, les vibrations presque imperceptibles d'une feuille de papier
accrochée à un clou figé contre la muraille. Dans un cinquième étage. De
même qu'un jeune homme, qui aspire à la gloire, entend un bruissement
qu'il ne sait à quoi attribuer, ainsi j'entends une voix mélodieuse qui
prononce à mon oreille: «Maldoror!» Mais, avant de mettre fin à sa
méprise, il croyait entendre les ailes d'un moustique ... penché sur
sa table de travail. Cependant, je ne rêve pas; qu'importe que je sois
étendu sur mon lit de satin? Je fais avec sang-froid la perspicace
remarque que j'ai les yeux ouverts, quoiqu'il soit l'heure des dominos
roses et des bals masqués. Jamais ... oh! non, jamais! une voix mortelle
ne fit entendre ces accents séraphiques, en prononçant, avec tant de
douloureuse élégance, les syllabes de mon nom! Les ailes d'un moustique
... Comme sa voix est bienveillante. M'a-t-il donc pardonné? Son corps
alla cogner contre le tronc d'un chêne ... «Maldoror!»



FIN DU QUATRIÈME CHANT




CHANT CINQUIÈME


Que le lecteur ne se fâche pas contre moi, si ma prose n'a pas le
bonheur de lui plaire. Tu soutiens que mes idées sont au moins
singulières. Ce que tu dis là, homme respectable, est la vérité; mais,
une vérité partiale. Or, quelle source abondante d'erreurs et de
méprises n'est pas toute vérité partiale! Les bandes d'étourneaux ont
une manière de voler qui leur est propre, et semble soumise à une
tactique uniforme et régulière, telle que serait celle d'une troupe
disciplinée, obéissant avec précision à la voix d'un seul chef. C'est à
la voix de l'instinct que les étourneaux obéissent, et leur instinct les
porte à se rapprocher toujours du centre du peloton, tandis que la
rapidité de leur vol les emporte sans cesse au delà; en sorte que cette
multitude d'oiseaux, ainsi réunis par une tendance commune vers le même
point aimanté, allant et venant sans cesse, circulant et se croisant en
tous sens, forme une espèce de tourbillon fort agité, dont la masse
entière, sans suivre de direction bien certaine, paraît avoir un
mouvement général d'évolution sur elle-même, résultant des mouvements
particuliers de circulation propre à chacune de ses parties, et dans
lequel le centre, tendant perpétuellement à se développer, mais sans
cesse pressé, repoussé par l'effort contraire des lignes environnantes
qui pèsent sur lui, est constamment plus serré qu'aucune de ces lignes,
lesquelles le sont elles-mêmes d'autant plus, qu'elles sont plus
voisines du centre. Malgré cette singulière manière de tourbillonner,
les étourneaux n'en fendent pas moins, avec une vitesse rare, l'air
ambiant, et gagnent sensiblement, à chaque seconde, un terrain précieux
pour le terme de leurs fatigues, et le but de leur pèlerinage. Toi, de
même, ne fais pas attention à la manière bizarre dont je chante chacune
de ces strophes. Mais, sois persuadé que les accents fondamentaux de
la poésie n'en conservent pas moins leur intrinsèque droit sur mon
intelligence. Ne généralisons pas des faits exceptionnels, je ne demande
pas mieux: cependant mon caractère est dans l'ordre des choses
possibles. Sans doute, entre les deux termes extrêmes de la littérature,
telle que tu l'entends, et de la mienne, il en est une infinité
d'intermédiaires et il serait facile de multiplier les divisions; mais,
il n'y aurait nulle utilité, et il y aurait le danger de donner quelque
chose d'étroit et de faux à une conception éminemment philosophique, qui
cesse d'être rationnelle, dès qu'elle n'est plus comprise comme elle a
été imaginée, c'est-à-dire avec ampleur. Tu sais allier l'enthousiasme
et le froid intérieur, observateur d'une humeur concentrée; enfin, pour
moi, je te trouve parfait ... Et tu ne veux pas me comprendre! Si tu
n'es pas en bonne santé, suis mon conseil (c'est le meilleur que je
possède à ta disposition), et va faire une promenade dans la campagne.
Triste compensation, qu'en dis-tu? Lorsque tu auras pris l'air, reviens
me trouver: tes sens seront plus reposés. Ne pleure plus; je ne voulais
pas te faire de la peine. N'est-il pas vrai, mon ami, que, jusqu'à un
certain point, ta sympathie est acquise à mes chants? Or, qui t'empêche
de franchir les autres degrés? La frontière entre ton goût et le mien
est invisible; tu ne pourras jamais la saisir: preuve que cette
frontière elle-même n'existe pas. Réfléchis donc qu'alors (je ne fais
ici qu'effleurer la question) il ne serait pas impossible que tu eusses
signé un traité d'alliance avec l'obstination, cette agréable fille du
mulet, source si riche d'intolérance. Si je ne savais pas que tu n'étais
pas un sot, je ne te ferais pas un semblable reproche. Il n'est pas
utile pour toi que tu t'encroûtes dans la cartilagineuse carapace d'un
axiome que tu crois inébranlable. Il y a d'autres axiomes aussi qui sont
inébranlables, et qui marchent parallèlement avec le tien. Si tu as un
penchant marqué pour le caramel (admirable farce de la nature), personne
ne le concevra comme un crime; mais, ceux dont l'intelligence, plus
énergique et capable de plus grandes choses, préfère le poivre et
l'arsenic, ont de bonnes raisons pour agir de la sorte, sans avoir
l'intention d'imposer leur pacifique domination à ceux qui tremblent de
peur devant une musaraigne ou l'expression parlante des surfaces d'un
cube. Je parle par expérience, sans venir jouer ici le rôle de
provocateur. Et, de même que les rotifères et les tardigrades peuvent
être chauffés à une température voisine de l'ébullition, sans perdre
nécessairement leur vitalité, il en sera de même pour toi, si tu sais
t'assimiler, avec précaution, l'âcre sérosité suppurative qui se dégage
avec lenteur de l'agacement que causent mes intéressantes élucubrations.
Eh! quoi, n'est-on pas parvenu à greffer sur le dos d'un rat vivant la
queue détachée du corps d'un autre rat? Essaie donc pareillement de
transporter dans ton imagination les diverses modifications de ma raison
cadavérique. Mais, sois prudent. A l'heure que j'écris, de nouveaux
frissons parcourent l'atmosphère intellectuelle: il ne s'agit que
d'avoir le courage de les regarder en face. Pourquoi fais-tu cette
grimace? Et même tu l'accompagnes d'un geste que l'on ne pourrait imiter
qu'après un long apprentissage. Sois persuadé que l'habitude est
nécessaire en tout; et, puisque la répulsion instinctive, qui s'était
déclarée dès les premières pages, a notablement diminué de profondeur,
en raison inverse de l'application à la lecture, comme un furoncle qu'on
incise, il faut espérer, quoique ta tête soit encore malade, que ta
guérison ne tardera certainement pas à rentrer dans sa dernière période.
Pour moi, il est indubitable que tu vogues déjà en pleine convalescence;
cependant ta figure est restée bien maigre, hélas! Mais ... courage! il
y a en toi un esprit peu commun, je t'aime, et je ne désespère pas de
ta complète délivrance, pourvu que tu absorbes quelques substances
médicamenteuses, qui ne feront que hâter la disparition des derniers
symptômes du mal. Comme nourriture astringente et tonique, tu arracheras
d'abord les bras de ta mère (si elle existe encore), tu les dépèceras en
petits morceaux, et tu les mangeras ensuite, en un seul jour, sans
qu'aucun trait de ta figure ne trahisse ton émotion. Si ta mère était
trop vieille, choisis un autre sujet chirurgique, plus jeune et plus
frais, sur lequel la rugine aura prise, et dont les os tarsiens, quand
il marche, prennent aisément un point d'appui pour faire la bascule: ta
soeur, par exemple. Je ne puis m'empêcher de plaindre son sort, et je
ne suis pas de ceux dans lesquels un enthousiasme très froid ne fait
qu'affecter la bonté. Toi et moi, nous verserons pour elle, pour cette
vierge aimée (mais, je n'ai pas de preuves pour établir qu'elle soit
vierge), deux larmes incoercibles, deux larmes de plomb. Ce sera tout.
La potion la plus lénitive, que je te conseille, est un bassin, plein
d'un pus blennorragique à noyaux, dans lequel on aura préalablement
dissous un kyste pileux de l'ovaire, un chancre folliculaire, un prépuce
enflammé, renversé en arrière du gland par une paraphimosis, trois
limaces rouges. Si tu suis mes ordonnances, ma poésie te recevra à bras
ouverts, comme un pou résèque, avec ses baisers, la racine d'un cheveu.

       *       *       *       *       *

Je voyais, devant moi, un objet debout sur un tertre. Je ne distinguais
pas clairement sa tête; mais, déjà, je devinais qu'elle n'était pas
d'une forme ordinaire, sans, néanmoins, préciser la proportion exacte
de ses contours. Je n'osais m'approcher de cette colonne immobile; et,
quand même j'aurais eu à ma disposition les pattes ambulatoires de plus
de trois mille crabes (je ne parle même pas de celles qui servent à la
préhension et à la mastication des aliments), je serais encore resté à
la même place, si un événement, très futile par lui-même, n'eût prélevé
un lourd tribut sur ma curiosité, qui faisait craquer ses digues. Un
scarabée, roulant, sur le sol, avec ses mandibules et ses antennes,
une boule, dont les principaux éléments étaient composés de matières
excrémentielles, s'avançait d'un pas rapide, vers le tertre désigné,
s'appliquant à bien mettre en évidence la volonté qu'il avait de prendre
cette direction. Cet animal articulé n'était pas de beaucoup plus grand
qu'une vache! Si l'on doute de ce que je dis, que l'on vienne à moi, et
je satisferai les plus incrédules par le témoignage de bons témoins.
Je le suivis de loin, ostensiblement intrigué. Que voulait-il faire de
cette grosse boule noire? O lecteur, toi qui te vantes sans cesse de ta
perspicacité (et non à tort), serais-tu capable de me le dire? Mais, je
ne veux pas soumettre à une rude épreuve ta passion connue pour les
énigmes. Qu'il te suffise de savoir que la plus douce punition que je
puisse t'infliger, est encore de te faire observer que ce mystère ne te
sera révélé (il te sera révélé) que plus tard, à la fin de ta vie, quand
tu entameras des discussions philosophiques avec l'agonie sur le bord de
ton chevet ... et peut-être même à la fin de cette strophe. Le scarabée
était arrivé au bas du tertre. J'avais emboîté mon pas sur ses traces,
et j'étais encore à une grande distance du lieu de la scène; car, de
même que les stercoraires, oiseaux inquiets comme s'ils étaient toujours
affamés, se plaisent dans les mers qui baignent les deux pôles, et
n'avancent qu'accidentellement dans les zones tempérées, ainsi je
n'étais pas tranquille, et je portais mes jambes en avant avec beaucoup
de lenteur. Mais qu'était-ce donc que la substance corporelle vers
laquelle j'avançais? Je savais que la famille des pélécaninés comprend
quatre genres distincts: le fou, le pélican, le cormoran, la frégate. La
forme grisâtre qui m'apparaissait n'était pas un fou. Le bloc plastique
que j'apercevais n'était pas une frégate. La chair cristallisée que
j'observais n'était pas un cormoran. Je le voyais maintenant, l'homme
à l'encéphale dépourvu de protubérance annulaire! Je recherchais
vaguement, dans les replis de ma mémoire, dans quelle contrée torride
ou glacée, j'avais déjà remarqué ce bec très long, large, convexe, en
voûte, à arête marquée, onguiculée, renflée et très crochue à son
extrémité; ces bords dentelés, droits; cette mandibule inférieure, à
branches séparées jusqu'auprès de la pointe; cet intervalle rempli par
une peau membraneuse; cette large poche, jaune et sacciforme, occupant
toute la gorge et pouvant se distendre considérablement: et ces narines
très étroites, longitudinales, presque imperceptibles, creusées dans un
sillon bazal! Si cet être vivant, à respiration pulmonaire et simple, à
corps garni de poils, avait été un oiseau entier jusqu'à la plante des
pieds, et non plus seulement jusqu'aux épaules, il ne m'aurait pas alors
été si difficile de le reconnaître: chose très facile à faire, comme
vous allez le voir vous-même. Seulement, cette fois, je m'en dispense;
pour la clarté de ma démonstration, j'aurais besoin qu'un de ces oiseaux
fût placé sur ma table de travail, quand même il ne serait qu'empaillé.
Or, je ne suis pas assez riche pour m'en procurer. Suivant pas à pas une
hypothèse antérieure, j'aurais de suite assigné sa véritable nature et
trouvé une place, dans les cadres d'histoire naturelle, à celui dont
j'admirais la noblesse dans sa pose maladive. Avec quelle satisfaction
de n'être pas tout à fait ignorant sur les secrets de son double
organisme, et quelle avidité d'en savoir davantage, je le contemplais
dans sa métamorphose durable! Quoiqu'il ne possédât pas un visage
humain, il me paraissait beau comme les deux longs filaments
tentaculiformes d'un insecte; ou plutôt, comme une inhumation
précipitée; ou encore, comme la loi de la reconstitution des organes
mutilés; et surtout, comme un liquide éminemment putrescible! Mais, ne
prêtant aucune attention à ce qui se passait aux alentours, l'étranger
regardait toujours devant lui, avec sa tête de pélican! Un autre jour,
je reprendrai la fin de cette histoire. Cependant, je continuerai ma
narration avec un morne empressement; car, si, de votre côté, il vous
tarde de savoir où mon imagination veut en venir (plût au ciel qu'en
effet, ce ne fût là que de l'imagination!), du mien, j'ai pris la
résolution de terminer en une seule fois (et non en deux!) ce que
j'avais à vous dire, quoique cependant personne n'ait le droit de
m'accuser de manquer de courage. Mais, quand on se trouve en présence
de pareilles circonstances, plus d'un sent battre contre la paume de sa
main les pulsations de son coeur. Il vient de mourir, presque inconnu,
dans un petit port de Bretagne, un maître caboteur, vieux marin, qui
fut le héros d'une terrible histoire. Il était alors capitaine au long
cours, et voyageait pour un armateur de Saint-Malo. Or, après une
absence de treize mois, il arriva au foyer conjugal, au moment où sa
femme, encore alitée, venait de lui donner un héritier, à la
reconnaissance duquel il ne se reconnaissait aucun droit. Le capitaine
ne fit rien paraître de sa surprise et de sa colère; il pria froidement
sa femme de s'habiller, et de l'accompagner à une promenade, sur les
remparts de la ville. On était en janvier. Les remparts de Saint-Malo
sont élevés, et, lorsque souffle le vent du nord, les plus intrépides
reculent. La malheureuse obéit, calme et résignée; en rentrant, elle
délira. Elle expira dans la nuit. Mais, ce n'était qu'une femme. Tandis
que moi, qui suis un homme, en présence d'un drame non moins grand,
je ne sais si je conservai assez d'empire sur moi-même, pour que les
muscles de ma figure restassent immobiles! Dès que le scarabée fut
arrivé au bas du tertre, l'homme leva son bras vers l'ouest
(précisément, dans cette direction, un vautour des agneaux et un
grand-duc de Virginie avaient engagé un combat dans les airs), essuya
sur son bec une longue larme qui présentait un système de coloration
diamantée, et dit au scarabée: «Malheureuse boule! ne l'as-tu pas fait
rouler assez longtemps? Ta vengeance n'est pas encore assouvie; et,
déjà, cette femme, dont tu avais attaché, avec des colliers de perles,
les jambes et les bras, de manière à réaliser un polyèdre amorphe, afin
de la traîner, avec tes tarses, à travers les vallées et les chemins,
sur les ronces et les pierres (laisse-moi m'approcher pourvoir si c'est
encore elle!), a vu ses os se creuser de blessures, ses membres se polir
par la loi mécanique du frottement rotatoire, se confondre dans l'unité
de la coagulation, et son corps présenter, au lieu des linéaments
primordiaux et des courbes naturelles, l'apparence monotone d'un seul
tout homogène qui ne ressemble que trop, par la confusion de ses divers
éléments broyés, à la masse d'une sphère! Il y a longtemps qu'elle est
morte; laisse ces dépouilles à la terre, et prends garde d'augmenter,
dans d'irréparables proportions, la rage qui te consume: ce n'est plus
de la justice: car, l'égoïsme, caché dans les téguments de ton front,
soulève lentement, comme un fantôme, la draperie qui le recouvre.» Le
vautour des agneaux et le grand-duc de Virginie, portés insensiblement,
par les péripéties de leur lutte, s'étaient rapprochés de nous. Le
scarabée trembla devant ces paroles inattendues, et, ce qui, dans une
autre occasion, aurait été un mouvement insignifiant, devint, cette
fois, la marque distinctive d'une fureur qui ne connaissait plus de
bornes; car, il frotta redoutablement ses cuisses postérieures contre le
bord des élytres, en faisant entendre un bruit aigu: «Qui es-tu, donc,
toi, être pusillanime? Il paraît que tu as oublié certains
développements étranges des temps passés; tu ne les retiens pas dans ta
mémoire, mon frère. Cette femme nous a trahis, l'un après l'autre. Toi
le premier, moi le second. Il me semble que cette injure ne doit pas
(ne doit pas!) disparaître du souvenir si facilement. Si facilement! Toi,
ta nature magnanime te permet de pardonner. Mais, sais-tu si, malgré la
situation anormale des atomes de cette femme, réduite à pâte de pétrin
(il n'est pas maintenant question de savoir si l'on ne croirait pas, à
la première investigation, que ce corps ait été augmenté d'une quantité
notable de densité plutôt par l'engrenage de deux fortes roues que par
les effets de ma passion fougueuse), elle n'existe pas encore? Tais-toi,
et permets que je me venge.» Il reprit son manège, et s'éloigna, la
boule poussée devant lui. Quand il se fut éloigné, le pélican s'écria:
«Cette femme, par son pouvoir magique, m'a donné une tête de palmipède,
et a changé mon frère en scarabée: peut-être qu'elle mérite même de
pires traitements que ceux que je viens d'énumérer.» Et moi, qui n'étais
pas certain de ne pas rêver, devinant, par ce que j'avais entendu, la
nature des relations hostiles qui unissaient, au-dessus de moi, dans un
combat sanglant, le vautour des agneaux et le grand-duc de Virginie, je
rejetai, comme un capuchon, ma tête en arrière, afin de donner au jeu de
mes poumons, l'aisance et l'élasticité susceptibles, et je leur criai,
en dirigeant mes yeux vers le haut: «Vous autres, cessez votre discorde.
Vous avez raison tous les deux; car, à chacun elle avait promis son
amour; par conséquent, elle vous a trompés ensemble. Mais, vous n'êtes
pas les seuls. En outre, elle vous dépouilla de votre forme humaine, se
faisant un jeu cruel de vos plus saintes douleurs. Et, vous hésiteriez à
me croire! D'ailleurs elle est morte; et le scarabée lui a fait subir un
châtiment d'ineffaçable empreinte, malgré la pitié du premier trahi.» A
ces mots, ils mirent fin à leur querelle, et ne s'arrachèrent plus les
plumes, ni les lambeaux de chair: ils avaient raison d'agir ainsi. Le
grand-duc de Virginie, beau comme un mémoire sur la courbe que décrit
un chien en courant après son maître, s'enfonça dans les crevasses d'un
couvent en ruines. Le vautour des agneaux, beau comme la loi de l'arrêt
de développement de la poitrine chez les adultes dont la propension à la
croissance n'est pas en rapport avec la quantité de molécules que leur
organisme s'assimile, se perdit dans les hautes couches de l'atmosphère.
Le pélican, dont le généreux pardon m'avait causé beaucoup d'impression,
parce que je ne le trouvais pas naturel, reprenant sur son tertre
l'impassibilité majestueuse d'un phare, comme pour avertir les
navigateurs humains de faire attention à son exemple, et de préserver
leur sort de l'amour des magiciennes sombres, regardait toujours devant
lui. Le scarabée, beau comme le tremblement des mains dans l'alcoolisme,
disparaissait à l'horizon. Quatre existences de plus que l'on pouvait
rayer du livre de vie. Je m'arrachai un muscle entier dans le bras
gauche, car je ne savais plus ce que je faisais, tant je me trouvais ému
devant cette quadruple infortune. Et, moi, qui croyais que c'étaient des
matières excrémentielles. Grande bête que je suis, va.

       *       *       *       *       *

L'anéantissement intermittent des facultés humaines: quoi que votre
pensée penchât à supposer, ce ne sont pas là des mots. Du moins, ce
ne sont pas des mots comme les autres. Qu'il lève la main, celui qui
croirait accomplir un acte juste, en priant quelque bourreau de
l'écorcher vivant. Qu'il redresse la tête, avec la volupté du sourire,
celui qui, volontairement, offrirait sa poitrine aux balles de la mort.
Mes yeux chercheront la marque des cicatrices; mes dix doigts
concentreront la totalité de leur attention à palper soigneusement la
chair de cet excentrique; je vérifierai que les éclaboussures de la
cervelle ont rejailli sur le satin de mon front. N'est-ce pas qu'un
homme, amant d'un pareil martyre, ne se trouverait pas dans l'univers
entier? Je ne connais pas ce que c'est que le rire, c'est vrai, ne
l'ayant jamais éprouvé par moi-même. Cependant, quelle imprudence n'y
aurait-il pas à soutenir que mes lèvres ne s'élargiraient pas, s'il
m'était donné de voir celui qui prétendrait que, quelque part, cet
homme-là existe? Ce qu'aucun ne souhaiterait pour sa propre existence,
m'a été échu par un lot inégal. Ce n'est pas que mon corps nage dans
le lac de la douleur; passe alors. Mais, l'esprit se dessèche par une
réflexion condensée et continuellement tendue; il hurle comme les
grenouilles d'un marécage, quand une troupe de flamants voraces et de
hérons affamés vient s'abattre sur les joncs de ses bords. Heureux celui
qui dort paisiblement dans un lit de plumes, arrachées à la poitrine de
l'eider, sans remarquer qu'il se trahit lui-même. Voilà plus de trente
ans que je n'ai pas encore dormi. Depuis l'imprononçable jour de ma
naissance, j'ai voué aux planches somnifères une haine irréconciliable.
C'est moi qui l'ai voulu; que nul ne soit accusé. Vite, que l'on se
dépouille du soupçon avorté. Distinguez-vous, sur mon front, cette pâle
couronne? Celle qui la tressa de ses doigts maigres fut la ténacité.
Tant qu'un reste de sève brûlante coulera dans mes os, comme un torrent
de métal fondu, je ne dormirai point. Chaque nuit, je force mon oeil
livide à fixer les étoiles, à travers les carreaux de ma fenêtre. Pour
être plus sûr de moi-même, un éclat de bois sépare mes paupières
gonflées. Lorsque l'aurore apparaît, elle me retrouve dans la même
position, le corps appuyé verticalement, et debout contre le plâtre de
la muraille froide. Cependant, il m'arrive quelquefois de rêver, mais
sans perdre un seul instant le vivace sentiment de ma personnalité et la
libre faculté de me mouvoir: sachez que le cauchemar qui se cache dans
les angles phosphoriques de l'ombre, la fièvre qui palpe mon visage avec
son moignon, chaque animal impur qui dresse sa griffe sanglante, eh
bien, c'est ma volonté qui, pour donner un aliment stable à son activité
perpétuelle, les fait tourner en rond. En effet, atome qui se venge en
son extrême faiblesse, le libre arbitre ne craint pas d'affirmer, avec
une autorité puissante, qu'il ne compte pas l'abrutissement parmi le
nombre de ses fils: celui qui dort, est moins qu'un animal châtré la
veille. Quoique l'insomnie entraîne, vers les profondeurs de la fosse,
ces muscles qui déjà répandent une odeur de cyprès, jamais la blanche
catacombe de mon intelligence n'ouvrira ses sanctuaires aux yeux du
Créateur. Une secrète et noble justice, vers les bras tendus de laquelle
je me lance par instinct, m'ordonne de traquer sans trêve cet ignoble
châtiment. Ennemi redoutable de mon âme imprudente, à l'heure où l'on
allume un falot sur la côte, je défends à mes reins infortunés de se
coucher sur la rosée de gazon. Vainqueur, je repousse les embûches de
l'hypocrite pavot. Il est en conséquence certain que, par cette lutte
étrange, mon coeur a muré ses desseins, affamé qui se mange lui-même.
Impénétrable comme les géants, moi, j'ai vécu sans cesse avec
l'envergure des yeux béante. Au moins, il est avéré que, pendant le
jour, chacun peut opposer une résistance utile contre le Grand Objet
Extérieur (qui ne sait pas son nom?); car, alors, la volonté veille à
sa propre défense avec un remarquable acharnement. Mais aussitôt que le
voile des vapeurs nocturnes s'étend, même sur les condamnés que l'on va
pendre, oh! voir son intellect entre les sacrilèges mains d'un étranger.
Un implacable scalpel en scrute les broussailles épaisses. La conscience
exhale un long râle de malédiction; car, le voile de sa pudeur reçoit de
cruelles déchirures. Humiliation! notre porte est ouverte à la curiosité
farouche du Céleste Bandit. Je n'ai pas mérité ce supplice infâme, toi,
le hideux espion de ma causalité! Si j'existe, je ne suis pas un autre.
Je n'admets pas en moi cette équivoque pluralité. Je veux résider seul
dans mon intime raisonnement. L'autonomie ... ou bien qu'on me change en
hippopotame. Abîme-toi sous terre, ô anonyme stygmate, et ne reparais
plus devant mon indignation hagarde. Ma subjectivité et le Créateur,
c'est trop pour un cerveau. Quand la nuit obscurcit le cours des heures,
quel est celui qui n'a pas combattu contre l'influence du sommeil, dans
sa couche mouillée d'une glaciale sueur? Ce lit, attirant contre son
sein les facultés mourantes, n'est qu'un tombeau composé de planches de
sapin équarri. La volonté se retire insensiblement, comme en présence
d'une force invisible. Une poix visqueuse épaissit le cristallin des
yeux. Les paupières se recherchent comme deux amis. Le corps n'est plus
qu'un cadavre qui respire. Enfin, quatre énormes pieux clouent sur le
matelas la totalité des membres. Et remarquez, je vous prie, qu'en somme
les draps ne sont que des linceuls. Voici la cassolette où brûle
l'encens des religions. L'éternité mugit, ainsi qu'une mer lointaine,
et s'approche à grands pas. L'appartement a disparu: prosternez-vous,
humains, dans la chapelle ardente! Quelquefois, s'efforçant inutilement
de vaincre les imperfections de l'organisme, au milieu du sommeil le
plus lourd, le sens magnétisé s'aperçoit avec étonnement qu'il n'est
plus qu'un bloc de sépulture, et raisonne admirablement, appuyé sur une
subtilité incomparable: «Sortir de cette couche est un problème plus
difficile qu'on ne le pense. Assis sur la charrette, l'on m'entraîne
vers la binarité des poteaux de la guillotine. Chose curieuse, mon bras
inerte s'est assimilé savamment la raideur de la souche. C'est très
mauvais de rêver qu'on marche à l'échafaud.» Le sang coule à large flots
à travers la figure. La poitrine effectue des soubresauts répétés, et se
gonfle à des sifflements. Le poids d'un obélisque étouffe l'expansion de
la rage. Le réel a détruit les rêves de la somnolence! Qui ne sait pas
que, lorsque la lutte se prolonge entre le moi, plein de fierté, et
l'accroissement terrible de la catalepsie, l'esprit halluciné perd le
jugement? Rongé par le désespoir, il se complaît dans son mal, jusqu'à
ce qu'il ait vaincu la nature, et que le sommeil, voyant sa proie lui
échapper, s'enfuie sans retour loin de son coeur, d'une aile irritée et
honteuse. Jetez un peu de cendre sur mon orbite en feu. Ne fixez pas mon
oeil qui ne se ferme jamais. Comprenez-vous les souffrances que
j'endure? (cependant, l'orgueil est satisfait). Dès que la nuit exhorte
les humains au repos, un homme, que je connais, marche à grands pas dans
la campagne. Je crains que ma résolution ne succombe aux atteintes de la
vieillesse. Qu'il arrive, ce jour fatal où je m'endormirai! Au réveil
mon rasoir, se frayant un passage à travers le cou, prouvera que rien
n'était, en effet, plus réel.

       *       *       *       *       *

--Mais qui donc!... mais qui donc ose, ici, comme un conspirateur,
traîner les anneaux de son corps vers ma poitrine noire? Qui que tu
sois, excentrique python, par quel prétexte excuses-tu ta présence
ridicule? Est-ce un vaste remords qui te tourmente? Car, vois-tu, boa,
ta sauvage majesté n'a pas, je le suppose, l'exorbitante prétention
de se soustraire à la comparaison que j'en fais avec les traits du
criminel. Cette bave écumeuse et blanchâtre est, pour moi, le signe de
la rage. Ecoute-moi: sais-tu que ton oeil est loin de boire un rayon
céleste? N'oublie pas que si ta présomptueuse cervelle m'a cru capable
de t'offrir quelques paroles de consolation, ce ne peut être que par
le motif d'une ignorance totalement dépourvue de connaissances
physiognomoniques. Pendant un temps, bien entendu, suffisant, dirige la
lueur de tes yeux vers ce que j'ai le droit, comme un autre, d'appeler
mon visage! Ne vois-tu pas comme il pleure? Tu t'es trompé, basilic. Il
est nécessaire que tu cherches ailleurs la triste ration de soulagement,
que mon impuissance radicale te retranche, malgré les nombreuses
protestations de ma bonne volonté. Oh! quelle force, en phrases
exprimables, fatalement t'entraîna vers ta perte? Il est presque
impossible que je m'habitue à ce raisonnement que tu ne comprennes pas
que, plaquant sur le gazon rougi, d'un coup de mon talon, les courbes
fuyantes de ta tête triangulaire, je pourrais pétrir un innommable
mastic avec l'herbe de la savane et la chair de l'écrasé.

--Disparais le plus tôt possible loin de moi, coupable à la face blême!
Le mirage fallacieux de l'épouvantement t'a montré ton propre spectre!
Dissipe tes injurieux soupçons, si tu ne veux pas que je t'accuse à mon
tour, et que je ne porte contre toi une récrimination qui serait
certainement approuvée par le jugement du serpentaire reptilivore.
Quelle monstrueuse aberration de l'imagination t'empêche de me
reconnaître! Tu ne te rappelles donc pas les services importants que je
t'ai rendus, par la gratification d'une existence que je fis émerger du
chaos, et, de ton coté, le voeu, à jamais inoubliable, de ne pas
déserter mon drapeau, afin de me rester fidèle jusqu'à la mort? Quand tu
étais enfant (ton intelligence était alors dans sa plus belle phase), le
premier, tu grimpais sur la colline, avec la vitesse de l'isard, pour
saluer, par un geste de ta petite main, les multicolores rayons de
l'aurore naissante. Les notes de ta voix jaillissaient, de ton larynx
sonore, comme des perles diamantines, et résolvaient leurs collectives
personnalités, dans l'agrégation vibrante d'un long hymne d'adoration.
Maintenant, tu rejettes à tes pieds, comme un haillon souillé de boue,
la longanimité dont j'ai fait trop longtemps preuve. La reconnaissance a
vu ses racines se dessécher, comme le lit d'une mare; mais, à sa place,
l'ambition a crû dans des proportions qu'il me serait pénible de
qualifier. Quel est-il, celui qui m'écoute, pour avoir une telle
confiance dans l'abus de sa propre faiblesse?

--Et qui es-tu, toi-même, substance audacieuse? Non!... non!... je ne me
trompe pas; et, malgré les métamorphoses multiples auxquelles tu as
recours, toujours ta tête de serpent reluira devant mes yeux comme un
phare d'éternelle injustice, et de cruelle domination! Il a voulu
prendre les rênes du commandement, mais il ne sait pas régner! Il a
voulu devenir un objet d'horreur pour tous les êtres de la création,
et il a réussi. Il a voulu prouver que lui seul est le monarque de
l'univers, et c'est en cela qu'il s'est trompé. O misérable! as-tu
attendu jusqu'à cette heure pour entendre les murmures et les complots
qui, s'élevant simultanément de la surface des sphères, viennent raser
d'une aile farouche les rebords papillacés de ton destructible tympan?
Il n'est pas loin, le jour, où mon bras te renversera dans la poussière,
empoisonnée par ta respiration, et, arrachant de tes entrailles une
nuisible vie, laissera sur le chemin ton cadavre, criblé de contorsions,
pour apprendre au voyageur consterné, que cette chair palpitante, qui
frappe sa vue d'étonnement, et cloue dans son palais sa langue muette,
ne doit plus être comparée, si l'on garde son sang-froid, qu'au tronc
pourri d'un chêne, qui tomba de vétusté! Quelle pensée de pitié me
retient devant ta présence? Toi-même, recule plutôt devant moi, te
dis-je, et va laver ton incommensurable honte dans le sang d'un enfant
qui vient de naître: voilà quelles sont tes habitudes. Elles sont dignes
de toi. Va ... marche toujours devant toi. Je te condamne à devenir
errant. Je te condamne à rester seul et sans famille. Chemine
constamment, afin que tes jambes te refusent leur soutien. Traverse
les sables des déserts jusqu'à ce que la fin du monde engloutisse les
étoiles dans le néant. Lorsque tu passeras près de la tanière du tigre,
il s'empressera de fuir, pour ne pas regarder, comme dans un miroir, son
caractère exhaussé sur le socle de la perversité idéale. Mais, quand la
fatigue impérieuse t'ordonnera d'arrêter ta marche devant les dalles de
mon palais, recouvertes de ronces et de chardons, fais attention à tes
sandales en lambeaux, et franchis, sur la pointe des pieds, l'élégance
des vestibules. Ce n'est pas une recommandation inutile. Tu pourrais
éveiller ma jeune épouse et mon fils en bas âge, couchés dans les
caveaux de plomb qui longent les fondements de l'antique château. Si tu
ne prenais tes précautions d'avance, ils pourraient te faire pâlir par
leurs hurlements souterrains. Quand ton impénétrable volonté leur ôta
l'existence, ils n'ignoraient pas que ta puissance est redoutable, et
n'avaient aucun doute à cet égard; mais, ils ne s'attendaient point (et
leurs adieux suprêmes me confirmèrent leur croyance) que ta Providence
se serait montrée à ce point impitoyable! Quoi qu'il en soit, traverse
rapidement ces salles abandonnées et silencieuses, aux lambris
d'émeraude, mais aux armoiries fanées, où reposent les glorieuses
statues de mes ancêtres. Ces corps de marbre sont irrités contre toi;
évite leurs regards vitreux. C'est un conseil que te donne la langue de
leur unique et dernier descendant. Regarde comme leur bras est levé dans
l'attitude de la défense provocatrice, la tête fièrement renversée en
arrière. Sûrement ils ont deviné le mal que tu m'as fait; et, si tu
passes à portée des piédestaux glacés qui soutiennent ces blocs
sculptés, la vengeance t'y attend. Si ta défense a besoin de m'objecter
quelque chose, parle. Il est trop tard pour pleurer maintenant. Il
fallait pleurer dans des moments plus convenables, quand l'occasion
était propice. Si tes yeux sont enfin dessillés, juge toi-même quelles
ont été les conséquences de ta conduite. Adieu! je m'en vais respirer la
brise des falaises; car, mes poumons, à moitié étouffés, demandent à
grands cris un spectacle plus tranquille et plus vertueux que le tien!

       *       *       *       *       *

O pédérastes incompréhensibles, ce n'est pas moi qui lancerai des
injures à votre grande dégradation; ce n'est pas moi qui viendrai jeter
le mépris sur votre anus infundibuliforme. Il suffit que les maladies
honteuses, et presque incurables, qui vous assiègent, portent avec elles
leur immanquable châtiment. Législateurs d'institutions stupides,
inventeurs d'une morale étroite, éloignez-vous de moi, car je suis une
âme impartiale. Et vous, jeunes adolescents ou plutôt jeunes filles,
expliquez-moi comment et pourquoi (mais, tenez-vous à une convenable
distance, car, moi non plus, je ne sais pas résister à mes passions)
la vengeance a germé dans vos coeurs, pour avoir attaché au flanc de
l'humanité une pareille couronne de blessures. Vous la faites rougir de
ses fils par votre conduite (que, moi, je vénère!); votre prostitution,
s'offrant au premier venu, exerce la logique des penseurs les plus
profonds, tandis que votre sensibilité exagérée comble la mesure de la
stupéfaction de la femme elle-même. Êtes-vous d'une nature moins ou plus
terrestre que celle de vos semblables? Possédez-vous un sixième sens qui
nous manque? Ne mentez pas, et dites ce que vous pensez. Ce n'est pas
une interrogation que je vous pose; car, depuis que je fréquente en
observateur la sublimité de vos intelligences grandioses, je sais à quoi
m'en tenir. Soyez bénis par ma main gauche, soyez sanctifiés par ma main
droite, anges protégés par mon amour universel. Je baise votre visage,
je baise votre poitrine, je baise, avec mes lèvres suaves, les diverses
parties de votre corps harmonieux et parfumé. Que ne m'aviez-vous dit
tout de suite ce que vous étiez, cristallisations d'une beauté morale
supérieure? Il a fallu que je devinasse par moi-même les innombrables
trésors de tendresse et de chasteté que recélaient les battements de
votre coeur oppressé. Poitrine ornée de guirlandes de roses et de
vétyver. Il a fallu que j'entr'ouvrisse vos jambes pour vous connaître
et que ma bouche se suspendit aux insignes de votre pudeur. Mais (chose
importante à représenter) n'oubliez pas chaque jour de laver la peau de
vos parties, avec de l'eau chaude, car, sinon, des chancres vénériens
pousseraient infailliblement sur les commissures fendues de mes lèvres
inassouvies. Oh! si au lieu d'être un enfer, l'univers n'avait été qu'un
céleste anus immense, regardez le geste que je fais du côté de mon
bas-ventre: oui, j'aurais enfoncé ma verge à travers son sphyncter
sanglant, fracassant, par mes mouvements impétueux, les propres parois
de son bassin! Le malheur n'aurait pas alors soufflé, sur mes yeux
aveuglés, des dunes entières de sable mouvant; j'aurais découvert
l'endroit souterrain où gît la vérité endormie, et les fleuves de mon
sperme visqueux auraient trouvé de la sorte un océan où se précipiter!
Mais, pourquoi me surprends-je à regretter un état de choses imaginaire
et qui ne recevra jamais le cachet de son accomplissement ultérieur? Ne
nous donnons pas la peine de construire de fugitives hypothèses. En
attendant, que celui qui brûle de l'ardeur de partager mon lit vienne me
trouver; mais, je mets une condition rigoureuse à mon hospitalité: il
faut qu'il n'ait pas plus de quinze ans. Qu'il ne croie pas de son côté
que j'en ai trente; qu'est-ce que cela y fait? L'âge ne diminue pas
l'intensité des sentiments, loin de là; et, quoique mes cheveux soient
devenus blancs comme la neige, ce n'est pas à cause de la vieillesse:
c'est, au contraire, pour le motif que vous savez. Moi, je n'aime pas
les femmes! Ni même les hermaphrodites! Il me faut des êtres qui me
ressemblent, sur le front desquels la noblesse humaine soit marquée en
caractères plus tranchés et ineffaçables! Êtes-vous certain que celles
qui portent de longs cheveux, soient de la même nature que la mienne?
Je ne le crois pas, et je ne déserterai pas mon opinion. Une salive
saumâtre coule de ma bouche, je ne sais pas pourquoi. Qui veut me la
sucer, afin que j'en sois débarrassé? Elle monte ... elle monte
toujours! Je sais ce que c'est. J'ai remarqué que, lorsque je bois à la
gorge le sang de ceux qui se couchent à côté de moi (c'est à tort que
l'on me suppose vampire, puisqu'on appelle ainsi des morts qui sortent
de leur tombeau; or, moi, je suis un vivant), j'en rejette le lendemain
une partie par la bouche: voilà l'explication de la salive infecte. Que
voulez-vous que j'y fasse, si les organes, affaiblis par le vice, se
refusent à l'accomplissement des fonctions de la nutrition? Mais, ne
révélez mes confidences à personne. Ce n'est pas pour moi que je vous
dis cela; c'est pour vous-même et les autres, afin que le prestige du
secret retienne dans les limites du devoir et de la vertu ceux qui,
aimantés par l'électricité de l'inconnu, seraient tentés de m'imiter.
Ayez ma bonté de regarder ma bouche (pour le moment, je n'ai pas le
temps d'employer une formule plus longue de politesse); elle vous frappe
au premier abord par l'apparence de sa structure, sans mettre le serpent
dans vos comparaisons; c'est que j'en contracte le tissu jusqu'à la
dernière réduction, afin de faire croire que je possède un caractère
froid. Vous n'ignorez pas qu'il est diamétralement opposé. Que ne
puis-je regarder à travers ces pages séraphiques le visage de celui qui
me lit. S'il n'a pas dépassé la puberté, qu'il s'approche. Serre-moi
contre toi, et ne crains pas de me faire du mal; rétrécissons
progressivement les liens de nos muscles. Davantage. Je sens qu'il est
inutile d'insister; l'opacité, remarquable à plus d'un titre, de cette
feuille de papier, est un empêchement des plus considérables à
l'opération de notre complète jonction. Moi, j'ai toujours éprouvé un
caprice infâme pour la pâle jeunesse des collèges, et les enfants
étiolés des manufactures! Mes paroles ne sont pas les réminiscences d'un
rêve, et j'aurais trop de souvenirs à débrouiller, si l'obligation
m'était imposée de faire passer devant vos yeux les événements qui
pourraient affermir de leur témoignage la véracité de ma douloureuse
affirmation. La justice humaine ne m'a pas encore surpris en flagrant
délit, malgré l'incontestable habileté de ses agents. J'ai même
assassiné (il n'y a pas longtemps!) un pédéraste qui ne se prêtait pas
suffisamment à ma passion; j'ai jeté son cadavre dans un puits
abandonné, et l'on n'a pas de preuves décisives contre moi. Pourquoi
frémissez-vous de peur, adolescent qui me lisez? Croyez-vous que je
veuille en faire autant envers vous? Vous vous montrez souverainement
injuste ... Vous avez raison: méfiez-vous de moi, surtout si vous êtes
beau. Mes parties offrent éternellement le spectacle lugubre de la
turgescence; nul ne peut soutenir (et combien ne s'en ont-ils pas
approchés!) qu'il les a vues à l'état de tranquillité normale, pas même
le décrotteur qui m'y porta un coup de couteau dans un moment de délire.
L'ingrat! Je change de vêtements deux fois par semaine, la propreté
n'étant pas le principal motif de ma détermination. Si je n'agissais pas
ainsi, les membres de l'humanité disparaîtraient au bout de quelques
jours, dans des combats prolongés. En effet, dans quelque contrée que je
me trouve, ils me harcèlent continuellement de leur présence et viennent
lécher la surface de mes pieds. Mais, quelle puissance possèdent-elles
donc, mes gouttes séminales, pour attirer vers elles tout ce qui respire
par des nerfs olfactifs! Ils viennent des bords des Amazones, ils
traversent les vallées qu'arrose le Gange, ils abandonnent le lichen
polaire, pour accomplir de longs voyages à ma recherche, et demander aux
cités immobiles, si elles n'ont pas vu passer, un instant, le long de
leurs remparts, celui dont le sperme sacré embaume les montagnes, les
lacs, les bruyères, les forêts, les promontoires et la vastitude des
mers! Le désespoir de ne pas pouvoir me rencontrer (je me cache
secrètement dans les endroits les plus inaccessibles, afin d'alimenter
leur ardeur) les porte aux actes les plus regrettables. Ils se mettent
trois cent mille de chaque côté, et les mugissements des canons servent
de prélude à la bataille. Toutes les ailes s'ébranlent à la fois, comme
un seul guerrier. Les carrés se forment et tombent aussitôt pour ne plus
se relever. Les chevaux effarés s'enfuient dans toutes les directions.
Les boulets labourent le sol, comme des météores implacables. Le théâtre
du combat n'est plus qu'un vaste champ de carnage, quand la nuit révèle
sa présence et que la lune silencieuse apparaît entre les déchirures
d'un nuage. Me montrant du doigt un espace de plusieurs lieues recouvert
de cadavres, le croissant vaporeux de cet astre m'ordonne de prendre un
instant, comme le sujet de méditatives réflexions, les conséquences
funestes qu'entraîne, après lui, l'inexplicable talisman enchanteur que
la Providence m'accorda. Malheureusement que de siècles ne faudra-t-il
pas encore, avant que la race humaine périsse entièrement par mon piège
perfide! C'est ainsi qu'un esprit habile, et qui ne se vante pas,
emploie, pour atteindre à ses fins, les moyens mêmes qui paraîtraient
d'abord y porter un invincible obstacle. Toujours mon intelligence
s'élève vers cette imposante question, et vous êtes témoin vous-même
qu'il ne m'est plus possible de rester dans le sujet modeste qu'au
commencement j'avais le dessein de traiter. Un dernier mot ... c'était
une nuit d'hiver. Pendant que la bise sifflait dans les sapins, le
Créateur ouvrit sa porte au milieu des ténèbres et fit entrer un
pédéraste.

      *       *       *       *       *

Silence! il passe un cortège funéraire à côté de vous. Inclinez la
binarité de vos rotules vers la terre et entonnez un chant
d'outre-tombe. (Si vous considérez mes paroles plutôt comme une simple
forme impérative, que comme un ordre formel qui n'est pas à sa place,
vous montrerez de l'esprit et du meilleur.) Il est possible que vous
parveniez de la sorte à réjouir extrêmement l'âme du mort, qui va se
reposer de la vie dans une fosse. Même le fait est, pour moi, certain.
Remarquez que je ne dis pas que votre opinion ne puisse jusqu'à un
certain point être contraire à la mienne; mais, ce qu'il importe avant
tout, c'est de posséder des notions justes sur les bases de la morale,
de telle manière que chacun doive se pénétrer du principe qui commande
de faire à autrui ce que l'on voudrait peut-être qui fût fait à
soi-même. Le prêtre des religions ouvre le premier la marche, en tenant
à la main un drapeau blanc, signe de la paix, et de l'autre un emblème
d'or qui représente les parties de l'homme et de la femme, comme pour
indiquer que ces membres charnels sont la plupart du temps, abstraction
faite de toute métaphore, des instruments très dangereux entre les mains
de ceux qui s'en servent, quand ils les manipulent aveuglément pour des
buts divers qui se querellent entre eux, au lieu d'engendrer une
opportune réaction contre la passion connue qui cause presque tous nos
maux. Au bas de son dos est attachée (artificiellement, bien entendu)
une queue de cheval, aux crins épais, qui balaie la poussière du sol.
Elle signifie de prendre garde de ne pas nous ravaler par notre conduite
au rang des animaux. Le cercueil connaît sa route et marche après la
tunique flottante du consolateur. Les parents et les amis du défunt, par
la manifestation de leur position, ont résolu de fermer la marche du
cortège. Celui-ci s'avance avec majesté, comme un vaisseau qui fend la
pleine mer, et ne craint pas le phénomène de l'enfoncement; car, au
moment actuel, les tempêtes et les écueils ne se font pas remarquer par
quelque chose de moins que leur explicable absence. Les grillons et
les crapauds suivent à quelques pas la fête mortuaire; eux, aussi,
n'ignorent pas que leur modeste présence aux funérailles de quiconque
leur sera un jour comptée. Ils s'entretiennent à voix basse dans leur
pittoresque langage (ne soyez pas assez présomptueux, permettez-moi de
vous donner ce conseil non intéressé, pour croire que vous seul possédez
la précieuse faculté de traduire les sentiments de votre pensée) de
celui qu'ils regardèrent plus d'une fois courir à travers les prairies
verdoyantes, et plonger la sueur de ses membres dans les bleuâtres
vagues des golfes arénacés. D'abord, la vie parut lui sourire sans
arrière-pensée, et, magnifiquement, le couronna de fleurs; mais, puisque
votre intelligence elle-même s'aperçoit ou plutôt devine qu'il s'est
arrêté aux limites de l'enfance, je n'ai pas besoin, jusqu'à l'apparition
d'une rétractation véritablement nécessaire, de continuer les prolégomènes
de ma rigoureuse démonstration. Dix ans. Nombre exactement calqué, à s'y
méprendre, sur celui des doigts de la main. C'est peu et c'est beaucoup
Dans le cas qui nous préoccupe, cependant, je m'appuierai sur votre amour
envers la vérité, pour que vous prononciez, avec moi, sans tarder une
seconde de plus, que c'est peu. Et, quand je réfléchis sommairement à ces
ténébreux mystères, par lesquels un être humain disparaît de la terre,
aussi facilement qu'une mouche ou une libellule, sans conserver l'espérance
d'y revenir, je me surprends à couver le vif regret de ne pas probablement
pouvoir vivre assez longtemps, pour vous bien expliquer ce que je n'ai pas
la prétention de comprendre moi-même. Mais, puisqu'il est prouvé que, par
un hasard extraordinaire, je n'ai pas encore perdu la vie depuis ce
temps lointain où je commençai, plein de terreur, la phrase précédente,
je calcule mentalement qu'il ne sera pas inutile ici, de construire
l'aveu complet de mon impuissance radicale, quand il s'agit surtout,
comme à présent, de cette imposante et inabordable question. C'est,
généralement parlant, une chose singulière que la tendance attractive
qui nous porte à rechercher (pour ensuite les exprimer) les
ressemblances et et les différences que recèlent, dans leurs naturelles
propriétés, les objets les plus opposés entre eux, et quelquefois les
moins aptes, en apparence, à se prêter à ce genre de combinaisons
sympathiquement curieuses, et qui, ma parole d'honneur, donnent
gracieusement au style de l'écrivain, qui se paie cette personnelle
satisfaction, l'impossible et inoubliable aspect d'un hibou sérieux
jusqu'à l'éternité. Suivons en conséquence le courant qui nous entraîne.
Le milan royal a les ailes proportionnellement plus longues que les
buses, et le vol bien plus aisé: aussi passe-t-il sa vie dans l'air.
Il ne se repose presque jamais et parcourt chaque jour des espaces
immenses; et ce grand mouvement n'est point un exercice de chasse, ni
poursuite de proie, ni même de découverte; car, il ne chasse pas; mais,
il semble que le vol soit son état naturel, sa favorite situation. L'on
ne peut s'empêcher d'admirer la manière dont il l'exécute. Ses ailes
longues et étroites paraissent immobiles; c'est la queue qui croit
diriger toutes les évolutions, et la queue ne se trompe pas: elle agit
sans cesse. Il s'élève sans effort; il s'abaisse comme s'il glissait sur
un plan incliné; il semble plutôt nager que voler; il précipite sa
course, il la ralentit, s'arrête, et reste comme suspendu ou fixé à la
même place, pendant des heures entières. L'on ne peut s'apercevoir
d'aucun mouvement dans ses ailes: vous ouvririez les yeux comme la porte
d'un four, que ce serait d'autant inutile. Chacun a le bon sens de
confesser sans difficulté (quoique avec un peu de mauvaise grâce) qu'il
ne s'aperçoit pas, au premier abord, du rapport, si lointain qu'il soit,
que je signale entre la beauté du vol du milan royal, et celle de la
figure de l'enfant, s'élevant doucement, au-dessus du cercueil
découvert, comme un nénuphar qui perce la surface des eaux; et voilà
précisément en quoi consiste l'impardonnable faute qu'entraîne
l'inamovible situation d'un manque de repentir, touchant l'ignorance
volontaire dans laquelle on croupit. Ce rapport de calme majesté entre
les deux termes de ma narquoise comparaison n'est déjà que trop commun,
et d'un symbole assez compréhensible, pour que je m'étonne davantage de
ce qui ne peut avoir, comme seule excuse, que ce même caractère de
vulgarité qui fait appeler, sur tout objet ou spectacle qui en est
atteint, un profond sentiment d'indifférence injuste. Comme si ce qui se
voit quotidiennement n'en devrait pas moins réveiller l'attention de
notre admiration! Arrivé à l'entrée du cimetière, le cortège s'empresse
de s'arrêter; son intention n'est pas d'aller plus loin. Le fossoyeur
achève le creusement de la fosse; l'on y dépose le cercueil avec toutes
les précautions prises en pareil cas; quelques pelletées de terre
inattendues viennent recouvrir le corps de l'enfant. Le prêtre des
religions, au milieu de l'assistance émue, prononce quelques paroles
pour bien enterrer le mort, davantage, dans l'imagination des
assistants. «Il dit qu'il s'étonne beaucoup de ce que l'on verse ainsi
tant de pleurs, pour un acte d'une telle insignifiance. Textuel. Mais il
craint de ne pas qualifier suffisamment ce qu'il prétend, lui, être un
incontestable bonheur. S'il avait cru que la mort est aussi peu
sympathique dans sa naïveté, il aurait renoncé à son mandat, pour ne pas
augmenter la légitime douleur des nombreux parents et amis du défunt;
mais, une secrète voix l'avertit de leur donner quelques consolations,
qui ne seront pas inutiles, ne fût-ce que celle qui ferait entrevoir
l'espoir d'une prochaine rencontre dans les cieux entre celui qui mourut
et ceux qui survécurent.» Maldoror s'enfuyait au grand galop, en
paraissant diriger sa course vers les murailles du cimetière. Les sabots
de son coursier élevaient autour de son maître une fausse couronne de
poussière épaisse. Vous autres, vous ne pouvez savoir le nom de ce
cavalier; mais, moi, je le sais. Il s'approchait de plus en plus; sa
figure de platine commençait à devenir perceptible, quoique le bas en
fût entièrement enveloppé d'un manteau que le lecteur s'est gardé d'ôter
de sa mémoire et qui ne laissait apercevoir que les yeux. Au milieu de
son discours, le prêtre des religions devient subitement pâle, car son
oreille reconnaît le galop irrégulier de ce célébré cheval blanc qui
n'abandonna jamais son maître. «Oui, ajouta-t-il de nouveau, ma
confiance est grande dans cette prochaine rencontre; alors, on
comprendra, mieux qu'auparavant, quel sens il fallait attacher à la
séparation temporaire de l'âme et du corps. Tel qui croit vivre sur
cette terre se berce d'une illusion dont il importerait d'accélérer
l'évaporation.» Le bruit du galop s'accroissait de plus en plus; et,
comme le cavalier, étreignant la ligne d'horizon, paraissait en vue,
dans le champ d'optique qu'embrassait le portail du cimetière, rapide
comme un cyclone giratoire, le prêtre des religions plus gravement
reprit: «Vous ne semblez pas vous douter que celui-ci, que la maladie
força de ne connaître que les premières phases de la vie, et que la
fosse vient de recevoir dans son sein, est l'indubitable vivant; mais,
sachez au moins que celui-là, dont vous apercevez la silhouette
équivoque emportée par un cheval nerveux, et sur lequel je vous
conseille de fixer le plus tôt possible les yeux, car il n'est plus
qu'un point, et va bientôt disparaître dans la bruyère, quoiqu'il ait
beaucoup vécu, est le seul véritable mort.»

       *       *       *       *       *

«Chaque nuit, à l'heure où le sommeil est parvenu à son plus grand degré
d'intensité, une vieille araignée de la grande espèce sort lentement sa
tête d'un trou placé sur le sol, à l'une des intersections des angles
de la chambre. Elle écoute attentivement si quelque bruissement remue
encore ses mandibules dans l'atmosphère. Vu sa conformation d'insecte,
elle ne peut pas faire moins, si elle prétend augmenter de brillantes
personnifications les trésors de la littérature, que d'attribuer des
mandibules au bruissement. Quand elle s'est assurée que le silence règne
aux alentours, elle retire successivement, des profondeurs de son nid,
sans le secours de la méditation, les diverses parties de son corps, et
s'avance à pas comptés vers ma couche. Chose remarquable! moi qui fais
reculer le sommeil et les cauchemars, je me sens paralysé dans la
totalité de mon corps, quand elle grimpe le long des pieds d'ébène de
mon lit de satin. Elle m'étreint la gorge avec les pattes, et me suce le
sang avec son ventre. Tout simplement! Combien de litres d'une liqueur
pourprée, dont vous n'ignorez pas le nom, n'a-t-elle pas bus, depuis
qu'elle accomplit le même manège avec une persistance digne d'une
meilleure cause! Je ne sais pas ce que je lui ait fait, pour qu'elle se
conduise de la sorte à mon égard. Lui ai-je broyé une patte par
inattention? Lui ai-je enlevé ses petits? Ces deux hypothèses, sujettes
à caution, ne sont pas capables de soutenir un sérieux examen; elles
n'ont même pas de la peine à provoquer un haussement dans mes épaules et
un sourire sur mes lèvres, quoique l'on ne doive se moquer de personne.
Prends garde à toi, tarentule noire; si ta conduite n'a pas pour excuse
un irréfutable syllogisme, une nuit je me réveillerai en sursaut, par un
dernier effort de ma volonté agonisante, je romprai le charme avec
lequel tu retiens mes membres dans l'immobilité, et je t'écraserai entre
les os de mes doigts, comme un morceau de matière mollasse. Cependant,
je me rappelle vaguement que je t'ai donné la permission de laisser tes
pattes grimper sur l'éclosion de la poitrine, et de là jusqu'à la peau
qui recouvre mon visage; que par conséquent, je n'ai pas le droit de te
contraindre. Oh! qui démêlera mes souvenirs confus! Je lui donne pour
récompense ce qui reste de mon sang: en comptant la dernière goutte
inclusivement, il y en a pour remplir au moins la moitié d'une coupe
d'orgie.» Il parle, et il ne cesse de se déshabiller. Il appuie une
jambe sur le matelas, et de l'autre, pressant le parquet de saphir afin
de s'enlever, il se trouve étendu dans une position horizontale. Il a
résolu de ne pas fermer les yeux, afin d'attendre son ennemi de pied
ferme. Mais, chaque fois, ne prend-il pas la même résolution, et
n'est-elle pas toujours détruite par l'inexplicable image de sa promesse
fatale? Il ne dit plus rien, et se résigne avec douleur; car, pour lui
le serment est sacré. Il s'enveloppe majestueusement dans les replis de
la soie, dédaigne d'entrelacer les glands d'or de ses rideaux, et,
appuyant les boucles ondulées de ses longs cheveux noirs sur les franges
du coussin de velours, il tâte, avec la main, la large blessure de son
cou, dans laquelle la tarentule a pris l'habitude de se loger, comme
dans un deuxième nid, tandis que son visage respire la satisfaction. Il
espère que cette nuit actuelle (espérez avec lui!) verra la dernière
représentation de la succion immense; car, son unique voeu serait que
le bourreau en finit avec son existence: la mort, et il sera content.
Regardez cette vieille araignée de la grande espèce, qui sort lentement
sa tête d'un trou placé sur le sol, à l'une des intersections des angles
de la chambre. Nous ne sommes plus dans la narration. Elle écoute
attentivement si quelque bruissement remue encore ses mandibules dans
l'atmosphère. Hélas! nous sommes maintenant arrivés dans le réel, quant
à ce qui regarde la tarentule, et, quoique l'on pourrait mettre un point
d'exclamation à la fin de chaque phrase, ce n'est peut-être pas une
raison pour s'en dispenser! Elle s'est assurée que le silence règne aux
alentours; la voilà qui retire successivement des profondeurs de son
nid, sans le secours de la méditation, les diverses parties de son
corps, et s'avance à pas comptés vers la couche de l'homme solitaire. Un
instant elle s'arrête; mais il est court, ce moment d'hésitation. Elle
se dit qu'il n'est pas temps encore de cesser de torturer, et qu'il faut
auparavant donner au condamné les plausibles raisons qui déterminèrent
la perpétualité du supplice. Elle a grimpé à côté de l'oreille de
l'endormi. Si vous voulez ne pas perdre une seule parole de ce qu'elle
va dire, faites abstraction des occupations étrangères qui obstruent le
portique de votre esprit, et soyez, au moins, reconnaissant de l'intérêt
que je vous porte, en faisant assister votre présence aux scènes
théâtrale qui me paraissent dignes d'exciter une véritable attention
de votre part; car, qui m'empêcherait de garder, pour moi seul, les
événements que je raconte? «Réveille-toi, flamme amoureuse des anciens
jours, squelette décharné. Le temps est venu d'arrêter la main de la
justice. Nous ne te ferons pas attendre longtemps l'explication que tu
souhaites. Tu nous écoutes, n'est-ce pas? Mais ne remue pas tes membres;
tu es encore aujourd'hui sous notre magnétique pouvoir, et l'atonie
encéphalique persiste: c'est pour la dernière fois. Quelle impression la
figure d'Elseneur fait-elle dans ton imagination? Tu l'as oublié! Et ce
Réginald, à la démarche fière, as-tu gravé ses traits dans ton cerveau
fidèle? Regarde-le caché dans les replis des rideaux; sa bouche est
penchée vers ton front; mais il n'ose te parler, car il est plus timide
que moi. Je vais te raconter un épisode de ta jeunesse, et te remettre
dans le chemin de la mémoire ...» Il y avait longtemps que l'araignée
avait ouvert son ventre, d'où s'étaient élancés deux adolescents, à la
robe bleue, chacun un glaive flamboyant à la main, et qui avaient pris
place aux côtés du lit, comme pour garder désormais le sanctuaire du
sommeil. «Celui-ci, qui n'a pas encore cessé de te regarder, car il
t'aima beaucoup, fut le premier de nous deux auquel tu donnas ton amour.
Mais tu le fis souvent souffrir par les brusqueries de ton caractère.
Lui, il ne cessait d'employer ses efforts à n'engendrer de ta part aucun
sujet de plainte contre lui: un ange n'aurait pas réussi. Tu lui
demandas, un jour s'il voulait aller se baigner avec toi, sur le rivage
de la mer. Tous les deux, comme deux cygnes, vous vous élançâtes en même
temps d'une roche à pic. Plongeurs éminents, vous glissâtes dans la
masse aqueuse, les bras étendus entre la tête et se réunissant aux
mains. Pendant quelques minutes, vous nageâtes entre deux courants. Vous
reparûtes à une grande distance, vos cheveux entremêlés entre eux, et
ruisselants du liquide salé. Mais quel mystère s'était donc passé sous
l'eau, pour qu'une longue trace de sang s'aperçût à travers les vagues?
Revenus à la surface, toi, tu continuais de nager, et tu faisais
semblant de ne pas remarquer la faiblesse croissante de ton compagnon.
Il perdait rapidement ses forces, et tu n'en poussais pas moins tes
larges brassées vers l'horizon brumeux, qui s'estompait devant toi. Le
blessé poussa des cris de détresse, et tu fis le sourd. Réginald frappa
trois fois l'écho des syllabes de ton nom, et trois fois tu répondis par
un cri de volupté. Il se trouvait trop loin du rivage pour y revenir,
et s'efforçait en vain de suivre les sillons de ton passage afin de
t'atteindre, et reposer un instant sa main sur ton épaule. La chasse
négative se prolongea pendant une heure, lui, perdant ses forces, et,
toi, sentant croître les tiennes. Désespérant d'égaler ta vitesse, il
fit une courte prière au Seigneur pour lui recommander son âme, se plaça
sur le dos comme quand on fait la planche, de telle manière qu'on
apercevait le coeur battre violemment sous sa poitrine, et attendit que
la mort arrivât, afin de ne plus attendre. En cet instant, tes membres
vigoureux étaient à perte de vue, et s'éloignaient encore, rapides comme
une sonde qu'on laisse filer. Une barque, qui revenait de placer ses
filets au large, passa dans ces parages. Les pêcheurs prirent Réginald
pour un naufragé, et le halèrent, évanoui, dans leur embarcation. On
constata la présence d'une blessure au flanc droit; chacun de ces matelots
expérimentés émit l'opinion qu'aucune pointe d'écueil ou fragment de
rocher n'était susceptible de percer un trou si microscopique et en même
temps si profond. Une arme tranchante, comme le serait un stylet des plus
aigus, pouvait seule s'arroger des droits à la paternité d'une si fine
blessure. Lui, ne voulut jamais raconter les diverses phases du plongeon,
à travers les entrailles des flots, et ce secret, il l'a gardé jusqu'à
présent. Des larmes coulent maintenant sur ses joues un peu décolorées,
et tombent sur tes draps: le souvenir est quelquefois plus amer que la
chose. Mais moi, je ne ressentirai pas de la pitié: ce serait te montrer
trop d'estime. Ne roule pas dans leur orbite ces yeux furibonds. Reste
calme plutôt. Tu sais que tu ne peux pas bouger. D'ailleurs, je n'ai pas
terminé mon récit.--Relève ton glaive, Réginald, et n'oublie pas si
facilement la vengeance. Qui sait? peut-être un jour elle viendrait te
faire des reproches.--Plus tard, tu conçus des remords dont l'existence
devait être éphémère; tu résolus de racheter ta faute par le choix d'un
autre ami, afin de le bénir et de l'honorer. Par ce moyen expiatoire, tu
effaçais les taches du passé, et tu faisais retomber sur celui qui devint
la deuxième victime, la sympathie que tu n'avais pas su montrer à l'autre.
Vain espoir; le caractère ne se modifie pas d'un jour à l'autre, et ta
volonté resta pareille à elle-même. Moi, Elseneur, je te vis pour la
première fois, et, dès ce moment, je ne pus t'oublier. Nous nous regardâmes
pendant quelques instants, et tu te mis à sourire. Je baissais les yeux,
parce que je vis dans les tiens une flamme surnaturelle. Je me demandais
si, à l'aide d'une nuit obscure, tu t'étais laissé choir secrètement
jusqu'à nous de la surface de quelque étoile; car, je le confesse,
aujourd'hui qu'il n'est pas nécessaire de feindre, tu ne ressemblais pas
aux marcassins de l'humanité; mais une auréole de rayons étincelants
enveloppait la périphérie de ton front. J'aurais désiré lier des
relations intimes avec toi; ma présence n'osait approcher devant la
frappante nouveauté de cette étrange noblesse, et une tenace terreur
rôdait autour de moi. Pourquoi n'ai-je pas écouté ces avertissements de
la conscience? Pressentiments fondés. Remarquant mon hésitation, tu
rougis à ton tour, et tu avanças le bras. Je mis courageusement ma main
dans la tienne, et, après cette action, je me sentis plus fort;
désormais un souffle de ton intelligence était passé dans moi. Les
cheveux au vent et respirant les haleines des brises, nous marchâmes
quelques instants devant nous, à travers des bosquets touffus de
lentisques, de jasmins, de grenadiers et d'orangers, dont les senteurs
nous enivraient. Un sanglier frôla nos habits à toute course, et une
larme tomba de son oeil, quand il me vit avec toi: je ne m'expliquais
pas sa conduite. Nous arrivâmes à la tombée de la nuit devant les portes
d'une cité populeuse. Les profils des dômes, les flèches des minarets et
les boules de marbre des belvédères découpaient vigoureusement leurs
dentelures, à travers les ténèbres, sur le bleu intense du ciel. Mais tu
ne voulus pas te reposer en cet endroit, quoique nous fussions accablés
de fatigue. Nous longeâmes le bas des fortifications externes, comme
des chacals nocturnes; nous évitâmes la rencontre des sentinelles aux
aguets; et nous parvînmes à nous éloigner, par la porte opposée, de
cette réunion solennelle d'animaux raisonnables, civilisés comme les
castors. Le vol de la fulgore porte-lanterne, le craquement des herbes
sèches, les hurlements intermittents de quelque loup lointain
accompagnaient l'obscurité de notre marche incertaine, à travers la
campagne. Quels étaient donc tes valables motifs pour fuir les ruches
humaines? Je me posais cette question avec un certain trouble; mes
jambes d'ailleurs commençaient à me refuser un service trop longtemps
prolongé. Nous atteignîmes enfin la lisière d'un bois épais, dont les
arbres étaient entrelacés entre eux par un fouillis de hautes lianes
inextricables, de plantes parasites, et de cactus à épines monstrueuses.
Tu t'arrêtas devant un bouleau. Tu me dis de m'agenouiller pour me
préparer à mourir; tu m'accordais un quart d'heure pour sortir de cette
terre. Quelques regards furtifs, pendant notre longue course, jetés à la
dérobée sur moi, quand je ne t'observais pas, certains gestes dont j'avais
remarqué l'irrégularité de mesure et de mouvement se présentèrent aussitôt
à ma mémoire, comme les pages ouvertes d'un livre. Mes soupçons étaient
confirmés. Trop faible pour lutter contre toi, tu me renversas à terre,
comme l'ouragan abat la feuille du tremble. Un de tes genoux sur ma
poitrine, et l'autre appuyé sur l'herbe humide, tandis qu'une de tes mains
arrêtait la binarité de mes bras dans son étau, je vis l'autre sortir un
couteau, de la gaîne appendue à ta ceinture. Ma résistance était presque
nulle, et je fermai les yeux: les trépignements d'un troupeau de boeufs
s'entendirent à quelque distance, apportés par le vent. Il s'avançait
comme une locomotive, harcelé par le bâton d'un pâtre et les mâchoires
d'un chien. Il n'y avait pas de temps à perdre, et c'est ce que tu compris;
craignant de ne pas parvenir à tes fins, car l'approche d'un secours
inespéré avait doublé ma puissance musculaire, et t'apercevant que tu ne
pouvais rendre immobile qu'un de mes bras à la fois, tu te contentas, par
un rapide mouvement imprimé à la lame d'acier, de me couper le poignet
droit. Le morceau, exactement détaché, tomba par terre. Tu pris la fuite,
pendant que j'étais étourdi par la douleur. Je ne te raconterai pas comment
le pâtre vint à mon secours, ni combien de temps devint nécessaire à ma
guérison. Qu'il te suffise de savoir que cette trahison, à laquelle je ne
m'attendais pas, me donna l'envie de rechercher la mort. Je portai ma
présence dans les combats, afin d'offrir ma poitrine aux coups. J'acquis
de la gloire dans les champs de bataille; mon nom était devenu redoutable
même aux plus intrépides, tant mon artificielle main de fer répandait le
carnage et la destruction dans les rangs ennemis. Cependant, un jour que
les obus tonnaient beaucoup plus fort qu'à l'ordinaire, et que les
escadrons, enlevés de leur base, tourbillonnaient, comme des pailles, sous
l'influence du cyclone de la mort, un cavalier, à la démarche hardie,
s'avança devant moi, pour me disputer la palme de la victoire. Les deux
armées s'arrêtèrent, immobiles, pour nous contempler en silence. Nous
combattîmes longtemps, criblés de blessures, et les casques brisés. D'un
commun accord, nous cessâmes la lutte, afin de nous reposer, et la
reprendre ensuite avec plus d'énergie. Plein d'admiration pour son
adversaire, chacun lève sa propre visière: «Elseneur!...», «Réginald!...»,
telles furent les simples paroles que nos gorges haletantes prononcèrent
en même temps. Ce dernier, tombé dans le désespoir d'une tristesse
inconsolable, avait pris, comme moi, la carrière des armes, et les
balles l'avaient épargné. Dans quelles circonstances nous nous
retrouvions! Mais ton nom ne fut pas prononcé! Lui et moi, nous nous
jurâmes une amitié éternelle; mais, certes, différente des deux
premières dans lesquelles tu avais été le principal acteur. Un archange,
descendu du ciel et messager du Seigneur, nous ordonna de nous changer
en une araignée unique, et de venir chaque nuit te sucer la gorge,
jusqu'à ce qu'un commandement venu d'en haut arrêtât le cours du
châtiment. Pendant près de dix ans, nous avons hanté ta couche. Dès
aujourd'hui, tu es délivré de notre persécution. La promesse vague dont
tu parlais, ce n'est pas à nous que tu la fis, mais bien à l'Être qui
est plus fort que toi: tu comprenais toi-même qu'il valait mieux se
soumettre à ce décret irrévocable. Réveille-toi, Maldoror! Le charme
magnétique qui a pesé sur ton système cérébro-spinal, pendant les nuits
de deux lustres, s'évapore.» Il se réveille comme il lui a été ordonné,
et voit deux formes célestes disparaître dans les airs, les bras
entrelacés. Il n'essaie pas de se rendormir. Il sort lentement, l'un
après l'autre, ses membres hors de sa couche. Il va réchauffer sa peau
glacée aux tisons rallumés de la cheminée gothique. Sa chemise seule
recouvre son corps. Il cherche des yeux la carafe de cristal afin
d'humecter son palais desséché. Il ouvre les contrevents de la fenêtre.
Il s'appuie sur le rebord. Il contemple la lune qui verse, sur sa
poitrine, un cône de rayons extatiques, où palpitent, comme des phalènes,
des atomes d'argent d'une douceur ineffable. Il attend que le crépuscule
du matin vienne apporter, par le changement de décors, un dérisoire
soulagement à son coeur bouleversé.


FIN DU CINQUIÈME CHANT




CHANT SIXIÈME


Vous, dont le calme enviable ne peut pas faire plus que d'embellir le
faciès, ne croyez pas qu'il s'agisse encore de pousser, dans des
strophes de quatorze ou quinze lignes, ainsi qu'un élève de quatrième,
des exclamations qui passeront pour inopportunes, et des gloussements
sonores de poule cochinchinoise, aussi grotesques qu'on serait capable
de l'imaginer, pour peu qu'on s'en donnât la peine; mais il est
préférable de prouver par des faits les propositions que l'on avance.
Prétendriez-vous donc que, parce que j'aurais insulté, comme en me
jouant, l'homme, le Créateur et moi-même, dans mes explicables
hyperboles, ma mission fût complète? Non: la partie la plus importante
de mon travail n'en subsiste pas moins, comme tâche qui reste à faire.
Désormais, les ficelles du roman remueront les trois personnages nommés
plus haut: il leur sera ainsi communiqué une puissance moins abstraite.
La vitalité se répandra magnifiquement dans le torrent de leur appareil
circulatoire, et vous verrez comme vous serez étonné vous-même de
rencontrer, là où d'abord vous n'aviez cru voir que des entités vagues
appartenant au domaine de la spéculation pure, d'une part, l'organisme
corporel avec ses ramifications de nerfs et ses membranes muqueuses, de
l'autre, le principe spirituel qui préside aux fonctions physiologiques
de la chair. Ce sont des êtres doués d'une énergique vie qui, les bras
croisés et la poitrine en arrêt, poseront prosaïquement (mais, je suis
certain que l'effet sera très poétique) devant votre visage, placés
seulement à quelques pas de vous, de manière que les rayons solaires,
frappant d'abord les tuiles des toits et le couvercle des cheminées,
viendront ensuite se refléter, visiblement sur leurs cheveux terrestres
et matériels. Mais, ce ne seront plus des anathèmes, possesseurs de la
spécialité de provoquer le rire; des personnalités fictives qui auraient
bien fait de rester dans la cervelle de l'auteur; ou des cauchemars
placés trop au-dessus de l'existence ordinaire. Remarquez que, par cela
même, ma poésie n'en sera que plus belle. Vous toucherez avec vos mains
des branches ascendantes d'aorte et des capsules surrénales; et puis des
sentiments! Les cinq premiers récits n'ont pas été inutiles; ils étaient
le frontispice de mon ouvrage, le fondement de la construction,
l'explication préalable de ma poétique future: et je devais à moi-même,
avant de boucler ma valise et me mettre en marche pour les contrées de
l'imagination, d'avertir les sincères amateurs de la littérature, par
l'ébauche rapide d'une généralisation claire et précise, du but que
j'avais résolu de poursuivre. En conséquence, mon opinion est que,
maintenant, la partie synthétique de mon oeuvre est complète et
suffisamment paraphrasée. C'est par elle que vous avez appris que je me
suis proposé d'attaquer l'homme et Celui qui le créa. Pour le moment et
pour plus tard, vous n'avez pas besoin d'en savoir davantage! Des
considérations, nouvelles me paraissent superflues, car elles ne
feraient que répéter, sous une autre forme, plus ample, il est vrai,
mais identique, l'énoncé de la thèse dont la fin de ce jour verra le
premier développement. Il résulte, des observations qui précèdent, que
mon intention est d'entreprendre, désormais, la partie analytique; cela
est si vrai qu'il n'y a que quelques minutes seulement, que j'exprimai
le voeu ardent que vous fussiez emprisonné dans les glandes sudoripares
de ma peau, pour vérifier la loyauté de ce que j'affirme, en
connaissance de cause. Il faut, je le sais, étayer d'un grand nombre de
preuves l'argumentation qui se trouve comprise dans mon théorème; eh
bien, ces preuves existent, et vous savez que je n'attaque personne,
sans avoir des motifs sérieux! Je ris à gorge déployée, quand je songe
que vous me reprochez de répandre d'amères accusations contre
l'humanité, dont je suis un des membres (cette seule remarque me
donnerait raison!) et contre la Providence: je ne rétracterai pas mes
paroles; mais, racontant ce que j'aurai vu, il ne me sera pas difficile,
sans autre ambition que la vérité, de les justifier. Aujourd'hui, je
vais fabriquer un petit roman de trente pages; cette mesure restera dans
la suite à peu près stationnaire. Espérant voir promptement, un jour ou
l'autre, la consécration de mes théories acceptée par telle ou telle
forme littéraire, je crois avoir enfin trouvé, après quelques
tâtonnements, ma formule définitive. C'est la meilleure: puisque c'est
le roman! Cette préface hybride a été exposée d'une manière qui ne
paraîtra peut-être pas assez naturelle, en ce sens qu'elle surprend,
pour ainsi dire, le lecteur, qui ne voit pas très bien où l'on veut
d'abord le conduire; mais, ce sentiment de remarquable stupéfaction,
auquel on doit généralement chercher à soustraire ceux qui passent leur
temps à lire des livres ou des brochures, j'ai fait tous mes efforts
pour le produire. En effet, il m'était impossible de faire moins, malgré
ma bonne volonté: ce n'est que plus tard, lorsque quelques romans auront
paru, que vous comprendrez mieux la préface du renégat, à la figure
fuligineuse.

       *       *       *       *       *

Avant d'entrer en matière, je trouve stupide qu'il soit nécessaire (je
pense que chacun ne sera pas de mon avis, si je me trompe) que je place
à côté de moi un encrier ouvert, et quelques feuillets de papier non
mâché. De cette manière, il me sera possible de commencer, avec amour,
par ce sixième chant, la série des poëmes instructifs qu'il me tarde de
produire. Dramatiques épisodes d'une implacable utilité! Notre héros
s'aperçut qu'en fréquentant les cavernes, et prenant pour refuge les
endroits inaccessibles, il transgressait les règles de la logique, et
commettait un cercle vicieux. Car, si d'un côté, il favorisait ainsi sa
répugnance pour les hommes, par le dédommagement de la solitude et de
l'éloignement, et circonscrivait passivement son horizon borné, parmi
des arbustes rabougris, des ronces et des lambrusques, de l'autre, son
activité ne trouvait plus aucun aliment pour nourrir le minotaure de
ses instincts pervers. En conséquence, il résolut de se rapprocher des
agglomérations humaines, persuadé que parmi tant de victimes toutes
préparées, ses passions diverses trouveraient amplement de quoi se
satisfaire. Il savait que la police, ce bouclier de la civilisation,
le recherchait avec persévérance, depuis nombre d'années, et qu'une
véritable armée d'agents et d'espions était continuellement à ses
trousses. Sans, cependant, parvenir à le rencontrer. Tant son habileté
renversante déroutait, avec un suprême chic, les ruses les plus
indiscutables au point de vue de leur succès, et l'ordonnance de la
plus savante méditation. Il avait une faculté spéciale pour prendre des
formes méconnaissables aux yeux exercés. Déguisements supérieurs, si je
parle en artiste! Accoutrements d'un effet réellement médiocre, quand
je songe à la morale. Par ce point, il touchait presqu'au génie.
N'avez-vous pas remarqué la gracilité d'un joli grillon, aux mouvements
alertes, dans les égouts de Paris? Il n'y a que celui-là: c'était
Maldoror! Magnétisant les florissantes capitales, avec un fluide
pernicieux, il les amène dans un état léthargique où elles sont
incapables de se surveiller comme il le faudrait. État d'autant plus
dangereux qu'il n'est pas soupçonné. Aujourd'hui il est à Madrid; demain
il sera à Saint-Pétersbourg; hier il se trouvait à Pékin. Mais, affirmer
exactement l'endroit actuel que remplissent de terreur les exploits de
ce poétique Rocambole, est un travail au-dessus des forces possibles de
mon épaisse ratiocination. Ce bandit est, peut-être, à sept cents lieues
de ce pays; peut-être, il est à quelques pas de vous. Il n'est pas
facile de faire périr entièrement les hommes, et les lois sont là; mais,
on peut, avec de la patience, exterminer, une par une, les fourmis
humanitaires. Or, depuis les jours de ma naissance, où je vivais avec
les premiers aïeuls de notre race, encore inexpérimenté dans la tension
de mes embûches; depuis les temps reculés, placés, au delà de
l'histoire, où, dans de subtiles métamorphoses, je ravageais, à diverses
époques, les contrées du globe par les conquêtes et le carnage, et
répandais la guerre civile au milieu des citoyens, n'ai-je pas déjà
écrasé sous mes talons, membre par membre ou collectivement, des
générations entières, dont il ne serait pas difficile de concevoir le
chiffre innombrable? Le passé radieux a fait de brillantes promesses à
l'avenir: il les tiendra. Pour le ratissage de mes phrases, j'emploierai
forcément la méthode naturelle, en rétrogradant jusque chez les
sauvages, afin qu'ils me donnent des leçons. Gentlemen simples et
majestueux, leur bouche gracieuse ennoblit tout ce qui découle de leurs
lèvres tatouées. Je viens de prouver que rien n'est risible dans cette
planète. Planète cocasse, mais superbe. M'emparant d'un style que
quelques-uns trouveront naïf (quand il est si profond), je le ferai
servir à interpréter des idées qui, malheureusement, ne paraîtront
peut-être pas grandioses! Par cela même, me dépouillant des allures
légères et sceptiques de l'ordinaire conversation, et, assez prudent
pour ne pas poser ... je ne sais plus ce que j'avais l'intention de
dire, car, je ne me rappelle pas le commencement de la phrase. Mais,
sachez que la poésie se trouve partout où n'est pas le sourire,
stupidement railleur, de l'homme, à la figure de canard. Je vais d'abord
me moucher, parce que j'en ai besoin; et ensuite, puissamment aidé par
ma main, je reprendrai le porte-plume que mes doigts avaient laissé
tomber. Comment le pont du Carrousel put-il garder la constance de sa
neutralité, lorsqu'il entendit les cris déchirants que semblait pousser
le sac!

       *       *       *       *       *

I


Les magasins de la rue Vivienne étalent leurs richesses aux yeux
émerveillés. Éclairés par de nombreux becs de gaz, les coffrets d'acajou
et les montres en or répandent à travers les vitrines des gerbes de
lumière éblouissante. Huit heures ont sonné à l'horloge de la Bourse:
ce n'est pas tard! A peine le dernier coup de marteau s'est-il fait
entendre, que la rue, dont le nom a été cité, se met à trembler, et
secoue ses fondements depuis la place Royale jusqu'au boulevard
Montmartre. Les promeneurs hâtent le pas, et se retirent pensifs dans
leurs maisons. Une femme s'évanouit et tombe sur l'asphalte. Personne ne
la relève: il tarde à chacun de s'éloigner de ce parage. Les volets se
referment avec impétuosité, et les habitants s'enfoncent dans leurs
couvertures. On dirait que la peste asiatique a révélé sa présence.
Ainsi, pendant que la plus grande partie de la ville se prépare à nager
dans les réjouissances des fêtes nocturnes, la rue Vivienne se trouve
subitement glacée par une sorte de pétrification. Comme un coeur qui
cesse d'aimer, elle a sa vie éteinte. Mais, bientôt, la nouvelle du
phénomène se répand dans les autres couches de la population, et un
silence morne plane sur l'auguste capitale. Où sont-ils passés, les becs
de gaz? Que sont-elles devenues, les vendeuses d'amour? Rien ... la
solitude et l'obscurité! Une chouette, volant dans une direction
rectiligne, et dont la patte est cassée, passe au-dessus de la
Madeleine, et prend son essor vers la barrière du Trône, en s'écriant:
«Un malheur se prépare.» Or, dans cet endroit que ma plume (ce véritable
ami qui me sert de compère) vient de rendre mystérieux, si vous regardez
du côté par où la rue Colbert s'engage dans la rue de Vivienne, vous
verrez, à l'angle formé par le croisement de ces deux voies, un
personnage montrer sa silhouette, et diriger sa marche légère vers les
boulevards. Mais, si l'on s'approche davantage, de manière à ne pas
amener sur soi-même l'attention de ce passant, on s'aperçoit, avec un
agréable étonnement, qu'il est jeune! De loin on l'aurait pris en effet
pour un homme mûr. La somme des jours ne compte plus, quand il s'agit
d'apprécier la capacité intellectuelle d'une figure sérieuse. Je me
connais à lire l'âge dans les lignes physiognomoniques du front: il a
seize ans et quatre mois! Il est beau comme la rétractilité des serres
des oiseaux rapaces; ou encore, comme l'incertitude des mouvements
musculaires dans les plaies des parties molles de la région cervicale
postérieure; ou plutôt, comme ce piège à rats perpétuel, toujours
retendu par l'animal pris, qui peut prendre seul des rongeurs
indéfiniment, et fonctionner même caché sous la paille; et surtout,
comme la rencontre fortuite sur une table de dissection d'une machine à
coudre et d'un parapluie! Mervyn, ce fils de la blonde Angleterre, vient
de prendre chez son professeur une leçon d'escrime, et, enveloppé dans
son tartan écossais, il retourne chez ses parents. C'est huit heures et
demie, et il espère arriver chez lui à neuf heures: de sa part, c'est
une grande présomption que de feindre d'être certain de connaître
l'avenir. Quelque obstacle imprévu ne peut-il l'embarrasser dans sa
route? Et cette circonstance, serait-elle si peu fréquente, qu'il dût
prendre sur lui de la considérer comme une exception? Que ne
considère-t-il plutôt, comme un fait anormal, la possibilité qu'il a eue
jusqu'ici de se sentir dépourvu d'inquiétude et pour ainsi dire heureux?
De quel droit en effet prétendrait-il gagner indemne sa demeure, lorsque
quelqu'un le guette et le suit par derrière comme sa future proie? (Ce
serait bien peu connaître sa profession d'écrivain à sensation, que de
ne pas, au moins, mettre en avant, les restrictives interrogations après
lesquelles arrive immédiatement la phrase que je suis sur le point de
terminer.) Vous avez reconnu le héros imaginaire qui, depuis un long
temps, brise par la pression de son individualité ma malheureuse
intelligence! Tantôt Maldoror se rapproche de Mervyn, pour graver dans
sa mémoire les traits de cet adolescent; tantôt, le corps rejeté en
arrière, il recule sur lui-même comme le boomerang d'Australie, dans la
deuxième période de son trajet, ou plutôt, comme une machine infernale.
Indécis sur ce qu'il doit faire. Mais, sa conscience n'éprouve aucun
symptôme d'une émotion la plus embryogénique, comme à tort vous le
supposeriez. Je le vis s'éloigner un instant dans une direction opposée:
était-il accablé par le remords? Mais, il revint sur ses pas avec un
nouvel acharnement. Mervyn ne sait pas pourquoi ses artères temporales
battent avec force, et il presse le pas, obsédé par une frayeur dont lui
et vous cherchent vainement la cause. Il faut lui tenir compte de son
application à découvrir l'énigme. Pourquoi ne se retourne-t-il pas? Il
comprendrait tout. Songe-t-on jamais aux moyens les plus simples de
faire cesser un état alarmant? Quand un rôdeur de barrières traverse un
faubourg de la banlieue, un saladier de vin blanc dans le gosier et la
blouse en lambeaux, si, dans le coin d'une borne, il aperçoit un vieux
chat musculeux, contemporain des révolutions auxquelles ont assisté nos
pères, contemplant mélancoliquement les rayons de la lune, qui
s'abattent sur la plaine endormie, il s'avance tortueusement dans une
ligne courbe, et fait signe à un chien cagneux, qui se précipite. Le
noble animal de la race féline attend son adversaire avec courage, et
dispute chèrement sa vie. Demain quelque chiffonnier achètera une peau
électrisable. Que ne fuyait-il donc? C'était si facile. Mais, dans le
cas qui nous préoccupe actuellement. Mervyn complique encore le danger
par sa propre ignorance. Il a comme quelques lueurs, excessivement
rares, il est vrai, dont je ne m'arrêterai pas à démontrer le vague qui
les recouvre; cependant, il lui est impossible de deviner la réalité. Il
n'est pas prophète, je ne dis pas le contraire, et il ne se reconnaît
pas la faculté de l'être. Arrivé sur la grande artère, il tourne à
droite et traverse le boulevard Poissonnière et le boulevard
Bonne-Nouvelle. A ce point de son chemin, il s'avance dans la rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Denis, laisse derrière lui l'embarcadère du chemin de fer
de Strasbourg, et s'arrête devant un portail élevé, avant d'avoir
atteint la superposition perpendiculaire de la rue Lafayette. Puisque
vous me conseillez de terminer en cet endroit la première strophe, je
veux bien, pour cette fois, obtempérer à votre désir. Savez-vous que,
lorsque je songe à l'anneau de fer caché sous la pierre par la main d'un
maniaque, un invincible frisson me passe par les cheveux?




II


Il tire le bouton de cuivre, et le portail de l'hôtel moderne tourne sur
ses gonds. Il arpente la cour, parsemée de sable fin, et franchit les
huit degrés du perron. Les deux statues, placées à droite et à gauche
comme les gardiennes de l'aristocratique villa, ne lui barrent pas le
passage. Celui qui a tout renié, père, mère, Providence, amour, idéal,
afin de ne plus penser qu'à lui seul, s'est bien gardé de ne pas suivre
les pas qui précédaient. Il l'a vu entrer dans un spacieux salon du
rez-de-chaussée, aux boiseries de cornaline. Le fils de famille se jette
sur un sofa, et l'émotion l'empêche de parler. Sa mère, à la robe longue
et traînante, s'empresse autour de lui, et l'entoure de ses bras. Ses
frères, moins âgés que lui, se groupent autour du meuble, chargé d'un
fardeau; ils ne connaissent pas la vie d'une manière suffisante, pour se
faire une idée nette de la scène qui se passe. Enfin, le père élève sa
canne, et abaisse sur les assistants un regard plein d'autorité.
Appuyant le poignet sur les bras du fauteuil, il s'éloigne de son siège
ordinaire, et s'avance, avec inquiétude, quoique affaibli par les ans,
vers le corps immobile de son premier-né. Il parle dans une langue
étrangère, et chacun l'écoute dans un recueillement respectueux: «Qui a
mis le garçon dans cet état? La Tamise brumeuse charriera encore une
quantité notable de limon avant que mes forces soient complètement
épuisées. Des lois préservatrices n'ont pas l'air d'exister dans cette
contrée inhospitalière. Il éprouverait la vigueur de mon bras, si je
connaissais le coupable. Quoique j'aie pris ma retraite, dans
l'éloignement des combats maritimes, mon épée de commodore, suspendue à
la muraille, n'est pas encore rouillée. D'ailleurs, il est facile d'en
repasser le fil. Mervyn, tranquillise-toi; je donnerai des ordres à mes
domestiques, afin de rencontrer la trace de celui que, désormais, je
chercherai, pour le faire périr de ma propre main. Femme, ôte toi de là,
et va t'accroupir dans un coin; tes yeux m'attendrissent, et tu ferais
mieux de refermer le conduit de tes glandes lacrymales. Mon fils, je
t'en supplie, réveille tes sens, et reconnais ta famille; c'est ton père
qui te parle ...» La mère se tient à l'écart, et, pour obéir aux ordres
de son maître, elle a pris un livre entre ses mains, et s'efforce de
demeurer tranquille, en présence du danger que court celui que sa
matrice enfanta. « ... Enfants, allez vous amuser dans le parc, et
prenez garde, en admirant la natation des cygnes, de ne pas tomber dans
la pièce d'eau ...» Les frères, les mains pendantes, restent muets;
tous, la toque surmontée d'une plume arrachée à l'aile de l'engoulevent
de la Caroline, avec le pantalon de velours s'arrêtant aux genoux, et
les bas de soie rouge, se prennent par la main et se retirent du salon,
ayant soin de ne presser le parquet d'ébène que de la pointe des pieds.
Je suis certain qu'ils ne s'amuseront pas, et qu'ils se promèneront avec
gravité dans les allées de platanes. Leur intelligence est précoce. Tant
mieux pour eux. « ... Soins inutiles, je te berce dans mes bras, et tu
es insensible à mes supplications. Voudrais-tu relever la tête?
J'embrasserai tes genoux, s'il le faut. Mais non ... elle retombe
inerte.»--«Mon doux maître, si tu le permets à ton esclave, je vais
chercher dans mon appartement un flacon rempli d'essence de
térébenthine, et dont je me sers habituellement quand la migraine
envahit mes tempes, après être revenue du théâtre, ou lorsque la lecture
d'une narration émouvante, consignée dans les annales britanniques de la
chevaleresque histoire de nos ancêtres, jette ma pensée rêveuse dans les
tourbières de l'assoupissement.»--«Femme, je ne t'avais pas donné la
parole, et tu n'avais pas le droit de la prendre. Depuis notre légitime
union, aucun nuage n'est venu s'interposer entre nous. Je suis content
de toi, je n'ai jamais eu de reproches à te faire: et réciproquement.
Va chercher dans ton appartement un flacon rempli d'essence de
térébenthine. Je sais qu'il s'en trouve un dans les tiroirs de ta
commode, et tu ne viendras pas me l'apprendre. Dépêche-toi de franchir
les degrés de l'escalier en spirale, et reviens me trouver avec un
visage content.» Mais la sensible Londonienne est à peine arrivée aux
premières marches (elle ne court pas aussi promptement qu'une personne
des classes inférieures) que déjà une de ses demoiselles d'atour
redescend du premier étage, les joues empourprées de sueur, avec le
flacon qui, peut-être, contient la liqueur de vie dans ses parois de
cristal. La demoiselle s'incline avec grâce en présentant son offre, et
la mère, avec sa démarche royale, s'est avancée vers les franges qui
bordent le sofa, seul objet qui préoccupe sa tendresse. Le commodore,
avec un geste fier, mais bienveillant, accepte le flacon des mains de
son épouse. Un foulard d'Inde y est trempé, et l'on entoure la tête de
Mervyn avec les méandres orbiculaires de la soie. Il respire des sels;
il remue un bras. La circulation se ranime, et l'on entend les cris
joyeux d'un kakatoès des Philippines, perché sur l'embrasure de la
fenêtre. «Qui va là?... Ne m'arrêtez point ... Où suis-je? Est-ce une
tombe qui supporte mes membres alourdis? Les planches m'en paraissent
douces ... Le médaillon qui contient le portrait de ma mère, est-il
encore attaché à mon cou?... Arrière, malfaiteur, à la tête échevelée.
Il n'a pu m'atteindre, et j'ai laissé entre ses doigts un pan de mon
pourpoint. Détachez les chaînes des bouledogues, car, cette nuit, un
voleur reconnaissable peut s'introduire chez nous avec effraction,
tandis que nous serons plongés dans le sommeil. Mon père et ma mère, je
vous reconnais, et je vous remercie de vos soins. Appelez mes petits
frères. C'est pour eux que j'avais acheté des pralines, et je veux les
embrasser.» A ces mots, il tombe dans un profond état léthargique. Le
médecin, qu'on a mandé en toute hâte, se frotte les mains et s'écrie:
«La crise est passée. Tout va bien. Demain votre fils se réveillera
dispos. Tous, allez-vous-en dans vos couches respectives, je l'ordonne,
afin que je reste seul à côté du malade, jusqu'à l'apparition de
l'aurore et du chant du rossignol.» Maldoror, caché derrière la porte,
n'a perdu aucune parole. Maintenant, il connaît le caractère des
habitants de l'hôtel, et agira en conséquence. Il sait où demeure
Mervyn, et ne désire pas en savoir davantage. Il a inscrit dans un
calepin le nom de la rue et le numéro du bâtiment. C'est le principal.
Il est sûr de ne pas les oublier. Il s'avance, comme une hyène, sans
être vu, et longe les côtés de la cour. Il escalade la grille avec
agilité, et s'embarrasse un instant dans les pointes de fer; d'un bond,
il est sur la chaussée. Il s'éloigne à pas de loup. «Il me prenait pour
un malfaiteur, s'écrie-t-il: lui, c'est un imbécile. Je voudrais trouver
un homme exempt de l'accusation que le malade a portée contre moi. Je ne
lui ai pas enlevé un pan de son pourpoint, comme il l'a dit. Simple
hallucination hypnagogique causée par la frayeur. Mon intention n'était
pas aujourd'hui de m'emparer de lui; car, j'ai d'autres projets
ultérieurs sur cet adolescent timide.» Dirigez-vous du côté où se trouve
le lac des cygnes; et, je vous dirai plus tard pourquoi il s'en trouve
un de complètement noir parmi la troupe, et dont le corps, supportant
une enclume, surmontée du cadavre en putréfaction d'un crabe tourteau,
inspire à bon droit de la méfiance à ses autres aquatiques camarades.




III


Mervyn est dans sa chambre; il a reçu une missive. Qui donc lui écrit
une lettre? Son trouble l'a empêché de remercier l'agent postal.
L'enveloppe a les bordures noires, et les mots sont tracés d'une
écriture hâtive. Ira-t-il porter cette lettre à son père? Et si le
signataire le lui défend expressément? Plein d'angoisse, il ouvre sa
fenêtre pour respirer les senteurs de l'atmosphère; les rayons du soleil
reflètent leurs prismatiques irradiations sur les glaces de Venise et
les rideaux de damas. Il jette la missive de côté, parmi les livres à
tranche dorée et les albums à couverture de nacre, parsemés sur le cuir
repoussé qui recouvre la surface de son pupitre d'écolier. Il ouvre son
piano, et fait courir ses doigts effilés sur les touches d'ivoire. Les
cordes de laiton ne résonnent point. Cet avertissement indirect l'engage
à reprendre le papier vélin; mais celui-ci recula, comme s'il avait été
offensé de l'hésitation du destinataire. Prise à ce piège, la curiosité
de Mervyn s'accroît et il ouvre le morceau de chiffon préparé. Il
n'avait vu jusqu'à ce moment que sa propre écriture. «Jeune homme, je
m'intéresse à vous: je veux faire votre bonheur. Je vous prendrai pour
compagnon, et nous accomplirons de longues pérégrinations dans les îles
de l'Océanie. Mervyn, tu sais que je t'aime, et je n'ai pas besoin de te
le prouver. Tu m'accorderas ton amitié, j'en suis persuadé. Quand tu me
connaîtras davantage, tu ne te repentiras pas de la confiance que tu
m'auras témoignée. Je te préserverai des périls que courra ton
inexpérience. Je serai pour toi un frère, et les bons conseils ne te
manqueront pas. Pour de plus longues explications, trouve-toi,
après-demain matin, à cinq heures, sur le pont du Carrousel. Si je ne
suis pas arrivé, attends-moi; mais, j'espère être rendu à l'heure juste.
Toi, fais de même. Un Anglais n'abandonnera pas facilement l'occasion de
voir clair dans ses affaires. Jeune homme, je te salue, et à bientôt.
Ne montre cette lettre à personne.»--«Trois étoiles au lieu d'une
signature, s'écrie Mervyn; et une tache de sang au bas de la page!» Des
larmes abondantes coulent sur les curieuses phrases que ses yeux ont
dévorées, et qui ouvrent à son esprit le champ illimité des horizons
incertains et nouveaux. Il lui semble (ce n'est que depuis la lecture
qu'il vient de terminer) que son père est un peu sévère et sa mère trop
majestueuse. Il possède des raisons qui ne sont pas parvenues à ma
connaissance et que, par conséquent, je ne pourrais vous transmettre,
pour insinuer que ses frères ne lui conviennent pas non plus. Il cache
cette lettre dans sa poitrine. Ses professeurs ont observé que, ce
jour-là, il n'a pas ressemblé à lui-même; ses yeux se sont assombris
démesurément, et le voile de la réflexion excessive s'est abaissé sur la
région péri-orbitaire. Chaque professeur a rougi, de crainte de ne pas
se trouver à la hauteur intellectuelle de son élève, et, cependant,
celui-ci, pour la première fois, a négligé ses devoirs et n'a pas
travaillé. Le soir, la famille s'est réunie dans la salle à manger,
décorée de portraits antiques. Mervyn admire les plats chargés de
viandes succulentes et les fruits odoriférants, mais, il ne mange pas;
les polychromes ruissellements des vins du Rhin et le rubis mousseux du
Champagne s'enchâssent dans les étroites et hautes coupes de pierre de
Bohême, et laissent même sa vue indifférente. Il appuie son coude sur
la table, et reste absorbé dans ses pensées comme un somnambule. Le
commodore, au visage boucané par l'écume de la mer, se penche à
l'oreille de son épouse: «L'aîné a changé de caractère, depuis le jour
de la crise; il n'était déjà que trop porté aux idées absurdes;
aujourd'hui il rêvasse encore plus de coutume. Mais enfin, je n'étais
pas comme cela, moi, lorsque j'avais son âge. Fais semblant de ne
t'apercevoir de rien. C'est ici qu'un remède efficace, matériel ou
moral, trouverait aisément son emploi. Mervyn, toi qui goûtes la lecture
des livres de voyages et d'histoire naturelle, je vais te lire un récit
qui ne te déplaira pas. Qu'on m'écoute avec attention; chacun y trouvera
son profit, moi, le premier. Et vous autres, enfants, apprenez, par
l'attention que vous saurez prêter à mes paroles, à perfectionner le
dessin de votre style, et à vous rendre compte des moindres intentions
d'un auteur.» Comme si cette nichée d'adorables moutards aurait pu
comprendre ce que c'était que la rhétorique! Il dit, et, sur un geste de
sa main, un des frères se dirige vers la bibliothèque paternelle, et en
revient avec un volume sous le bras. Pendant ce temps, le couvert et
l'argenterie sont enlevés, et le père prend le livre. A ce nom
électrisant de voyages, Mervyn a relevé la tête, et s'est efforcé de
mettre un terme à ses méditations hors de propos. Le livre est ouvert
vers le milieu, et la voix métallique du commodore prouve qu'il est
resté capable, comme dans les jours de sa glorieuse jeunesse, de
commander à la fureur des hommes et des tempêtes. Bien avant la fin de
la lecture, Mervyn est retombé sur son coude, dans l'impossibilité de
suivre plus longtemps le raisonné développement des phrases passées à la
filière et la saponification des obligatoires métaphores. Le père s'écrie:
«Ce n'est pas cela qui l'intéresse: lisons autre chose. Lis, femme; tu
seras plus heureuse que moi, pour chasser le chagrin des jours de notre
fils.» La mère ne conserve plus d'espoir; cependant, elle s'est emparée
d'un autre livre, et le timbre de sa voix de soprano retentit
mélodieusement aux oreilles du produit de sa conception. Mais, après
quelques paroles, le découragement l'envahit, et elle cesse d'elle-même
l'interprétation de l'oeuvre littéraire. Le premier-né s'écrie: «Je vais
me coucher.» Il se retire, les yeux baissés avec une fixité froide, et
sans rien ajouter. Le chien se met à pousser un lugubre aboiement, car
il ne trouve pas cette conduite naturelle, et le vent du dehors,
s'engouffrant inégalement dans la fissure longitudinale de la fenêtre,
fait vaciller la flamme rabattue par deux coupoles de cristal rosé, de
la lampe de bronze. La mère appuie ses mains sur son front, et le père
relève les yeux vers le ciel. Les enfants jettent des regards effarés
sur le vieux marin. Mervyn ferme la porte de sa chambre à double tour,
et sa main court rapidement sur le papier: «J'ai reçu votre lettre à
midi, et vous me pardonnerez si je vous ai fait attendre la réponse. Je
n'ai pas l'honneur de vous connaître personnellement, et je ne savais
pas si je devais vous écrire. Mais, comme l'impolitesse ne loge pas dans
notre maison, j'ai résolu, de prendre la plume, et de vous remercier
chaleureusement de l'intérêt que vous prenez pour un inconnu. Dieu me
garde de ne pas montrer de la reconnaissance pour la sympathie dont vous
me comblez. Je connais mes imperfections, et je ne m'en montre pas plus
fier. Mais, s'il est convenable d'accepter l'amitié d'une personne âgée,
il l'est aussi de lui faire comprendre que nos caractères ne sont pas
les mêmes. En effet, vous paraissez être plus âgé que moi, puisque vous
m'appelez jeune homme, et cependant je conserve des doutes sur votre âge
véritable. Car, comment concilier la froideur de vos syllogismes avec la
passion qui s'en dégage? Il est certain que je n'abandonnerai pas le
lieu qui m'a vu naître, pour vous accompagner dans les contrées
lointaines; ce qui ne serait possible qu'à la condition de demander
auparavant aux auteurs de mes jours, une permission impatiemment
attendue. Mais, comme vous m'avez enjoint de garder le secret (dans le
sens du mot cubique) sur cette affaire spirituellement ténébreuse, je
m'empresserai d'obéir à votre sagesse incontestable. A ce qu'il paraît,
elle n'affronterait pas avec plaisir la clarté de la lumière. Puisque
vous paraissez souhaiter que j'aie de la confiance en votre propre
personne (voeu qui n'est pas déplacé, je me plais à le confesser), ayez
la bonté, je vous prie, de témoigner, à mon égard, une confiance
analogue, et de ne pas avoir la prétention de croire que je serais
tellement éloigné de votre avis, qu'après-demain matin, à l'heure
indiquée, je ne serais pas exact au rendez-vous. Je franchirai le mur de
clôture du parc, car la grille sera fermée, et personne ne sera témoin
de mon départ. A parler avec franchise, que ne ferais-je pas pour vous,
dont l'inexplicable attachement a su promptement se révéler à mes yeux
éblouis, surtout étonnés d'une telle preuve de bonté, à laquelle je me
suis assuré que je ne me serais pas attendu. Puisque je ne ne vous
connaissais pas. Maintenant je vous connais. N'oubliez pas la promesse
que vous m'avez faite de vous promener sur le pont du Carrousel. Dans le
cas que j'y passe, j'ai une certitude à nulle autre pareille, de vous
y rencontrer et de vous toucher la main, pourvu que cette innocente
manifestation d'un adolescent qui, hier encore, s'inclinait devant
l'autel de la pudeur, ne doive pas vous offenser par sa respectueuse
familiarité. Or, la familiarité n'est-elle pas avouable dans le cas
d'une forte et ardente intimité, lorsque la perdition est sérieuse et
convaincue? Et quel mal y aurait-il après tout, je vous le demande
à vous-même, à ce que je vous dise adieu tout en passant, lorsque
après-demain, qu'il pleuve ou non, cinq heures auront sonné? Vous
apprécierez vous-même, gentleman, le tact avec lequel j'ai conçu ma
lettre; car, je ne me permets pas dans une feuille volante, apte à
s'égarer, de vous en dire davantage. Votre adresse au bas de la page
est un rébus. Il m'a fallu près d'un quart d'heure pour la déchiffrer.
Je crois que vous avez bien fait d'en tracer les mots d'une manière
microscopique. Je me dispense de signer et en cela je vous imite: nous
vivons dans un temps trop excentrique, pour s'étonner un instant de ce
qui pourrait arriver. Je serais curieux de savoir comment vous avez
appris l'endroit ou demeure mon immobilité glaciale, entourée d'une
longue rangée de salles désertes, immondes charniers de mes heures
d'ennui. Comment dire cela? Quand je pense à vous, ma poitrine s'agite,
retentissante comme l'écroulement d'un empire en décadence; car, l'ombre
de votre amour accuse un sourire qui, peut-être, n'existe pas: elle est
si vague, et remue ses écailles si tortueusement! Entre vos mains,
j'abandonne mes sentiments impétueux, tables de marbre toutes neuves, et
vierges encore d'un contact mortel. Prenons patience jusqu'aux premières
lueurs du crépuscule matinal, et, dans l'attente du moment qui me
jettera dans l'entrelacement hideux de vos bras pestiférés, je m'incline
humblement à vos genoux, que je presse.» Après avoir écrit cette lettre
coupable, Mervyn la porte à la poste et revient se mettre au lit. Ne
comptez pas y trouver son ange gardien. La queue de poisson ne volera
que pendant trois jours, c'est vrai; mais, hélas! la poutre n'en sera
pas moins brûlée; et une balle cylindro-conique percera la peau du
rhinocéros, malgré la fille de neige et le mendiant! C'est que le fou
couronné aura dit la vérité sur la fidélité des quatorze poignards.




VI


Je me suis aperçu que je n'avais qu'un oeil au milieu du front! O
miroirs d'argent, incrustés dans les panneaux des vestibules, combien de
services ne m'avez-vous pas rendus par votre pouvoir réflecteur! Depuis
le jour où un chat angora me rongea, pendant une heure, la bosse
pariétale, comme un trépan qui perfore le crâne, en s'élançant
brusquement sur mon dos, parce que j'avais fait bouillir ses petits dans
une cuve remplie d'alcool, je n'ai pas cessé de lancer contre moi-même
la flèche des tourments. Aujourd'hui, sous l'impression des blessures
que mon corps a reçues dans diverses circonstances, soit par la fatalité
de ma naissance, soit par le fait de ma propre faute; accablé par les
conséquences de ma chute morale (quelques-unes ont été accomplies; qui
prévoira les autres?); spectateur impassible des monstruosités acquises
ou naturelles, qui décorent les aponévroses et l'intellect de celui qui
parle, je jette un long regard de satisfaction sur la dualité qui me
compose ... et je me trouve beau! Beau comme le vice de conformation
congénital des organes sexuels de l'homme, consistant dans la brièveté
relative du canal de l'urètre et la division ou l'absence de sa paroi
inférieure, de telle sorte que ce canal s'ouvre à une distance variable
du gland et au-dessous du pénis; ou encore, comme la caroncule charnue,
de forme conique, sillonnée par des rides transversales assez profondes,
qui s'élève sur la base du bec supérieur du dindon; ou plutôt, comme
la vérité qui suit: «Le système des gammes, des modes et de leur
enchaînement harmonique ne repose pas sur des lois naturelles
invariables, mais il est, au contraire, la conséquence de principes
esthétiques qui ont varié avec le développement progressif de
l'humanité, et qui varieront encore;» et surtout, comme une corvette
cuirassée à tourelles! Oui, je maintiens l'exactitude de mon assertion.
Je n'ai pas d'illusion présomptueuse, je m'en vante, et je ne trouverais
aucun profit dans le mensonge; donc, ce que j'ai dit, vous ne devez
mettre aucune hésitation à le croire. Car, pourquoi m'inspirerais-je à
moi-même de l'horreur, devant les témoignages élogieux qui partent de ma
conscience? Je n'envie rien au Créateur; mais, qu'il me laisse descendre
le fleuve de ma destinée, à travers une série croissante de crimes
glorieux. Sinon, élevant à la hauteur de son front un regard irrité de
tout obstacle, je lui ferai comprendre qu'il n'est pas le seul maître
de l'univers; que plusieurs phénomènes qui relèvent directement d'une
connaissance plus approfondie de la nature des choses, déposent en
faveur de l'opinion contraire, et opposent un formel démenti à la
viabilité de l'unité de la puissance. C'est que nous sommes deux à nous
contempler les cils des paupières, vois-tu ... et tu sais, que plus
d'une fois a retenti, dans ma bouche sans lèvres, le clairon de la
victoire. Adieu, guerrier illustre; ton courage dans le malheur inspire
de l'estime à ton ennemi le plus acharné; mais Maldoror te retrouvera
bientôt pour te disputer la proie qui s'appelle Mervyn. Ainsi, sera
réalisée la prophétie du coq, quand il entrevit l'avenir au fond du
candélabre. Plût au ciel que le crabe tourteau rejoigne à temps la
caravane des pèlerins, et leur apprenne en quelques mots la narration du
chiffonnier de Clignancourt!




V


Sur un banc du Palais-Royal, du côté gauche et non loin de la pièce
d'eau, un individu, débouchant de la rue de Rivoli, est venu s'asseoir.
Il a les cheveux en désordre, et ses habits dévoilent l'action corrosive
d'un dénûment prolongé. Il a creusé un trou dans le sol avec un morceau
de bois pointu, et a rempli de terre le creux de sa main. Il a porté
cette nourriture à la bouche et l'a rejetée avec précipitation. Il s'est
relevé, et, appliquant sa tête contre le banc, il a dirigé ses jambes
vers le haut. Mais, comme cette situation funambulesque est en dehors
des lois de la pesanteur qui régissent le centre de gravité, il est
retombé lourdement sur la planche, les bras pendants, la casquette lui
cachant la moitié de la figure, et les jambes battant le gravier dans
une situation d'équilibre instable, de moins en moins rassurante. Il
reste longtemps dans cette position. Vers l'entrée mitoyenne du nord,
à côté de la rotonde qui contient une salle de café, le bras de notre
héros est appuyé contre la grille. Sa vue parcourt la superficie du
rectangle, de manière à ne laisser échapper aucune perspective. Ses yeux
reviennent sur eux-mêmes, après l'achèvement de l'investigation, et il
aperçoit, au milieu du jardin, un homme qui fait de la gymnastique
titubante avec un banc sur lequel il s'efforce de s'affermir, en
accomplissant des miracles de force et d'adresse. Mais, que peut la
meilleure intention, apportée au service d'une cause juste, contre les
dérèglements de l'aliénation mentale? Il s'est avancé vers le fou, l'a
aidé avec bienveillance à replacer sa dignité dans une position normale,
lui a tendu la main, et s'est assis à côté de lui. Il remarque que la
folie n'est qu'intermittente; l'accès a disparu; son interlocuteur
répond logiquement à toutes les questions. Est-il nécessaire de
rapporter le sens de ses paroles? Pourquoi rouvrir, à une page
quelconque, avec un empressement blasphématoire, l'in-folio des misères
humaines? Rien n'est d'un enseignement plus fécond. Quand même je
n'aurais aucun événement de vrai à vous faire entendre, j'inventerais
des récits imaginaires pour les transvaser dans votre cerveau. Mais, le
malade ne l'est pas devenu pour son propre plaisir; et la sincérité de
ses rapports s'allie à merveille avec la crédulité du lecteur. «Mon père
était un charpentier de la rue de la Verrerie ... Que la mort des trois
Marguerite retombe sur sa tête, et que le bec du canari lui ronge
éternellement l'axe du bulbe oculaire! Il avait contracté l'habitude de
s'enivrer; dans ces moments-là, quand il revenait à la maison, après
avoir couru les comptoirs des cabarets, sa fureur devenait presque
incommensurable, et il frappait indistinctement les objets qui se
présentaient à sa vue. Mais, bientôt, devant les reproches de ses amis,
il se corrigea complètement, et devint d'une humeur taciturne. Personne
ne pouvait l'approcher, pas même notre mère. Il conservait un secret
ressentiment contre l'idée du devoir qui l'empêchait de se conduire à sa
guise. J'avais acheté un serin pour mes trois soeurs; c'était pour mes
trois soeurs que j'avais acheté un serin. Elles l'avaient enfermé dans
une cage, au-dessus de la porte, et les passants s'arrêtaient, chaque
fois, pour écouter les chants de l'oiseau, admirer sa grâce fugitive et
étudier ses formes savantes. Plus d'une fois, mon père avait donné
l'ordre de faire disparaître la cage et son contenu, car il se figurait
que le serin se moquait de sa personne, en lui jetant le bouquet des
cavatines aériennes de son talent de vocaliste. Il alla détacher la cage
du clou, et glissa de la chaise, aveuglé par la colère. Une légère
excoriation au genou fut le trophée de son entreprise. Après être resté
quelques secondes à presser la partie gonflée avec un copeau, il
rabaissa son pantalon, les sourcils froncés, prit mieux ses précautions,
mit la cage sous son bras et se dirigea vers le fond de son atelier.
Là, malgré les cris et les supplications de sa famille (nous tenions
beaucoup à cet oiseau, qui était, pour nous, comme le génie de la
maison) il écrasa de ses talons ferrés la boîte d'osier, pendant qu'une
varlope, tournoyant autour de sa tête, tenait à distance les assistants.
Le hasard fit que le serin ne mourut pas sur le coup; ce flocon de
plumes vivait encore, malgré la maculation sanguine. Le charpentier
s'éloigna, et referma la porte avec bruit. Ma mère et moi, nous nous
efforçâmes de retenir la vie de l'oiseau, prête à s'échapper; il
atteignait à sa fin, et le mouvement de ses ailes ne s'offrait plus à la
vue, que comme le miroir de la suprême convulsion d'agonie. Pendant ce
temps, les trois Marguerite, quand elles s'aperçurent que tout espoir
allait être perdu, se prirent par la main, d'un commun accord, et la
chaîne vivante alla s'accroupir, après avoir repoussé à quelques pas un
baril de graisse, derrière l'escalier, à côté du chenil de notre
chienne. Ma mère ne discontinuait pas sa tâche, et tenait le serin entre
ses doigts, pour le réchauffer de son haleine. Moi, je courais éperdu
par toutes les chambres, me cognant aux meubles et aux instruments. De
temps à autre, une de mes soeurs montrait sa tête devant le bas de
l'escalier pour se renseigner sur le sort du malheureux oiseau, et la
retirait avec tristesse. La chienne était sortie de son chenil, et,
comme si elle avait compris l'étendue de notre perte, elle léchait avec
la langue de la stérile consolation la robe des trois Marguerite. Le
serin n'avait plus que quelques instants à vivre. Une de mes soeurs,
à son tour (c'était la plus jeune) présenta sa tête dans la pénombre
formée par la raréfaction de lumière. Elle vit ma mère pâlir, et
l'oiseau, après avoir, pendant un éclair, relevé le cou, par la dernière
manifestation de son système nerveux, retomber entre ses doigts, inerte
à jamais. Elle annonça la nouvelle à ses soeurs. Elles ne firent
entendre le bruissement d'aucune plainte, d'aucun murmure. Le silence
régnait dans l'atelier. L'on ne distinguait que le craquement saccadé
des fragments de la cage qui, en vertu de l'élasticité du bois,
reprenaient en partie la position primordiale de leur construction. Les
trois Marguerite ne laissaient écouler aucune larme, et leur visage ne
perdait point sa fraîcheur pourprée; non ... elles restaient seulement
immobiles. Elles se traînèrent jusqu'à l'intérieur du chenil, et
s'étendirent sur la paille, l'une à côté de l'autre, pendant que la
chienne, témoin passif de leur manoeuvre, les regardait faire avec
étonnement. A plusieurs reprises, ma mère les appela; telles ne
rendirent le son d'aucune réponse. Fatiguées par les émotions
précédentes, elles dormaient, probablement! Elle fouilla tous les coins
de la maison sans les apercevoir. Elle suivit la chienne, qui la tirait
par la robe, vers le chenil. Cette femme s'abaissa et plaça sa tête à
l'entrée. Le spectacle dont elle eut la possibilité d'être témoin, mises
à part les exagérations malsaines de la peur maternelle, ne pouvait être
que navrant, d'après les calculs de mon esprit. J'allumai une chandelle
et la lui présentai; de cette manière, aucun détail ne lui échappa. Elle
ramena sa tête, couverte de brins de paille, de la tombe prématurée, et
me dit: «Les trois Marguerite sont mortes.» Comme nous ne pouvions les
sortir de cet endroit, car, retenez bien ceci, elles étaient étroitement
entrelacées ensemble, j'allai chercher dans l'atelier un marteau, pour
briser la demeure canine. Je me mis, sur-le-champ, à l'oeuvre de
démolition, et les passants purent croire, pour peu qu'ils eussent de
l'imagination, que le travail ne chômait pas chez nous. Ma mère,
impatientée de ces retards qui, cependant, étaient indispensables,
brisait ses ongles contre les planches. Enfin, l'opération de la
délivrance négative se termina; le chenil fendu s'entr'ouvrit de tous
les côtés; et nous retirâmes, des décombres, l'une après l'autre, après
les avoir séparées difficilement, les filles du charpentier. Ma mère
quitta le pays. Je n'ai plus revu mon père. Quant à moi, l'on dit que je
suis fou, et j'implore la charité publique. Ce que je sais, c'est que le
canari ne chante plus.» L'auditeur approuve dans son intérieur ce nouvel
exemple apporté à l'appui de ses dégoûtantes théories. Comme si, à cause
d'un homme, jadis pris de vin, l'on était en droit d'accuser l'entière
humanité. Telle est du moins la réflexion paradoxale qu'il cherche à
introduire dans son esprit; mais elle ne peut en chasser les
enseignements importants de la grave expérience. Il console le fou avec
une compassion feinte, et essuie ses larmes avec son propre mouchoir.
Il l'amène dans un restaurant, et ils mangent à la même table. Ils s'en
vont chez un tailleur de la fashion et le protégé est habillé comme un
prince. Ils frappent chez le concierge d'une grande maison de la rue
Saint-Honoré, et le fou est installé dans un riche appartement du
troisième étage. Le bandit le force à accepter sa bourse, et, prenant le
vase de nuit au-dessous du lit, il le met sur la tête d'Aghone. «Je te
couronne roi des intelligences, s'écrie-t-il avec une emphase
préméditée: à ton moindre appel j'accourrai; puise à pleines mains dans
mes coffres; de corps et d'âme je t'appartiens. La nuit, tu rapporteras
la couronne d'albâtre à sa place ordinaire, avec la permission de t'en
servir; mais, le jour, dès que l'aurore illuminera les cités, remets-la
sur ton front, comme le symbole de ta puissance. Les trois Marguerite
revivront en moi, sans compter que je serai ta mère.» Alors le fou
recula de quelques pas, comme s'il était la proie d'un insultant
cauchemar; les lignes du bonheur se peignirent sur son visage, ridé par
les chagrins; il s'agenouilla, plein d'humiliation, aux pieds de son
protecteur. La reconnaissance était entrée, comme un poison, dans le
coeur du fou couronné! Il voulut parler, et sa langue s'arrêta. Il
pencha son corps en avant, et il retomba sur le carreau. L'homme aux
lèvres de bronze se retire. Quel était son but? Acquérir un ami à toute
épreuve, assez naïf pour obéir au moindre de ses commandements. Il ne
pouvait mieux rencontrer et le hasard l'avait favorisé. Celui qu'il a
trouvé, couché sur le banc, ne sait plus, depuis un événement de sa
jeunesse, reconnaître le bien du mal. C'est Aghone même qu'il lui faut.




VI


Le Tout-Puissant avait envoyé sur la terre un de ses archanges, afin de
sauver l'adolescent d'une mort certaine. Il sera forcé de descendre
lui-même! Mais, nous ne sommes point encore arrivés à cette partie de
notre récit, et je me vois dans l'obligation de fermer ma bouche, parce
que je ne puis pas tout dire à la fois: chaque truc à effet paraîtra
dans son lieu, lorsque la trame de cette fiction n'y verra point
d'inconvénient. Pour ne pas être reconnu, l'archange avait pris la forme
d'un crabe tourteau, grand comme une vigogne. Il se tenait sur la pointe
d'un écueil, au milieu de la mer, et attendait le favorable moment de
la marée pour opérer sa descente sur le rivage. L'homme aux lèvres de
jaspe, caché derrière une sinuosité de la plage, épiait l'animal, un
bâton à la main. Qui aurait désiré lire dans la pensée de ces deux
êtres? Le premier ne se cachait pas qu'il avait une mission difficile
à accomplir: «Et comment réussir, s'écriait-il, pendant que les vagues
grossissantes battaient son refuge temporaire, là où mon maître a vu
plus d'une fois échouer sa force et son courage? Moi, je ne suis qu'une
substance limitée, tandis que l'autre, personne ne sait d'où il vient
et quel est son but final. A son nom, les armées célestes tremblent;
et plus d'un raconte, dans les régions que j'ai quittées, que Satan
lui-même, Satan, l'incarnation du mal, n'est pas si redoutable.» Le
second faisait les réflexions suivantes: elles trouvèrent un écho,
jusque dans la coupole azurée qu'elles souillèrent: «Il a l'air plein
d'inexpérience; je lui réglerai son compte avec promptitude. Il vient
sans doute d'en haut, envoyé par celui qui craint tant de venir
lui-même! Nous verrons, à l'oeuvre, s'il est aussi impérieux qu'il en a
l'air; ce n'est pas un habitant de l'abricot terrestre; il trahit son
origine séraphique par ses yeux errants et indécis.» Le crabe tourteau,
qui, depuis quelque temps, promenait sa vue sur un espace délimité de la
côte, aperçut notre héros (celui-ci alors, se releva de toute la hauteur
de sa taille herculéenne), et l'apostropha dans les termes qui vont
suivre: «N'essaie pas la lutte et rends-toi. Je suis envoyé par
quelqu'un qui est supérieur à nous deux, afin de te charger de chaînes,
et mettre les deux membres complices de ta pensée dans l'impossibilité
de remuer. Serrer des couteaux et des poignards entre tes doigts, il
faut que désormais cela te soit défendu, crois-m'en; aussi bien dans ton
intérêt que dans celui des autres. Mort ou vif, je t'aurai; j'ai l'ordre
de t'amener vivant. Ne me mets pas dans l'obligation de recourir au
pouvoir qui m'a été prêté. Je me conduirai avec délicatesse; de ton
côté, ne m'oppose aucune résistance. C'est ainsi que je reconnaîtrai,
avec empressement et allégresse, que tu auras fait un premier pas vers
le repentir.» Quand notre héros entendit cette harangue, empreinte d'un
sel si profondément comique, il eut de la peine à conserver le sérieux
sur la rudesse de ses traits hâlés. Mais, enfin, chacun ne sera pas
étonné si j'ajoute qu'il finit par éclater de rire. C'était plus fort
que lui! Il n'y mettait pas de la mauvaise intention! Il ne voulait
certes pas s'attirer les reproches du crabe tourteau! Que d'efforts ne
fit-il pas pour chasser l'hilarité! Que de fois ne serra-t-il point ses
lèvres l'une contre l'autre, afin de ne pas avoir l'air d'offenser son
interlocuteur épaté! Malheureusement son caractère participait de la
nature de l'humanité, et il riait ainsi que font les brebis! Enfin il
s'arrêta! Il était temps! Il avait failli s'étouffer! Le vent porta
cette réponse à l'archange de l'écueil: «Lorsque ton maître ne m'enverra
plus des escargots et des écrevisses pour régler ses affaires, et qu'il
daignera parlementer personnellement avec moi, l'on trouvera, j'en suis
sûr, le moyen de s'arranger, puisque je suis inférieur à celui qui
t'envoya, comme tu l'as dit avec tant de justesse. Jusque là, les idées
de réconciliation m'apparaissent prématurées, et aptes à produire
seulement un chimérique résultat. Je suis très loin de méconnaître
ce qu'il y a de censé dans chacune de tes syllabes; et, comme nous
pourrions fatiguer inutilement notre voix, afin de lui faire parcourir
trois kilomètres de distance, il me semble que tu agirais avec sagesse,
si tu descendais de ta forteresse inexpugnable, et gagnais la terre
ferme à la nage: nous discuterons plus commodément les conditions d'une
reddition qui, pour si légitime qu'elle soit, n'en est pas moins
finalement, pour moi, d'une perspective désagréable.» L'archange, qui
ne s'attendait pas à cette bonne volonté, sortit des profondeurs de la
crevasse sa tête d'un cran, et répondit: «O Maldoror, est-il enfin
arrivé le jour où tes abominables instincts verront s'éteindre le
flambeau d'injustifiable orgueil qui les conduit à l'éternelle
damnation! Ce sera donc moi, qui, le premier, raconterai ce louable
changement aux phalanges des chérubins, heureux de retrouver un des
leurs. Tu sais toi-même et tu n'as pas oublié qu'une époque existait
où tu avais la première place parmi nous. Ton nom volait de bouche en
bouche; tu es actuellement le sujet de nos solitaires conversations.
Viens donc ... viens faire une paix durable avec ton ancien maître; il
te recevra comme un fils égaré, et ne s'apercevra point de l'énorme
quantité de culpabilité que tu as, comme une montagne de cornes d'élan
élevée par les Indiens, amoncelée sur ton coeur.» Il dit, et il retire
toutes les parties de son corps du fond de l'ouverture obscure. Il se
montre, radieux, sur la surface de l'écueil; ainsi un prêtre des
religions quand il a la certitude de ramener une brebis égarée. Il va
faire un bond sur l'eau, pour se diriger à la nage vers le pardonné.
Mais, l'homme aux lèvres de saphir a calculé longtemps à l'avance un
perfide coup. Son bâton est lancé avec force; après maints ricochets sur
les vagues, il va frapper à la tête l'archange bienfaiteur. Le crabe,
mortellement atteint, tombe dans l'eau. La marée porte sur le rivage
l'épave flottante. Il attendait la marée pour opérer plus facilement sa
descente. Eh bien, la marée est venue; elle l'a bercé de ses chants, et
l'a mollement déposé sur la plage: le crabe n'est-il pas content? Que
lui faut-il de plus? Et Maldoror, penché sur le sable des grèves, reçoit
dans ses bras deux amis, inséparablement réunis par les hasards de la
lame: le cadavre du crabe tourteau et le bâton homicide! «Je n'ai pas
encore perdu mon adresse, s'écrie-t-il; elle ne demande qu'à s'exercer;
mon bras conserve sa force et mon oeil sa justesse.» Il regarde l'animal
inanimé. Il craint qu'on ne lui demande compte du sang versé. Où
cachera-t-il l'archange? Et, en même temps, il se demande si la mort n'a
pas été instantanée. Il a mis sur son dos une enclume et un cadavre; il
s'achemine vers une vaste pièce d'eau, dont toutes les rives sont
couvertes et comme murées par un inextricable fouillis de grands joncs.
Il voulait d'abord prendre un marteau, mais c'est un instrument trop
léger, tandis qu'avec un objet plus lourd, si le cadavre donne signe de
vie, il le posera sur le sol et le mettra en poussière à coups
d'enclume. Ce n'est pas la vigueur qui manque à son bras, allez; c'est
le moindre de ses embarras. Arrivé en vue du lac, il le voit peuplé de
cygnes. Il se dit que c'est une retraite sûre pour lui; à l'aide d'une
métamorphose, sans abandonner sa charge, il se mêle à la bande des
autres oiseaux. Remarquez la main de la Providence là où l'on était
tenté de la trouver absente, et faites votre profit du miracle dont je
vais vous parler. Noir comme l'aile d'un corbeau, trois fois il nagea
parmi le groupe de palmipèdes, à la blancheur éclatante; trois fois,
il conserva cette couleur distinctive qui l'assimilait à un bloc de
charbon. C'est que Dieu, dans sa justice, ne permit point que son astuce
pût tromper même une bande de cygnes. De telle manière qu'il resta
ostensiblement dans l'intérieur du lac; mais, chacun se tint à l'écart,
et aucun oiseau ne s'approcha de son plumage honteux, pour lui tenir
compagnie. Et, alors, il circonscrivit ses plongeons dans une baie
écartée, à l'extrémité de la pièce d'eau, seul parmi les habitants de
l'air, comme il l'était parmi les hommes! C'est ainsi qu'il préludait à
l'incroyable événement de la place Vendôme!




VII


Le corsaire aux cheveux d'or, a reçu la réponse de Mervyn. Il suit dans
cette page singulière la trace des troubles intellectuels de celui qui
l'écrivit, abandonné aux faibles forces de sa propres suggestion.
Celui-ci aurait beaucoup mieux fait de consulter ses parents, avant de
répondre à l'amitié de l'inconnu. Aucun bénéfice ne résultera pour lui
de se mêler, comme principal acteur, à cette équivoque intrigue. Mais,
enfin, il l'a voulu. A l'heure indiquée, Mervyn, de la porte de sa
maison, est allé droit devant lui, en suivant le boulevard Sébastopol,
jusqu'à la fontaine Saint-Michel. Il prend le quai des Grands-Augustins
et traverse le quai Conti; au moment où il passe sur le quai Malaquais,
il voit marcher sur le quai du Louvre, parallèlement à sa propre
direction, un individu, porteur d'un sac sous le bras, et qui paraît
l'examiner avec attention. Les vapeurs du matin se sont dissipées.
Les deux passants débouchent en même temps de chaque côté du pont du
Carrousel. Quoiqu'ils ne se fussent jamais vus, ils se reconnurent!
Vrai, c'était touchant de voir ces deux êtres, séparés par l'âge,
rapprocher leurs âmes par la grandeur des sentiments. Du moins, c'eût
été l'opinion de ceux qui se seraient arrêtés devant ce spectacle, que
plus d'un, même avec un esprit mathématique, aurait trouvé émouvant.
Mervyn, le visage en pleurs, réfléchissait qu'il rencontrait, pour ainsi
dire à l'entrée de la vie, un soutien précieux dans les futures
adversités. Soyez persuadé que l'autre ne disait rien. Voici ce qu'il
fit: il déplia le sac qu'il portait, dégagea l'ouverture, et, saisissant
l'adolescent par la tête, il fit passer le corps entier dans l'enveloppe
de toile. Il noua, avec son mouchoir, l'extrémité qui servait
d'introduction. Comme Mervyn poussait des cris aigus, il enleva le sac,
ainsi qu'un paquet de linges, et en frappa, à plusieurs reprises, le
parapet du pont. Alors, le patient, s'étant aperçu du craquement de ses
os, se tut. Scène unique, qu'aucun romancier ne retrouvera! Un boucher
passait, assis sur la viande de sa charrette. Un individu court à lui,
l'engage à s'arrêter, et lui dit: «Voici un chien, enfermé dans ce sac;
il a la gale: abattez-le au plus vite.» L'interpellé se montre
complaisant. L'interrupteur, en s'éloignant, aperçoit une jeune fille en
haillons qui lui tend la main. Jusqu'où va donc le comble de l'audace et
de l'impiété? Il lui donne l'aumône! Dites-moi si vous voulez que je
vous introduise, quelques heures plus tard, à la porte d'un abattoir
reculé. Le boucher est revenu, et a dit à ses camarades, en jetant à
terre un fardeau: «Dépêchons-nous de tuer ce chien galeux.» Ils sont
quatre, et chacun saisit le marteau accoutumé. Et, cependant, ils
hésitaient, parce que le sac remuait avec force.» Quelle émotion
s'empare de moi?» cria l'un d'eux en abaissant lentement son bras.
«Ce chien pousse, comme un enfant, des gémissements de douleur, dit
un autre; on dirait qu'il comprend le sort qui l'attend.» «C'est leur
habitude, répondit un troisième; même quand il ne sont pas malades,
comme c'est le cas ici, il suffit que leur maître reste quelques jours
absent du logis, pour qu'ils se mettent à faire entendre des hurlements
qui, véritablement, sont pénibles à supporter.» «Arrêtez!... arrêtez!...
cria le quatrième, avant que tous les bras se fussent levés en cadence
pour frapper résolument, cette fois, sur le sac. Arrêtez, vous dis-je;
il y a ici un fait qui nous échappe. Qui vous dit que cette toile
renferme un chien? Je veux m'en assurer.» Alors, malgré les railleries
de ses compagnons, il dénoua le paquet et en retira l'un après l'autre
les membres de Mervyn! Il était presque étouffé par la gène de cette
position. Il s'évanouit en revoyant la lumière. Quelques moments après,
il donna des signes indubitables d'existence. Le sauveur dit: «Apprenez,
une autre fois, à mettre de la prudence jusque dans votre métier. Vous
avez failli remarquer, par vous-mêmes, qu'il ne sert de rien de
pratiquer l'inobservance de cette loi.» Les bouchers s'enfuirent.
Mervyn, le coeur serré et plein de pressentiments funestes, rentre chez
soi et s'enferme dans sa chambre. Ai-je besoin d'insister sur cette
strophe? Eh! qui n'en déplorera les événements consommés! Attendons la
fin pour porter un jugement encore plus sévère. Le dénoûment va se
précipiter; et, dans ces sortes de récits, où une passion, de quelque
genre qu'elle soit, étant donnée, celle-ci ne craint aucun obstacle pour
se frayer un passage, il n'y a pas lieu de délayer dans un godet la
gomme laque de quatre cents pages banales. Ce qui peut être dit dans une
demi-douzaine de strophes, il faut le dire, et puis se taire.




VIII


Pour construire mécaniquement la cervelle d'un conte somnifère, il ne
suffit pas de disséquer des bêtises et abrutir puissamment à doses
renouvelées l'intelligence du lecteur, de manière à rendre ses facultés
paralytiques pour le reste de sa vie, par la loi infaillible de la
fatigue; il faut, en outre, avec du bon fluide magnétique, le mettre
ingénieusement dans l'impossibilité somnambulique de se mouvoir, en le
forçant à obscurcir ses yeux contre son naturel par la fixité des
vôtres. Je veux dire, afin de ne pas me faire mieux comprendre, mais
seulement pour développer ma pensée qui intéresse et agace en même temps
par une harmonie des plus pénétrantes, que je ne crois pas qu'il soit
nécessaire, pour arriver au but que l'on se propose, d'inventer une
poésie tout à fait en dehors de la marche ordinaire de la nature, et
dont le souffle pernicieux semble bouleverser même les vérités absolues;
mais, amener un pareil résultat (conforme, du reste, aux règles de
l'esthétique, si l'on y réfléchit bien), cela n'est pas aussi facile
qu'on le pense: voilà ce que je voulais dire. C'est pourquoi je ferai
tous mes efforts pour y parvenir! Si la mort arrête la maigreur
fantastique des deux bras longs de mes épaules, employés à l'écrasement
lugubre de mon gypse littéraire, je veux au moins que le lecteur en
deuil puisse se dire: «Il faut lui rendre justice. Il m'a beaucoup
crétinisé. Que n'aurait-t-il pas fait, s'il eût pu vivre davantage!
c'est le meilleur professeur d'hypnotisme que je connaisse!» On gravera
ces quelques mots touchants sur le marbre de ma tombe, et mes mânes
seront satisfaits!--Je continue! Il y avait une queue de poisson qui
remuait au fond d'un trou, à côté d'une botte éculée. Il n'était pas
naturel de se demander: «Où est le poisson? Je ne vois que la queue qui
remue.» Car, puisque, précisément, on avouait implicitement ne pas
apercevoir le poisson, c'est qu'en réalité il n'y était pas. La pluie
avait laissé quelques gouttes d'eau au fond de cet entonnoir, creusé
dans le sable. Quant à la botte éculée, quelques-uns ont pensé depuis
qu'elle provenait de quelque abandon volontaire. Le crabe tourteau, par
la puissance divine, devait renaître de ses atomes résolus. Il tira du
puits la queue de poisson et lui promit de la rattacher à son corps
perdu, si elle annonçait au Créateur l'impuissance de son mandataire à
dominer les vagues en fureur de mer maldororienne. Il lui prêta deux
ailes d'albatros, et la queue de poisson prit son essor. Mais elle
s'envola vers la demeure du renégat, pour lui raconter ce qui se passait
et trahir le crabe tourteau. Celui-ci devina le projet de l'espion, et,
avant que le troisième jour fût parvenu à sa fin, il perça la queue du
poisson d'une flèche envenimée. Le gosier de l'espion poussa une faible
exclamation, qui rendit le dernier soupir avant de toucher la terre.
Alors, une poutre séculaire, placée sur le comble d'un château, se
releva de toute sa hauteur, en bondissant sur elle-même, et demanda
vengeance à grands cris. Mais le Tout-Puissant, changé en rhinocéros,
lui apprit que cette mort était méritée. La poutre s'apaisa, alla se
placer au fond du manoir, reprit sa position horizontale, et rappela les
araignées effarouchées, afin qu'elles continuassent, comme par le passé,
à tisser leur toile à ses coins. L'homme aux lèvres de soufre apprit la
faiblesse de son alliée; c'est pourquoi, il commanda au fou couronné de
brûler la poutre et de la réduire en cendres. Aghone exécuta cet ordre
sévère. «Puisque, d'après vous, le moment est venu, s'écria-t-il, j'ai
été reprendre l'anneau que j'avais enterré sous la pierre, et je l'ai
attaché à un des bouts du câble. Voici le paquet.» Et il présenta une
corde épaisse, enroulée sur elle-même, de soixante mètres de longueur.
Son maître lui demanda ce que faisaient les quatorze poignards. Il
répondit qu'ils restaient fidèles et se tenaient prêts à tout événement,
si c'était nécessaire. Le forçat inclina sa tête en signe de
satisfaction. Il montra de la surprise, et même de l'inquiétude, quand
Aghone ajouta qu'il avait vu un coq fendre avec son bec un candélabre en
deux, plonger tour à tour le regard dans chacune des parties, et
s'écrier, en battant ses ailes d'un mouvement frénétique: «Il n'y a pas
si loin qu'on le pense depuis la rue de la Paix jusqu'à la place du
Panthéon. Bientôt, on en verra la preuve lamentable!» Le crabe tourteau,
monté sur un cheval fougueux, courait à toute bride vers la direction de
l'écueil, le témoin du lancement du bâton par un bras tatoué, l'asile du
premier jour de sa descente sur la terre. Une caravane de pèlerins était
en marche pour visiter cet endroit, désormais consacré par une mort
auguste. Il espérait l'atteindre, pour lui demander des secours
pressants contre la trame qui se préparait, et dont il avait eu
connaissance. Vous verrez quelques lignes plus loin, à l'aide de mon
silence glacial, qu'il n'arriva pas à temps, pour leur raconter ce que
lui avait rapporté un chiffonnier, caché derrière l'échafaudage voisin
d'une maison en construction, le jour où le pont du Carrousel, encore
empreint de l'humide rosée de la nuit, aperçut avec horreur l'horizon de
sa pensée s'élargir confusément en cercles concentriques, à l'apparition
matinale du rythmyque pétrissage d'un sac icosaèdre, contre son parapet
calcaire! Avant qu'il stimule leur compassion, par le souvenir de cet
épisode, ils feront bien de détruire en eux la semence de l'espoir ...
Pour rompre votre paresse, mettez en usage les ressources d'une bonne
volonté, marchez à côté de moi et ne perdez pas de vue ce fou, la tête
surmontée d'un vase de nuit, qui pousse, devant lui, la main armée d'un
bâton, celui que vous auriez de la peine à reconnaître, si je ne prenais
soin de vous avertir, et de rappeler à votre oreille le mot qui se
prononce Mervyn. Comme il est changé! Les mains liées derrière le dos,
il marche devant lui, comme s'il allait à l'échafaud, et, cependant, il
n'est coupable d'aucun forfait. Ils sont arrivés dans l'enceinte
circulaire de la place Vendôme. Sur l'entablement de la colonne massive,
appuyé contre la balustrade carrée, à plus de cinquante mètres de
hauteur du sol, un homme a lancé et déroulé un câble, qui tombe jusqu'à
terre, à quelques pas d'Aghone. Avec de l'habitude, on fait vite une
chose; mais, je puis dire que celui-ci n'employa pas beaucoup de temps
pour attacher les pieds de Mervyn à l'extrémité de la corde. Le
rhinocéros avait appris ce qui allait arriver. Couvert de sueur, il
apparut haletant, au coin de la rue Castiglione. Il n'eut même pas la
satisfaction d'entreprendre le combat. L'individu, qui examinait les
alentours du haut de la colonne, arma son revolver, visa avec soin et
pressa la détente. Le commodore qui mendiait par les rues depuis le jour
où avait commencé ce qu'il croyait être la folie de son fils et la mère,
qu'on avait appelée _la fille de neige_, à cause de son extrême pâleur,
portèrent en avant leur poitrine pour protéger le rhinocéros. Inutile
soin. La balle troua sa peau, comme une vrille; l'on aurait pu croire,
avec une apparence de logique, que la mort devait infailliblement
apparaître. Mais nous savions que, dans ce pachyderme, s'était
introduite la substance du Seigneur. Il se retira avec chagrin. S'il
n'était pas bien prouvé qu'il ne fût trop bon pour une de ses créatures,
je plaindrais l'homme de la colonne! Celui-ci, d'un coup sec de poignet,
ramène à soi la corde ainsi lestée. Placée hors de la normale, ses
oscillations balancent Mervyn, dont la tête regarde le bas. Il saisit
vivement, avec ses mains, une longue guirlande d'immortelles, qui réunit
deux angles consécutifs de la base, contre laquelle il cogne son front.
Il emporte avec lui, dans les airs, ce qui n'était pas un point fixe.
Après avoir amoncelé à ses pieds, sous forme d'ellipses superposées, une
grande partie du câble, de manière que Mervyn reste suspendu à moitié
hauteur de l'obélisque de bronze, le forçat évadé fait prendre, de la
main droite, à l'adolescent, un mouvement accéléré de rotation uniforme,
dans un plan parallèle de l'axe de la colonne, et ramasse, de la main
gauche, les enroulements serpentins du cordage, qui gisent à ses pieds.
La fronde siffle dans l'espace; le corps de Mervyn la suit partout,
toujours éloigné du centre par la force centrifuge, toujours gardant sa
position mobile et équidistante, dans une circonférence aérienne,
indépendante de la matière. Le sauvage civilisé lâche peu à peu, jusqu'à
l'autre bout, qu'il retient avec un métacarpe ferme, ce qui ressemble à
tort à une barre d'acier. Il se met à courir autour de la balustrade, en
se tenant à la rampe par une main. Cette manoeuvre a pour effet de
changer le plan primitif de la révolution du câble, et d'augmenter sa
force de tension, déjà si considérable. Dorénavant, il tourne
majestueusement dans un plan horizontal, après avoir successivement
passé, par une marche insensible, à travers plusieurs plans obliques.
L'angle droit formé par la colonne et le fil végétal a ses côtés égaux!
Le bras du renégat et l'instrument meurtrier sont confondus dans l'unité
linéaire, comme les éléments atomistiques d'un rayon de lumière
pénétrant dans la chambre noire. Les théorèmes de la mécanique me
permettent de parler ainsi; hélas! on sait qu'une force, ajoutée à une
autre force, engendre une résultante composée des deux forces
primitives! Qui oserait prétendre que le cordage linéaire se serait déjà
rompu, sans la vigueur de l'athlète, sans la bonne qualité du chanvre?
Le corsaire au cheveux d'or, brusquement et en même temps, arrête sa
vitesse acquise, ouvre la main et lâche le câble. Le contre-coup de
cette opération, si contraire aux précédentes, fait craquer la
balustrade dans ses joints. Mervyn, suivi de la corde, ressemble à une
comète traînant après elle sa queue flamboyante. L'anneau de fer du
noeud coulant, miroitant aux rayons du soleil, engage à compléter
soi-même l'illusion. Dans le parcours de sa parabole, le damné à mort
fend l'atmosphère jusqu'à la rive gauche, la dépasse en vertu de la
force d'impulsion que je suppose infinie, et son corps va frapper le
dôme du Panthéon, tandis que la corde étreint, en partie, de ses replis,
la paroi supérieure de l'immense coupole. C'est sur sa superficie
sphérique et convexe, qui ne ressemble à une orange que pour la forme,
qu'on voit à toute heure du jour, un squelette desséché, resté suspendu.
Quand le vent le balance, l'on raconte que les étudiants du quartier
Latin, dans la crainte d'un pareil sort, font une courte prière: ce sont
des bruits insignifiants auxquels on n'est point tenu de croire, et
propres seulement à faire peur aux petits enfants. Il tient entre ses
mains crispées, comme un grand ruban de vieilles fleurs jaunes. Il
faut tenir compte de la distance, et nul ne peut affirmer, malgré
l'attestation de sa bonne vue, que ce soient là, réellement, ces
immortelles dont je vous ai parlé, et qu'une lutte inégale, engagée près
du nouvel Opéra, vit détacher d'un piédestal grandiose. Il n'en est pas
moins vrai que les draperies en forme de croissant de lune n'y reçoivent
plus l'expression de leur symétrie définitive dans le nombre quaternaire:
allez-y voir vous-même, si vous ne voulez pas me croire.


FIN DU SIXIÈME CHANT.








End of Project Gutenberg's Les Chants de Maldoror, by Comte de Lautreamont

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LES CHANTS DE MALDOROR ***

***** This file should be named 12005-8.txt or 12005-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/0/0/12005/

Produced by Anne Dreze and Marc D'Hooghe

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL



The Project Gutenberg EBook of Melmoth the Wanderer Vol 2 (of 4), by 
Charles Robert Maturin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Melmoth the Wanderer Vol 2 (of 4)

Author: Charles Robert Maturin

Release Date: December 7, 2016 [EBook #53686]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELMOTH THE WANDERER VOL 2 (OF 4) ***




Produced by David Edwards, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






    Transcriber’s Notes:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including inconsistencies in spelling, hyphenation, and
    punctuation. Some corrections of spelling and punctuation have been
    made. They are listed at the end of the text.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.

    The motto for Chapter VI is misquoted from Iliad XXIII 72; it has
    been left as printed.




  MELMOTH
  THE
  WANDERER:
  A
  TALE.

  BY THE AUTHOR OF “BERTRAM,” &c.

  IN FOUR VOLUMES.

  VOL. II.

  EDINBURGH:
  PRINTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY,
  AND HURST, ROBINSON, AND CO. CHEAPSIDE,
  LONDON.

  1820.




MELMOTH.




CHAPTER VI.

    Τηλε μἐιργουσι ψυχαι ειδωλα καμοντων.

    HOMER.


When, after some days interval, the Spaniard attempted to describe
his feelings on the receipt of his brother’s letter, the sudden
resuscitation of heart, and hope, and existence, that followed its
perusal, he trembled,--uttered some inarticulate sounds;--wept;--and
his agitation appeared to Melmoth, with _his uncontinental feelings_,
so violent, that he entreated him to spare the description of his
feelings, and proceed with his narrative.

“You are right,” said the Spaniard, drying his tears, “joy is a
convulsion, but grief is a habit, and to describe what we never can
communicate, is as absurd as to talk of colours to the blind. I will
hasten on, not to tell of my feelings, but of the results which they
produced. A new world of hope was opened to me. I thought I saw liberty
on the face of heaven when I walked in the garden. I laughed at the jar
of the doors as they opened, and said to myself, “You shall soon expand
to me for ever.” I behaved with uncommon complacency to the community.
But I did not, amid all this, neglect the most scrupulous precautions
suggested by my brother. Am I confessing the strength or the weakness of
my heart? In the midst of all the systematic dissimulation that I was
prepared and eager to carry on, the only circumstance that gave me real
compunction, was my being obliged to destroy the letters of that dear
and generous youth who had risked every thing for my emancipation. In
the mean time, I pursued my preparations with industry inconceivable to
you, who have never been in a convent.

“Lent was now begun,--all the community were preparing themselves for
the great confession. They shut themselves up,--they prostrated
themselves before the shrines of the saints,--they occupied themselves
whole hours in taking minutes of their consciences, and magnifying the
trivial defects of conventual discipline into offences in the eye of
God, in order to give consequence to their penitence in the hearing of
the confessor,--in fact, they would have been glad to accuse themselves
of a crime, to escape from the monotony of a monastic conscience. There
was a kind of silent bustle in the house, that very much favoured my
purposes. Hour after hour I demanded paper for my confession. I obtained
it, but my frequent demands excited suspicion,--they little knew what I
was writing. Some said, for every thing excites inquiry in a convent,
“He is writing the history of his family; he will discharge it into the
ears of the confessor, along with the secrets of his own soul.” Others
said, “He has been in a state of _alienation_ for some time, he is
giving an account to God for it,--we shall never hear a word about it.”
Others, who were more judicious, said, “He is weary of the monastic
life, he is writing an account of his monotony and ennui, doubtless that
must be very long;” and the speakers yawned as they uttered these words,
which gave a very strong attestation to what they said. The Superior
watched me in silence. He was alarmed, and with reason. He consulted
with some of the _discreet_ brethren, whom I mentioned before, and the
result was a restless vigilance on their part, to which I supplied an
incessant fuel, by my absurd and perpetual demand for paper. Here, I
acknowledge, I committed a great oversight. It was impossible for the
most exaggerated conscience to charge itself, even in a convent, with
crimes enough to fill all the paper I required. I was filling them all
the time with _their_ crimes, not my own. Another great mistake I made,
was being wholly unprepared for the great confession when it came on. I
received intimations of this as we walked in the garden,--I have before
mentioned that I had assumed an amicability of habit toward them. They
would say to me, “You have made ample preparations for the great
confession.” “I have prepared myself.” “But we expect great edification
from its results.” “I trust you will receive it.”--I said no more, but I
was very much disturbed at these hints. Others would say, “My brother,
amid the multitudinous offences that burden your conscience, and which
you have found necessary to employ quires of paper to record, would it
not be a relief to you to open your mind to the Superior, and ask for a
few previous moments of consolation and direction from _him_.” To this I
answered, “I thank you, and will consider of it.”--I was thinking all
the time of something else.

“It was a few nights before the time of the great confession, that I had
to entrust the last packet of my memorial to the porter. Our meetings
had been hitherto unsuspected. I had received and answered my brother’s
communications, and our correspondence had been conducted with a secrecy
unexampled in convents. But this last night, as I put my packet into the
porter’s hand, I saw a change in his appearance that terrified me. He
had been a comely, robust man, but now, even by the moon-light, I could
perceive he was wasted to a shadow,--his hands trembled as he took the
papers from me,--his voice faultered as he promised his usual secrecy.
The change, which had been observed by the whole convent, had escaped me
till that night; my mind had been too much occupied by my own situation.
I noticed it then, however, and I said, “But what is the matter?” “Can
you then ask? I am withered to a spectre by the terrors of the office I
have been bribed to. Do you know what I risk?--incarceration for life,
or rather for death,--perhaps a denunciation to the Inquisition. Every
line I deliver from you, or to you, seems a charge against my own
soul,--I tremble when I meet you. I know that you have the sources of
life and death, temporal and eternal, in your hands. The secret in which
I am an agent should never be intrusted but to _one_, and _you are
another_. As I sit in my place, I think every step in the cloister is
advancing to summon me to the presence of the Superior. When I attend in
the choir, amid the sounds of devotion your voice swells to accuse me.
When I lie down at night, the evil spirit is beside my bed, reproaching
me with perjury, and reclaiming his prey;--his emissaries surround me
wherever I move,--I am beset by the tortures of hell. The saints from
their shrines frown on me,--I see the painting of the traitor Judas on
every side I turn to. When I sleep for a moment, I am awakened by my own
cries. I exclaim, “Do not betray me, he has not yet violated his vows, I
was but an agent,--I was bribed,--do not kindle those fires for me.” I
shudder,--I start up in a cold sweat. My rest, my appetite, are gone.
Would to God you were out of this convent;--and O! would that I had
never been instrumental to your release, then both of us might have
escaped damnation to all eternity.” I tried to pacify him, to assure him
of his safety, but nothing could satisfy him but my solemn and sincere
assurance that this was the last packet I would ever ask him to deliver.
He departed tranquillized by this assurance; and I felt the dangers of
my attempt multiplying around me every hour.

“This man was faithful, but he was timid; and what confidence can we
have in a being whose right hand is held out to you, while his left
trembles to be employed in transferring your secret to your enemy. This
man died a few weeks after. I believe I owed his dying fidelity to the
delirium that seized on his last moments. But what I suffered during
those moments!--his death under such circumstances, and the unchristian
joy I felt at it, were only in my mind stronger evidences against the
unnatural state of life that could render such an event, and such
feelings, almost necessary. It was on the evening after this, that I was
surprised to see the Superior, with four of the monks, enter my cell. I
felt this visit boded me no good. I trembled all over, while I received
them with deference. The Superior seated himself opposite to me,
arranging his seat so as that I was opposite the light. I did not
understand what this precaution meant, but I conceive now, that he
wished to watch every change in my countenance, while his was concealed
from me. The four monks stood at the back of his chair; their arms were
folded, their lips closed, their eyes half shut, their heads
declined--they looked like men assembled reluctantly to witness the
execution of a criminal. The Superior began, in a mild voice, “My son,
you have been intently employed on your confession for some time--that
was laudable. But have you, then, accused yourself of every crime your
conscience charges you with?” “I have, my father.” “Of all, you are
sure?” “My father, I have accused myself of all I was conscious of. Who
but God can penetrate the abysses of the heart? I have searched mine as
far as I could.” “And you have recorded all the accusations you found
there?” “I have.” “And you did not discover among them the crime of
obtaining the means of writing out your confession, to abuse them to a
very different purpose?”--This was coming to the point. I felt it
necessary to summon my resolution--and I said, with a venial
equivocation, “That is a crime of which my conscience _does not accuse
me_.” “My son, do not dissemble with your conscience, or with me. I
should be even above it in your estimation; for if it errs and deceives
you, it is to me you should apply to enlighten and direct it. But I see
it is in vain to attempt to touch your heart. I make my last appeal to
it in these plain words. A few moments only of indulgence await you--use
them or abuse them, as you will. I have to ask you a few plain
questions, which, if you refuse to answer, or do not answer truly, your
blood be on your own head.” I trembled, but I said, “My father, have I
then refused to answer your questions?” “Your answers are all either
interrogations or evasions. They must be direct and simple to the
questions I am about to propose in the presence of these brethren. More
depends on your answer than you are aware of. The warning voice breaks
forth in spite of me.”--Terrified at these words, and humbled to the
wish to propitiate them, I rose from my chair--then gasping, I leant on
it for support. I said, “My God! what is all this terrible preparation
for? Of what am I guilty? Why am I summoned by this warning voice so
often, whose warnings are only so many mysterious threatenings? Why am I
not told of my offence?”

“The four monks, who had never spoken or lifted up their heads till
that moment, now directed their livid eyes at me, and repeated,
all together, in a voice that seemed to issue from the bottom of
a sepulchre, “Your crime is--” The Superior gave them a signal to
be silent, and this interruption increased my consternation. It is
certain, that when we are conscious of guilt, we always suspect
that a greater degree of it will be ascribed to us by others. Their
consciences avenge the palliations of our own, by the most horrible
exaggerations. I did not know of what crime they might be disposed
to accuse me; and already I felt the accusation of my clandestine
correspondence as dust in the balance of their resentment. I had heard
the crimes of convents were sometimes unutterably atrocious; and I
felt as anxious now for a distinct charge to be preferred against me,
as I had a few moments before to evade it. These indefinite fears were
soon exchanged for real ones, as the Superior proposed his questions.
“You have procured a large quantity of paper--how did you employ it?”
I recovered myself, and said, “As I ought to do.” “How, in unburdening
your conscience?” “Yes, in unburdening my conscience.” “That is false;
the greatest sinner on earth could not have blotted so many pages with
the record of his crimes.” “I have often been told in the convent, I
_was_ the greatest sinner on earth.” “You equivocate again, and convert
your ambiguities into reproaches--this will not do--you must answer
plainly: For what purpose did you procure so much paper, and how have
you employed it?” “I have told you already.” “It was, then, employed
in your confession?”--I was silent, but bowed assentingly.--“You
can, then, shew us the proofs of your application to your duties.
Where is the manuscript that contains your confession?” I blushed and
hesitated, as I showed about half-a-dozen blotted and scrawled pages as
my confession. It was ridiculous. It did not occupy more than a tenth
part of the paper which I had received. “And this is your confession?”
“It is.” “And you dare to say that you have employed all the paper
entrusted to you for that purpose.”--I was silent. “Wretch!” said the
Superior, losing all patience, “disclose instantly for what purpose
you have employed the paper granted you. Acknowledge instantly that
it was for some purpose contrary to the interests of this house.”--At
these words I was roused. I saw again the cloven foot of interest
peeping from beneath the monastic garb. I answered, “Why am I suspected
if _you_ are not guilty? What could I accuse you of? What could I
complain of if there were no cause? Your own consciences must answer
this question for me.” At these words, the monks were again about to
interpose, when the Superior, silencing them by a signal, went on with
his matter-of-fact questions, that paralyzed all the energy of passion.
“You will not tell me what you have done with the paper committed
to you?”--I was silent.--“I enjoin you, by your holy obedience, to
disclose it this moment.”--His voice rose in passion as he spoke, and
this operated as a signal on mine. I said, “You have no right, my
father, to demand such a declaration.” “Right is not the question now.
I command you to tell me. I require your oath on the altar of Jesus
Christ, and by the image of his blessed Mother.” “You have no right to
demand such an oath. I know the rules of the house--I am responsible
to the confessor.” “Do you, then, make a question between right and
power? You shall soon feel, within these walls, they are the same.” “I
make no question--perhaps they are the same.” “And you will not tell
what you have done with those papers, blotted, doubtless, with the most
infernal calumnies?” “I will not.” “And you will take the consequences
of your obstinacy on your own head?” “I will.” And the four monks
chorussed again, all in the same unnatural tone, “The consequences be
on his own head.” But while they spoke thus, two of them whispered in
my ears, “Deliver up your papers, and all is well. The whole convent
knows you have been writing.” I answered, “I have nothing to give
up--nothing on the faith of a monk. I have not a single page in my
possession, but what you have seized on.” The monks, who had whispered
in a conciliatory tone to me before, quitted me. They conversed in
whispers with the Superior, who, darting on me a terrible look,
exclaimed, “And you will not give up your papers?” “I have nothing to
give up: Search my person--search my cell--every thing is open to you.”
“Every thing shall be soon,” said the Superior in fury. In a moment
the examination commenced. There was not an article of furniture in
my cell that was not the object of their investigation. My chair and
table were overturned, shaken, and finally broken, in the attempt to
discover whether any papers had been secreted in them. The prints were
snatched from the walls,--held up between them and the light.--Then
the very frames were broken, to try if any thing was concealed in
them. Then they examined my bed;--they threw all the furniture about
the floor, they unripped the mattress, and tore out the straw; one of
them, during this operation, actually applied his teeth to facilitate
it,--and this malice of activity formed a singular contrast to the
motionless and rigid torpor with which they had clothed themselves
but a few moments before. All this time, I stood in the centre of the
floor, as I was ordered, without turning to right or left. Nothing was
found to justify their suspicions. They then surrounded me; and the
examination of my person was equally rapid, minute, and indecorous.
Every thing I wore was on the floor in a moment: The very seams of my
habit were ript open; and, during the examination, I covered myself
with one of the blankets they had taken from my bed. When it was over,
I said, “Have you discovered any thing?” The Superior answered, in a
voice of rage, struggling proudly, but vainly, with disappointment, “I
have other means of discovery--prepare for them, and tremble when they
are resorted to.” At these words he rushed from my cell, giving a sign
to the four monks to follow him. I was left alone. I had no longer any
doubt of my danger. I saw myself exposed to the fury of men who would
risk nothing to appease it. I watched, waited, trembled, at every step
I heard in the gallery--at the sound of every door that opened or shut
near me. Hours went on in this agony of suspense, and terminated at
last without an event. No one came near me that night--the next was to
be that of the great confession. In the course of the day, I took my
place in the choir, trembling, and watching every eye. I felt as if
every countenance was turned on me, and every tongue said in silence,
“Thou art the man.” Often I wished that the storm I felt was gathering
around me, would burst at once. It is better to hear the thunder than
to watch the cloud. It did not burst, however, then. And when the
duties of the day were over, I retired to my cell, and remained there,
pensive, anxious, and irresolute.

“The confession had begun; and as I heard the penitents, one by one,
return from the church, and close the doors of their cells, I began
to dread that I was to be excluded from approaching the holy chair,
and that this exclusion from a sacred and indispensible right, was to
be the commencement of some mysterious course of rigour. I waited,
however, and was at last summoned. This restored my courage, and I went
through my duties more tranquilly. After I had made my confession, only
a few simple questions were proposed to me, as, Whether I could accuse
myself of any _inward_ breach of conventual duty? of any thing I had
_reserved_? any thing in my conscience? &c.--and on my answering them
in the negative, was suffered to depart. It was on that very night the
porter died. My last packet had gone some days before,--all was safe
and well. Neither voice or line could bear witness against me now, and
hope began to revisit me, as I reflected that my brother’s zealous
industry would discover some other means for our future communication.

“All was profound calm for a few days, but the storm was to come soon
enough. On the fourth evening after the confession, I was sitting alone
in my cell, when I heard an unusual bustle in the convent. The bell was
rung,--the new porter seemed in great agitation,--the Superior hurried
to the parlour first, then to his cell,--then some of the elder monks
were summoned. The younger whispered in the galleries,--shut their
doors violently,--all seemed in agitation. In a domestic building,
occupied by the smallest family, such circumstances would hardly be
noticed, but, in a convent, the miserable monotony of what may be
called their internal existence, gives an importance,--an interest, to
the most trivial external circumstance in common life. I felt all this.
I said to myself, “Something is going on.”--I added, “Something is
going on against me.” I was right in both my conjectures. Late in the
evening I was ordered to attend the Superior in his own apartment,--I
said I was ready to go. Two minutes after the order was reversed, and
I was desired to remain in my cell, and await the approach of the
Superior,--I answered I was willing to obey. But this sudden change of
orders filled me with an _indefinite_ fear; and in all the changes of
my life, and vicissitude of my feelings, I have never felt any fear
so horrible. I walked up and down, I repeated incessantly, “My God
protect me! my God strengthen me!” Then I dreaded to ask the protection
of God, doubting whether the cause in which I was engaged merited
his protection. My ideas, however, were all scattered by the sudden
entrance of the Superior and the four monks who had attended him on
the visit previous to the confession. At their entrance I rose,--no
one desired me to sit down. The Superior advanced with a look of fury,
and, dashing some papers on my table, said, “Is that your writing?” I
threw a hurried and terrified eye over the papers,--_they were a copy
of my memorial_. I had presence of mind enough to say, “That is not my
writing.” “Wretch! you equivocate, it is a copy of your writing.”--I
was silent.--“Here is a proof of it,” he added, throwing down another
paper. It was a copy of the memoir of the advocate, addressed to me,
and which, by the influence of a superior court, they had not the power
of withholding from me. I was expiring with anxiety to examine it, but
I did not dare to glance at it. The Superior unfolded page after page.
He said, “Read, wretch! read,--look into it, examine it line by line.”
I approached trembling,--I glanced at it,--in the very first lines I
read _hope_. My courage revived.--I said, “My father, I acknowledge
this to be the copy of my memorial. I demand your permission to read
the answer of the advocate, you cannot refuse me this right.” “Read
it,” said the Superior, and he flung it towards me.

“You may readily believe, Sir, that, under such circumstances, I could
not read with very steady eyes; and my penetration was not at all
quickened by the four monks disappearing from the cell, at a signal I
did not see. The Superior and I were now alone. He walked up and down my
cell, while I appeared to hang over the advocate’s memoir. Suddenly he
stopped;--he struck his hand with violence on the table,--the pages I
was trembling over quivered from the violence of the blow,--I started
from my chair. “Wretch,” said the Superior, “when have such papers as
those profaned the convent before? When, till your unhallowed entrance,
were we insulted with the memoirs of legal advocates? How comes it that
you have dared to----” “Do what, my father?” “Reclaim your vows, and
expose _us_ to all the scandal of a civil court and its proceedings.” “I
weighed it all against my own misery.” “Misery! is it thus you speak of
a conventual life, the only life that can promise tranquillity here, or
ensure salvation hereafter.” These words, uttered by a man convulsed by
the most frantic passion, were their own refutation. My courage rose in
proportion to his fury; and besides, I was driven to a point, and forced
to act on my defence. The sight of the papers added to my confidence. I
said, “My father, it is in vain to endeavour to diminish my repugnance
to the monastic life; the proof that that repugnance is invincible lies
before you. If I have been guilty of a step that violates the decorum of
a convent, I am sorry,--but I am not reprehensible. Those who forced me
into a convent, are guilty of the violence which is falsely ascribed to
me. I am determined, if it be possible, to change my situation. You see
the efforts I have already made, be assured they will never cease.
Disappointment will only redouble their energy; and if it be in the
power of heaven or earth to procure the annulment of my vows, there is
no power in either I will not have recourse to.” I expected he would not
have heard me out, but he did. He even listened with calmness, and I
prepared myself to encounter and repel that alternation of reproach and
remonstrance, of solicitation and menace, which they so well know how to
employ in a convent. “Your repugnance to a conventual life is then
invincible?” “It is.” “But to what do you object?--not to your duties,
for you perform them with the most edifying punctuality,--not to the
treatment you receive, for it has been the most indulgent that our
discipline admits of,--not to the community itself, who are all disposed
to cherish and love you;--of what do you complain?” “Of the life
itself,--that comprehends every thing. I am not fit to be a monk.”
“Remember, I implore you, that though the forms of earthly courts must
be obeyed, from the necessity that makes us dependent on human
institutions, in all matters between man and man, they never can be
available in matters between God and man. Be assured, my deluded child,
that if all the courts on earth pronounced you absolved from your vows
this moment, your own conscience never can absolve you. All your
ignominious life, it will continue to reproach you with the violation of
a vow, whose breach man has connived at, but God has not. And, at your
last hour, how horrible will those reproaches be!” “Not so horrible as
at the hour I took that vow, or rather at the hour when it was
extorted.” “Extorted!” “Yes, my father, yes,--I take Heaven to witness
against you. On that disastrous morning, your anger, your remonstrances,
your pleadings, were as ineffectual as they are now, till you flung the
body of my mother before my feet.” “And do you reproach me with my zeal
in the cause of your salvation?” “I do not wish to reproach you. You
know the step I have taken, you must be aware I will pursue it with all
the powers of nature,--that I will never rest till my vows are annulled,
while a hope of it remains,--and that a soul, determined as mine, can
convert despair itself into hope. Surrounded, suspected, watched as I
have been, I yet found the means of conveying my papers to the hands of
the advocate. Calculate the strength of that resolution which could
effectuate such a measure in the very heart of a convent. Judge of the
futility of all future opposition, when you failed in defeating, or even
detecting, the first steps of my design.” At these words the Superior
was silent. I believed I had made an impression on him. I added, “If you
wish to spare the community the disgrace of my prosecuting my appeal
within its walls, the alternative is easy. Let the door be left
unguarded some day, connive at my escape, and my presence shall never
molest or dishonour you another hour.” “How! would you make me not only
a witness, but an accomplice in your crime? Apostate from God, and
plunged in perdition as you are, do you repay the hand stretched out to
save you, by seizing it, that you may drag me into the infernal gulph
along with you?” and he walked up and down the cell in the most violent
agitation. This unlucky proposal operated on his master-passion, (for he
was exemplarily rigid in discipline), and produced only convulsions of
hostility. I stood waiting till this fresh burst had subsided, while he
continued to exclaim incessantly, “My God, for what offence am I thus
humiliated?--for what inconceivable crime is this disgrace precipitated
on the whole convent? What will become of our character? What will all
Madrid say?” “My father, whether an obscure monk lives, dies, or recalls
his vows, is an object of little importance beyond the walls of his
convent. They will forget me soon, and you will be consoled by the
restored harmony of the discipline, in which I should always be a
jarring note. Besides, all Madrid, with all the interest you ascribe to
it, could never be made responsible for my salvation.” He continued to
walk up and down, repeating, “What will the world say? What will become
of us?” till he had worked himself into a state of fury; and, suddenly
turning on me, he exclaimed, “Wretch! renounce your horrible
resolution,--renounce it this moment! I give you but five minutes for
consideration.” “Five thousand would make no change.” “Tremble, then,
lest you should not have life spared to see the fulfilment of your
impious purposes.”

“As he uttered these words he rushed from my cell. The moments I passed
during his absence were, I think, the most horrible of my life. Their
terror was aggravated by darkness, for it was now night, and he had
carried away the light along with him. My agitation did not at first
permit me to observe this. I felt I was in the dark, but knew not how or
why. A thousand images of indescribable horror rushed in a host on me. I
had heard much of the terrors of convents,--of their punishments, often
carried to the infliction of death, or of reducing their victim to a
state in which death would have been a blessing. Dungeons, chains, and
scourges, swam before my eyes in a fiery mist. The threatening words of
the Superior appeared emblazoned on the darkened walls of my cell in
characters of flame. I shuddered,--I cried aloud, though conscious that
my voice would be echoed by no friendly answering tones in a community
of sixty persons,--such is the sterility of humanity in a convent. At
last my very fears recovered me by their excess. I said to myself, “They
dare not murder me,--they dare not incarcerate me;--they are answerable
to the court to which I have appealed for my forthcoming,--they dare not
be guilty of any violence.” Just as I had come to this comfortable
conclusion, which indeed was the triumph of the sophistry of hope, the
door of my cell was thrown open, and the Superior, attended by his four
satellites, re-entered. My eyes were dim from the darkness in which I
had been left, but I could distinguish that they carried with them a
rope and a piece of sackcloth. I drew the most frightful presages from
this apparatus. I altered my reasoning in a moment, and instead of
saying they dare not do so and so, I instantly argued, “What dare they
not do? I am in their power,--they know it. I have provoked them to the
utmost,--what is it monks will not do in the impotence of their
malignity?--what is to become of me?” They advanced, and I imagined the
rope was to strangle me, and the sackcloth to inclose my murdered body.
A thousand images of blood swam before me,--a gush of fire choaked up my
respiration. The groans of a thousand victims seemed to rise from the
vaults of the convent, to which they had been hurried by a fate like
mine. I know not what is death, but I am convinced I suffered the
agonies of many deaths in that moment. My first impulse was to throw
myself on my knees. I said, “I am in your power,--I am guilty in your
eyes,--accomplish your purpose, but do not keep me long in pain.” The
Superior, without heeding, or perhaps hearing me, said, “Now you are in
the posture that becomes you.” At hearing these words, which sounded
less dreadful than I had feared, I prostrated myself to the ground. A
few moments before I would have thought this a degradation, but fear is
very debasing. I had a dread of violent means,--I was very young, and
life was not the less attractive from its being arrayed only in the
brilliant drapery of imagination. The monks observed my posture,--they
feared its effect on the Superior. They said, in that choral
monotony,--that _discordant unison_ that had frozen my blood when I
knelt in the same posture but a few nights before, “Reverend father, do
not suffer yourself to be imposed on by this prostituted
humiliation,--the time for mercy is past. You gave him his moments of
deliberation,--he refused to avail himself of them. You come now not to
listen to pleadings, but to inflict justice.” At these words, that
announced every thing horrible, I went on my knees from one to the
other, as they all stood in a grim and executioner-like row. I said to
each with tears, “Brother Clement,--Brother Justin,--why do you try to
irritate the Superior against me? Why do you precipitate a sentence
which, whether just or not, must be severe, since you are to be the
executioners? What have I done to offend you? I interceded for you when
you were guilty of any slight deviation--Is this my return?” “This is
wasting time,” said the monks. “Hold,” said the Superior; “give him
leave to speak. Will you avail yourself of the last moment of indulgence
I can ever afford you, to renounce your horrible resolution of recalling
your vows?” Those words renewed all my energies. I stood upright before
them all. I said, in a loud distinct voice, “Never--I stand at the bar
of God.” “Wretch! you have renounced God.” “Well, then, my father, I
have only to hope that God will not renounce me. I have appealed to a
bar also, over which you have no power.” “But we have power here, and
that you shall feel.” He made a signal, and the four monks approached. I
uttered one short cry of fear, but submitted the next moment. I felt
convinced it was to be my last. I was astonished, when, instead of
fastening the cords round my neck, they bound my arms with them. They
then took off my habit, and covered me with the sackcloth. I made no
resistance; but shall I confess to you, Sir, I felt some disappointment.
I was prepared for death, but something worse than death appeared
threatened in these preparations. When we are driven to the precipice of
mortality, we spring forward with resolution, and often defeat the
triumph of our murderers, by merging it in our own. But when we are led
to it step by step, held often over it, and then withdrawn, we lose our
resolution along with our patience; and feel, that the last blow would
be mercy, compared with its long-suspended, slowly descending, wavering,
mutilating, hesitating stroke. I was prepared for every thing but what
followed. Bound with this rope as fast as a felon, or a galley-slave,
and covered only with the sackcloth, they dragged me along the gallery.
I uttered no cry, made no resistance. They descended the stairs that led
to the church. I followed, or rather was dragged after them. They
crossed the aisle; there was a dark passage near it which I had never
observed before. We entered it. A low door at the end presented a
frightful perspective. At sight of it I cried aloud, “You will not
immure me? You will not plunge me in that horrible dungeon, to be
withered by damps, and devoured by reptiles? No, you will not,--remember
you are answerable for my life.” At these words, they surrounded me;
then, for the first time, I struggled,--I called for help;--this was the
moment they waited for; they wanted some repugnance on my part. The
signal was instantly given to a lay-brother, who waited in the
passage,--the bell was rung,--that terrible bell, that requires every
member of a convent to plunge into his cell, as something extraordinary
is going on in the house. At the first toll I lost all hope. I felt as
if not a living being was in existence but those who surrounded me, and
who appeared, in the livid light of one taper burning faintly in that
dismal passage, like spectres hurrying a condemned soul to his doom.
They hurried me down the steps to this door, which was considerably
below the level of the passage. It was a long time before they could
open it; many keys were tried; perhaps they might have felt some
agitation at the thoughts of the violence they were going to commit. But
this delay increased my terrors beyond expression; I imagined this
terrible vault had never been inclosed before; that I was to be the
first victim inhumed within it; and that their determination was, I
should never quit it alive. As these thoughts occurred, in unutterable
agony I cried aloud, though I felt I was beyond all human hearing; but
my cries were drowned in the jarring of the heavy door, as it yielded to
the efforts of the monks, who, uniting their strength, pushed it with
extended arms, grating all the way against the floor of stone. The monks
hurried me in, while the Superior stood at the entrance with the light,
appearing to shudder at the view it disclosed. I had time to view all
the furniture of what I thought my last abode. It was of stone; the roof
formed an arch; a block of stone supported a crucifix, and a death’s
head, with a loaf and a pitcher of water. There was a mat on the floor,
to lie on; another rolled up at the end of it formed a pillow. They
flung me on it, and prepared to depart. I no longer struggled, for I
knew escape was in vain, but I supplicated them at least to leave me a
light; and I petitioned for this with as much earnestness as I could
have done for my liberty. Thus it is that misery always breaks down the
mind into petty details. We have not strength to comprehend the whole of
our calamity. We feel not the mountain which is heaped on us, but the
nearest grains press on and grind us. I said, “In Christian mercy leave
me a light, if it be but to defend myself against the reptiles that must
swarm here.” And already I saw this was true, for some of extraordinary
size, disturbed by the phænomenon of the light, came crawling down the
walls. All this time the monks were straining their strength to close
the heavy door; they did not utter a word. “I adjure you to leave me
light, _if it is but to gaze on that skull_; fear not the exercise of
sight can be any indulgence in this place; but still let me have a
light; think that when I wish to pray, I must _feel my way_ to that
crucifix.” As I spoke, the door was with difficulty closed and locked,
and I heard their departing steps. You will hardly believe, Sir, that I
slept profoundly; yet I did; but I would rather never sleep again, than
awake so horribly. I awoke in _the darkness of day_. I was to behold the
light no more; nor to watch those divisions of time, which, by measuring
our portions of suffering, appear to diminish them. When the clock
strikes, we know an hour of wretchedness is past, never to return. My
only time-keeper was the approach of the monk, who every day renewed my
allowance of bread and water; and had he been the object I loved most on
earth, the sound of his steps could not have made more delicious music.
These æras by which we compute the hours of darkness and inanity are
inconceivable to any but those who are situated as I was. You have
heard, Sir, no doubt, that the eye which, on its being first immersed
into darkness, appears deprived of the power of vision for ever,
acquires, imperceptibly, a power of accommodating itself to its darkened
sphere, and even of distinguishing objects by a kind of conventional
light. The mind certainly possesses the same power, otherwise, how could
I have had the power to reflect, to summon some resolution, and even to
indulge some hope, in this frightful abode? Thus it is, when all the
world seems sworn to hostility against us, we turn friends to ourselves
with all the obstinacy of despair;--and _while all the world is
flattering and deifying us, we are the perpetual victims of lassitude
and self-reproach_.

“The prisoner whose hours are visited by a dream of emancipation, is
less a prey to ennui than the sovereign on a throne, begirt with
adulation, voluptuousness, and satiety. I reflected that all my papers
were safe,--that my cause was prosecuting with vigour,--that, owing to
my brother’s zeal, I had the ablest advocate in Madrid,--that they dared
not murder me, and were answerable with the whole credit of the house
for my re-appearance whenever the courts demanded it,--that the very
rank of my family was a powerful protection, though none of them but my
generous fiery Juan was probably favourable to me;--that if I was
permitted to receive and read the advocate’s first memoir, even through
the hands of the Superior, it was absurd to imagine that I could be
denied intercourse with him in a more advanced and important stage of
the business. These were the suggestions of my hope, and they were
plausible enough. What were the suggestions of my despair, I shudder
even at this moment to reflect on. The most terrible of all was, that I
might be murdered _conventually_ before it was possible that my
liberation could be accomplished.

“Such, Sir, were my reflections; you may ask, what were my occupations?
My situation supplied me with those, and, revolting as they were, they
were still occupations. I had my devotions to perform; religion was my
only resource in solitude and darkness, and while I prayed only for
liberty and peace, I felt I was not at least insulting God by the
prayers of hypocrisy, which I would have been compelled to utter in the
choir. There I was obliged to join in a sacrifice that was odious to me,
and offensive to him;--in my dungeon I offered up the sacrifice of my
heart, and felt it was not unacceptable. During the glimpse of light
afforded me by the approach of the monk who brought me bread and water,
I arranged the crucifix so as that I could feel it when I awoke. This
was very often, and not knowing whether it was day or night, I uttered
my prayers at random. I knew not whether it was matins or vespers; there
was neither morning or evening for me, but it was like a talisman to me
to touch the crucifix, and I said as I felt for it, “My God is with me
in the darkness of my dungeon; he is a God who has suffered, and can
pity me. My extremest point of wretchedness can be nothing to what this
symbol of divine humiliation for the sins of man, has undergone for
mine!”--and I kissed the sacred image (with lips wandering from the
darkness) with more emotion than I had ever felt when I saw it
illuminated by the blaze of tapers, amid the elevation of the Host, the
tossing of the perfumed censers, the gorgeous habits of the priests, and
the breathless prostration of the faithful. I had other occupations less
dignified, but quite as necessary. The reptiles, who filled the hole
into which I had been thrust, gave me opportunity for a kind of
constant, miserable, ridiculous hostility. My mat had been placed in the
very seat of warfare;--I shifted it,--still they pursued me;--I placed
it against the wall,--the cold crawling of their bloated limbs often
awoke me from my sleep, and still oftener made me shudder when awake. I
struck at them;--I tried to terrify them by my voice, to arm myself
against them by the help of my mat; but above all, my anxiety was
ceaseless to defend my bread from their loathsome incursions, and my
pitcher of water from their dropping into it. I adopted a thousand
precautions, trivial as they were inefficacious, but still there was
occupation. I do assure you, Sir, I _had more to do in my dungeon than
in my cell_. To be fighting with reptiles in the dark appears the most
horrible struggle that can be assigned to man; but what is it compared
to his combat with those reptiles which his own heart hourly engenders
in a cell, and of which, if his heart be the mother, solitude is the
father. I had another employment,--I cannot call it occupation. I had
calculated with myself, that sixty minutes made an hour, and sixty
seconds a minute. I began to think I could keep time as accurately as
any clock in a convent, and measure the hours of my confinement or--my
release. So I sat and counted sixty; a doubt always occurred to me, that
I _was counting them faster than the clock_. Then I wished to be the
clock, that I might have no feeling, no _motive for hurrying on the
approach of time_. Then I reckoned slower. Sleep sometimes overtook me
in this exercise, (perhaps I adopted it from that hope); but when I
awoke, I applied to it again instantly. Thus I oscillated, reckoned, and
measured time on my mat, while time withheld its delicious diary of
rising and setting suns,--of the dews of dawn and of twilight,--of the
glow of morning and the shades of the evening. When my reckoning was
broken by my sleep, (and I knew not whether I slept by day or by night),
I tried to eke it out by my incessant repetition of minutes and seconds,
and I succeeded; for I always consoled myself, that whatever hour it
was, sixty minutes must go to an hour. Had I led this life much longer,
I might have been converted into the idiot, who, as I have read, from
the habit of watching a clock, imitated its mechanism so well, that when
it was down, he sounded the hour as faithfully as ear could desire. Such
was my life. On the fourth day, (as I reckoned by the visits of the
monk), he placed my bread and water on the block of stone as usual, but
hesitated for some time before he departed. In fact, he felt a
repugnance at delivering an intimation of hope; it was not consonant
either to his profession, or the office which, in the wantonness of
monastic malignity, he had accepted as penance. You shudder at this,
Sir, but it is nevertheless true; this man thought he was doing service
to God, by witnessing the misery of a being incarcerated amid famine,
darkness, and reptiles. He recoiled when his penance terminated. Alas!
how false is that religion which makes our aggravating the sufferings of
others our mediator with that God who willeth all men to be saved. But
this is a question to be solved in convents. This man hesitated long,
struggled with the ferocity of his nature, and at last departed and
bolted the door, that he might indulge it a few moments longer. Perhaps
in those moments he prayed to God, and ejaculated a petition, that this
protraction of _my_ sufferings might be accepted as a melioration of his
own. I dare say he was very sincere; but if men were taught to look to
the _one great Sacrifice_, would they be so ready to believe that their
own, or those of others, could ever be accepted as a commutation for it?
You are surprised, Sir, at these sentiments from a Catholic; but another
part of my story will disclose the cause of my uttering them. At length
this man could delay his commission no longer. He was obliged to tell me
that the Superior was moved by my sufferings, that God had touched his
heart in my behalf, and that he permitted me to quit my dungeon. The
words were scarce out of his mouth, before I rose, and rushed out with a
shout that electrified him. Emotion is very unusual in convents, and the
expression of joy a phenomenon. I had gained the passage before he
recovered his surprise; and the convent walls, which I had considered as
those of a prison, now appeared the area of emancipation. Had its doors
been thrown open to me that moment, I don’t think I could have felt a
more exquisite sensibility of liberty. I fell on my knees in the passage
to thank God. I thanked him for the light, for the air, for the restored
power of respiration. As I was uttering these effusions, (certainly not
the least sincere that were ever poured forth within those walls),
suddenly I became sick,--my head swam round,--I had feasted on the light
to excess. I fell to the ground, and remember nothing for many hours
afterwards. When I recovered my senses, I was in my cell, which appeared
just as I had left it; it was day-light, however; and I am persuaded
that circumstance contributed more to my restoration, than the food and
cordials with which I was now liberally supplied. All that day I heard
nothing, and had time to meditate on the motives of the indulgence with
which I had been treated. I conceived that an order might have been
issued to the Superior to produce me, or, at all events, that he could
not prevent those interviews between the advocate and me, which the
former might insist on as necessary while my cause was carrying on.
Towards evening some monks entered my cell; they talked of indifferent
matters,--affected to consider my absence as the result of
indisposition, and I did not undeceive them. They mentioned, as if
incidentally, that my father and mother, overwhelmed with grief at the
scandal I had brought on religion by appealing against my vows, had
quitted Madrid. At this intelligence I felt much more emotion than I
showed. I asked them how long I had been _ill_? They answered, Four
days. This confirmed my suspicions with regard to the cause of my
liberation, for the advocate’s letter had mentioned, that on the fifth
day he would require an interview with me on the subject of my appeal.
They then departed; but I was soon to receive another visitor. After
vespers, (from which I was excused), the Superior entered my cell alone.
He approached my bed. I attempted to rise, but he desired me to compose
myself, and sat down near me with a calm but penetrating look. He said,
“You have now found we have it in our power to punish.”--“I never
doubted it.”--“Before you tempt that power to an extremity, which, I
warn you, you will not be able to endure, I come to demand of you to
resign this desperate appeal against your vows, which can terminate only
in dishonouring God, and disappointing yourself.”--“My father, without
entering into details, which the steps taken on both sides have rendered
wholly unnecessary, I can only reply, that I will support my appeal with
every power Providence puts within my reach, and that my punishment has
only confirmed my resolution.”--“And this is your final
determination?”--“It is, and I implore you to spare me all further
importunity,--it will be useless.” He was silent for a long time; at
length he said, “And you will insist on your right to an interview with
the advocate to-morrow?”--“I shall claim it.”--“It will not be
necessary, however, to mention to him your late punishment.” These words
struck me. I comprehended the meaning which he wished to conceal in
them, and I answered, “It may not be necessary, but it will probably be
expedient.”--“How?--would you violate the secrets of the house, while
you are yet within its walls?”--“Pardon me, my father, for saying, that
you must be conscious of having exceeded your duty, to be so anxious for
its concealment. It is not, then, the secrets of your discipline, but
the violation of it, I shall have to disclose.”--He was silent, and I
added, “If you have abused your power, though I have been the sufferer,
it is you who are guilty.”--The Superior rose, and quitted my cell in
silence. The next morning I attended matins. Service went on as usual,
but at its conclusion, when the community were about to rise from their
knees, the Superior, striking the desk violently with his hand,
commanded them all to remain in the same posture. He added, in a
thundering voice, “The intercession of this whole community with God is
supplicated for a monk who, abandoned by the Spirit of God, is about to
commit an act dishonourable to Him, disgraceful to the church, and
infallibly destructive of his own salvation.” At these terrible sounds
the monks, all shuddering, sunk on their knees again. I was kneeling
among them, when the Superior, calling me by my name, said aloud, “Rise,
wretch! rise, and pollute not our incense with your unhallowed breath!”
I rose, trembling and confounded, and shrunk to my cell, where I
remained till I was summoned by a monk to the parlour, to meet the
advocate, who waited for me there. This interview was rendered quite
ineffective by the presence of the monk, who was desired by the Superior
to witness our conference, and whom the advocate could not order away.
When we entered into details, he interrupted us with declarations, that
his duty would not permit such a violation of the rules of the parlour.
When I asserted a fact, he contradicted it, gave me the lie repeatedly,
and finally disturbed the purpose of our conference so completely, that
in mere self-defence, I spoke of the subject of my punishment, which he
could not deny, and to which my livid looks bore a testimony invincible.
The moment I spoke on this subject the monk became silent, (he was
treasuring every word for the Superior), and the advocate redoubled his
attention. He took minutes of every thing I said, and appeared to lay
more stress on the matter than I had imagined, or indeed wished for.
When the conference was over, I retired again to my cell. The advocate’s
visits were repeated for some days, till he had obtained the information
requisite for carrying on my suit; and during this time, my treatment in
the convent was such as to give me no cause of complaint; and this
doubtless was the motive of their forbearance. But the moment those
visits ceased, the warfare of persecution commenced. They considered me
as one with whom no measures were to be kept, and they treated me
accordingly. I am convinced it was their intention that I should not
survive the event of my appeal; at least it is certain they left nothing
unaccomplished that could verify that intention. This began, as I
mentioned, on the day of the advocate’s last visit. The bell rung for
refection;--I was going to take my place as usual, when the Superior
said, “Hold,--place a mat for him in the midst of the hall.” This was
done, and I was required to sit down on it, and supplied with bread and
water. I eat a little, which I moistened with my tears. I foresaw what I
had to undergo, and did not attempt to expostulate. When grace was about
to be said, I was desired to stand without the door, lest my presence
should frustrate the benediction they implored.

“I retired, and when the bell rung for vespers, I presented myself among
the rest at the door of the church. I was surprised to find it shut, and
they all assembled. When the bell ceased, the Superior appeared, the
door was opened, and the monks hurried in. I was following, when the
Superior repelled me, exclaiming, “_You, wretch, you!_ Remain where you
are.” I obeyed; and the whole community entered the church, while I
remained at the door. This species of excommunication produced its full
effect of terror on me. As the monks slowly came out, and cast on me
looks of silent horror, I thought myself the most abject being on earth;
I could have hid myself under the pavement till the event of my appeal
was over.

“The next morning, when I went to matins, the same scene was renewed,
with the horrible addition of audible reproaches, and almost
imprecations, denounced against me, as they entered and returned. I
knelt at the door. I did not answer a word. I returned not “railing for
railing,” and lifted up my heart with a trembling hope, that this
offering might be as acceptable to God as the sonorous chaunt of the
choir, which I still felt it was miserable to be excluded from joining.

“In the course of the day, every sluice of monastic malignity and
vengeance was thrown open. I appeared at the door of the refectory. I
did not dare to enter. Alas! Sir, how are monks employed in the hour of
refection? It is an hour, when, while they swallow their meal, they
banquet on the little scandal of the convent. They ask, “Who was late at
prayers? Who is to undergo penance?” This serves them for conversation;
and the details of their miserable life supply no other subject for that
mixture of exhaustless malignity and curiosity, which are the
inseparable twins of monastic birth. As I stood at the door of the
refectory, a lay-brother, to whom the Superior nodded, bid me retire. I
went to my cell, waited for several hours, and just when the bell for
vespers had rung, was supplied with food, which famine itself would have
shrunk from. I tried to swallow it, but could not, and hurried away, as
the bell tolled, to attend vespers; for I wished to have no cause of
complaint against my neglect of duties. I hastened down. The door was
again shut; service began; and again I was compelled to retire without
partaking of it. The next day I was excluded from matins; the same
degrading scene was acted over when I appeared at the door of the
refectory. Food was sent to my cell, that a dog would have rejected; and
the door was shut when I attempted to enter the church. A thousand
circumstances of persecution, too contemptible, too minute, either for
recollection or repetition, but infinitely harassing to the sufferer,
were heaped on me every day. Imagine, Sir, a community of upwards of
sixty persons, all sworn to each other to make the life of one
individual insupportable; joined in a common resolution to insult,
harass, torment, and persecute him; and then imagine how that individual
can support such a life. I began to dread the preservation of my
reason--of my existence, which, miserable as it was, still fed on the
hope of my appeal. I will sketch one day of my life for you. _Ex uno
disce omnes._ I went down to matins, and knelt at the door; I did not
dare to enter. When I retired to my cell, I found the crucifix taken
away. I was about to go to the Superior’s apartment to complain of this
outrage; in the passage I happened to meet a monk and two boarders. They
all shrunk close to the walls; they drew in their garments, as if
trembling to encounter the pollution of my touch. I said mildly, “There
is no danger; the passage is wide enough.” The monk replied, “Apage
Satana. My children,” addressing the boarders, “repeat with me, apage
Satana; avoid the approach of that demon, who insults the habit he
desecrates.” They did so; and to render the exorcism complete, they spit
in my face as they passed. I wiped it off, and thought how little of the
spirit of Jesus was to be found in the house of his nominal brethren. I
proceeded to the apartment of the Superior, and knocked timidly at the
door. I heard the words, “Enter in peace;” and I prayed that it might be
in peace. As I opened the door, I saw several monks assembled with the
Superior. The latter uttered an exclamation of horror when he saw me,
and threw his robe over his eyes; the monks understood the signal; the
door was closed, and I was excluded. That day I waited several hours in
my cell before any food was brought me. There is no state of feeling
that exempts us from the wants of nature. I had no food for many days
requisite for the claims of adolescence, which were then rapidly
manifesting themselves in my tall, but attenuated frame. I descended to
the kitchen to ask for my share of food. The cook crossed himself as I
appeared at the door; for even at the door of the kitchen I faultered at
the threshold. He had been taught to consider me as a demon incarnate,
and shuddered, while he asked, “What do you want?”--“Food,” I replied;
“food;--that is all.”--“Well, you shall have it--but come no
further--there is food.” And he flung me the offal of the kitchen on the
earth; and I was so hungry, that I devoured it eagerly. The next day I
was not so lucky; the cook had learned the secret of the convent, (that
of tormenting those whom they no longer have hopes of commanding), and
mixed the fragments he threw to me, with ashes, hair, and dust. I could
hardly pick out a morsel that, famished as I was, was eatable. They
allowed me no water in my cell; I was not permitted to partake of it at
refection; and, in the agonies of thirst, aggravated by my constant
solicitude of mind, I was compelled to kneel at the brink of the well,
(as I had no vessel to drink out of), and take up the water in my hand,
or lap it like a dog. If I descended to the garden for a moment, they
took the advantage of my absence to enter my cell, and remove or destroy
every article of furniture. I have told you that they took away my
crucifix. I had still continued to kneel and repeat my prayers before
the table on which it stood. That was taken away,--table, chair, missal,
rosary, every thing, disappeared gradually; and my cell presented
nothing but four bare walls, with a bed, on which they had rendered it
impossible for me to taste repose. Perhaps they dreaded I might,
however, and they hit on an expedient, which, if it had succeeded, might
have deprived me of reason as well as repose.

“I awoke one night, and saw my cell in flames; I started up in horror,
but shrunk back on perceiving myself surrounded by demons, who, clothed
in fire, were breathing forth clouds of it around me. Desperate with
horror, I rushed against the wall, and found what I touched was cold. My
recollection returned, and I comprehended, that these were hideous
figures scrawled in phosphorus, to terrify me. I then returned to my
bed, and as the day-light approached, observed these figures gradually
decline. In the morning, I took a desperate resolution of forcing my way
to the Superior, and speaking to him. I felt my reason might be
destroyed amid the horrors they were surrounding me with.

“It was noon before I could work myself up to execute this resolution. I
knocked at his cell, and when the door was opened, he exhibited the same
horror as at my former intrusion, but I was not to be repelled. “My
father, I require you to hear me, nor will I quit this spot till you do
so.”--“Speak.”--“They famish me,--I am not allowed food to support
nature.”--“Do you deserve it?”--“Whether I do or not, neither the laws
of God or man have yet condemned me to die of hunger; and if _you_ do,
you commit murder.”--“Have you any thing else to complain of?”--“Every
thing; I am not allowed to enter the church,--I am forbid to pray,--they
have stripped my cell of crucifix, rosary, and the vessel for holy
water. It is impossible for me to perform my devotions even
alone.”--“_Your_ devotions!”--“My father, though I am not a monk, may I
not still be a Christian?”--“In renouncing your vows, you have abjured
your claim to either character.”--“But I am still a human being, and as
such--But I appeal not to your humanity, I call on your authority for
protection. Last night, my cell was covered with representations of
fiends. I awoke in the midst of flames and spectres.”--“So you will at
the last day!”--“My punishment will then be enough, it need not commence
already.”--“These are the phantoms of your conscience.”--“My father, if
you will deign to examine my cell, you will find the traces of
phosphorus on the walls.”--“_I_ examine your cell? _I_ enter it?”--“Am I
then to expect no redress? Interpose your authority for the sake of the
house over which you preside. Remember that, when my appeal becomes
public, all these circumstances will become so too, and you are to judge
what degree of credit they will attach to the community.” “Retire!” I
did so, and found my application attended to, at least with regard to
food, but my cell remained in the same dismantled state, and I continued
under the same desolating interdiction from all communion, religious or
social. I assure you, with truth, that so horrible was this amputation
from life to me, that I have walked hours in the cloister and the
passages, to place myself in the way of the monks, who, I knew, as they
passed, would bestow on me some malediction or reproachful epithet. Even
this was better than the withering silence which surrounded me. I began
almost to receive it as a customary salutation, and always returned it
with a benediction. In a fortnight my appeal was to be decided on; this
was a circumstance I was kept in ignorance of, but the Superior had
received a notification of it, and this precipitated his resolution to
deprive me of the benefit of its eventual success, by one of the most
horrible schemes that ever entered the human (I retract the expression)
the monastic heart. I received an indistinct intimation of it the very
night after my application to the Superior; but had I been apprised,
from the first, of the whole extent and bearings of their purpose, what
resources could I have employed against it?

“That evening I had gone into the garden; my heart felt unusually
oppressed. Its thick troubled beatings, seemed like the vibrations of a
time-piece, as it measures our approach to some hour of sorrow.

“It was twilight; the garden was empty; and kneeling on the ground, in
the open air, (the only oratory they had left me), I attempted to pray.
The attempt was in vain;--I ceased to articulate sounds that had no
meaning--and, overcome by a heaviness of mind and body inexpressible, I
fell on the ground, and remained extended on my face, torpid, but not
senseless. Two figures passed, without perceiving me; they were in
earnest conversation. One of them said, “More vigorous measures must be
adopted. You are to blame to delay them so long. You will be answerable
for the disgrace of the whole community, if you persist in this foolish
lenity.”--“But his resolution remains unbroken,” said the Superior, (for
it was he).--“It will not be proof against the measure I have
proposed.”--“He is in your hands then; but remember I will not be
accountable for----” They were by this time out of hearing. I was less
terrified than you will believe, by what I had heard. Those who have
suffered much, are always ready to exclaim, with the unfortunate Agag,
“Surely the bitterness of death is past.” They know not, that that is
the very moment when the sword is unsheathed to hew them in pieces. That
night, I had not been long asleep, when I was awoke by a singular noise
in my cell: I started up, and listened. I thought I heard some one hurry
away barefooted. I knew I had no lock to my door, and could not prevent
the intrusion of any one into my cell who pleased to visit it; but still
I believed the discipline of the convent too strict to allow of this. I
composed myself again, but was hardly asleep, when I was again awoke by
something that touched me. I started up again; a soft voice near me said
in whispers, “Compose yourself; I am your friend.”--“My friend? Have I
one?--but why visit me at this hour?”--“It is the only hour at which I
am permitted to visit you.”--“But who are you, then?”--“One whom these
walls can never exclude. One to whom, if you devote yourself, you may
expect services beyond the power of man.”--There was something frightful
in these words. I cried out, “Is it the enemy of souls that is tempting
me?” As I uttered these words, a monk rushed in from the passage, (where
he had been evidently waiting, for his dress was on). He exclaimed,
“What is the matter? You have alarmed me by your cries,--you pronounced
the name of the infernal spirit,--what have you seen? what is it you
fear?” I recovered myself, and said, “I have seen or heard nothing
extraordinary. I have had frightful dreams, that is all. Ah! Brother St
Joseph, no wonder, after passing such days, my nights should be
disturbed.”

“The monk retired, and the next day passed as usual; but at night the
same whispering sounds awoke me again. The preceding night these sounds
had only startled me; they now alarmed me. In the darkness of night, and
the solitude of my cell, this repeated visitation overcame my spirits. I
began almost to admit the idea that I was exposed to the assaults of the
enemy of man. I repeated a prayer, but the whisper, which seemed close
to my ear, still continued. It said, “Listen,--listen to me, and be
happy. Renounce your vows, place yourself under my protection, and you
shall have no cause to complain of the exchange. Rise from your bed,
trample on the crucifix which you will find at the foot of it, spit on
the picture of the Virgin that lies beside it, and----” At these words I
could not suppress a cry of horror. The voice ceased in a moment, and
the same monk, who occupied the cell next to mine, rushed in with the
same exclamations as on the preceding night; and, as he entered my cell,
the light in his hand shewed a crucifix, and a picture of the blessed
Virgin, _placed_ at the foot of my bed. I had sprung up when the monk
entered my cell; I saw them, and recognized them to be the very crucifix
and picture of the Virgin which had been taken from my cell. All the
hypocritical outcries of the monk, at the disturbance I had again caused
him, could not efface the impression which this slight circumstance made
on me. I believed, and not without reason, they had been left there by
the hands of some human tempter. I started, awake to this horrible
imposition, and required the monk to leave my cell. He demanded, with a
frightful paleness in his looks, why I had again disturbed him? said it
was impossible to obtain repose while such noises were occurring in my
cell; and, finally, stumbling over the crucifix and picture, demanded
how they came there. I answered, “You know best.”--“How, then, do you
accuse me of a compact with the infernal demon? By what means could
these have been brought to your cell?”--“By the very hands that removed
them,” I answered; and these words appeared to produce an effect on him
for a moment; but he retired, declaring, that if the nightly disturbance
in my cell continued, he must represent it to the Superior. I answered,
the disturbance did not proceed from me,--but I trembled for the
following night.

“I had reason to tremble. That night, before I lay down, I repeated
prayer after prayer, the terrors of my excommunication pressing heavy on
my soul. I also repeated the prayers against possession or temptation by
the evil spirit. These I was compelled to utter from memory, for I have
told you that they had not left a book in my cell. In repeating these
prayers, which were very long, and somewhat verbose, I at last fell
asleep. That sleep was not to continue long. I was again addressed by
the voice that whispered close to my bed. The moment I heard it, I rose
without fear. I crept around my cell with my hands extended, and my feet
bare. I could feel nothing but the empty walls,--not a single object,
tangible or visible, could I encounter. I lay down again, and had hardly
begun the prayer with which I tried to fortify myself, when the same
sounds were repeated close to my ear, without the possibility either of
my discovering from whence they proceeded, or preventing their reaching
me. Thus I was completely deprived of sleep; and if I dozed for a
moment, the same terrible sounds were re-echoed in my dreams. I became
feverish from want of rest. The night was passed in watching for these
sounds, or listening to them, and the day in wild conjectures or fearful
anticipations. I felt a mixture of terror and impatience inconceivable
at the approach of night. I had a consciousness of imposture the whole
time, but this gave me no consolation, for there is a point to which
human malice and mischief may be carried, that would baffle those of a
demon. Every night the persecution was renewed, and every night it
became more terrible. At times the voice would suggest to me the most
unutterable impurities,--at another, blasphemies that would make a demon
shudder. Then it would applaud me in a tone of derision, and assure me
of the final success of my appeal, then change to the most appalling
menaces. The wretched sleep I obtained, during the intervals of this
visitation, was any thing but refreshing. I would awake in a cold
perspiration, catching at the bed-furniture, and repeating in an
inarticulate voice, the last sounds that had rung in my closing ears. I
would start up and see the bed surrounded by monks, who assured me they
had been disturbed by my cries,--that they had hurried in terror to my
cell. Then they would cast looks of fear and consternation on each other
and on me; say, “Something extraordinary is the matter,--something
presses on your mind that you will not disburden it of.” They implored
me, in the most awful names, and for the interests of my salvation, to
disclose the cause of these extraordinary visitations. At these words,
however agitated before, I always became calm. I said, “Nothing is the
matter,--why do you intrude into my cell?” They shook their heads, and
affected to retire slowly and reluctantly, as if from pity of my
dreadful situation, while I repeated, “Ah, Brother Justin, ah Brother
Clement, I see you, I understand you,--remember there is a God in
heaven.”

“One night I lay for a considerable time without hearing any sound. I
fell asleep, but was soon awoke by an extraordinary light. I sat up in
my bed, and beheld displayed before me the mother of God, in all the
glorious and irradiated incarnation of beatitude. She hovered, rather
than stood, in an atmosphere of light at the foot of my bed, and held a
crucifix in her hand, while she appeared to invite me, with a benign
action, to kiss the five mysterious wounds(1). For a moment I almost
believed in the actual presence of this glorious visitor, but just then
_the voice_ was heard louder than ever, “Spurn them,--spit on them,--you
are mine, and I claim this homage from my vassal.” At these words the
figure disappeared instantly, and the voice was renewing its whispers,
but they were repeated to an insensible ear, for I fell into a swoon. I
could easily distinguish between this state and sleep, by the deadly
sickness, the cold sweats, and the horrid sense of _evanition_, that
preceded it, and by the gasping, sobbing, choaking efforts that attended
my recovery. In the mean time the whole community carried on and even
aggravated the terrible delusion, which, while it was my torment to
detect, it was my greater to be the victim of. When art assumes the
omnipotence of reality, when we feel we suffer as much from an illusion
as from truth, our sufferings lose all dignity and all consolation. We
turn demons against ourselves, and laugh at what we are writhing under.
All day long I was exposed to the stare of horror, the shudder of
suspicion, and, worst of all, the hastily-averted glance of hypocritical
commiseration, that dropt its pitying ray on me for a moment, and was
then instantly raised to heaven, as if to implore forgiveness for the
involuntary crime of compassionating one whom God had renounced. When I
encountered any of them in the garden, they would strike into another
walk, and cross themselves in my sight. If I met them in the passages of
the convent, they drew their garments close, turned their faces to the
wall, and told their beads as I went by. If I ventured to dip my hands
in the holy water that stood at the door of the church, it was thrown
out before my face. Certain extraordinary precautions were adopted by
the whole community against the power of the evil one. Forms of exorcism
were distributed, and additional prayers were used in the service of
matins and vespers. A report was industriously diffused, that Satan was
permitted to visit a favoured and devoted servant of his in the convent,
and that all the brethren might expect the redoubled malice of his
assaults. The effect of this on the young boarders was indescribable.
They flew with the speed of lightning from me, whenever they saw me. If
accident forced us to be near each other for a moment, they were armed
with holy water, which they flung at me in pailfuls; and when that
failed, what cries,--what convulsions of terror! They knelt,--they
screamed,--they shut their eyes,--they cried, “Satan have mercy on
me,--do not fix your infernal talons on me,--take your victim,” and they
mentioned my name. The terror that I inspired I at last began to feel. I
began to believe myself--I know not what, whatever they thought me. This
is a dreadful state of mind, but one impossible to avoid. In some
circumstances, where the whole world is against us, we begin to take its
part against ourselves, to avoid the withering sensation of being alone
on our own side. Such was my appearance, too, my flushed and haggard
look, my torn dress, my unequal gait, my constant internal muttering,
and my complete isolation from the habits of the house, that it was no
wonder I should justify, by my exterior, all of horrible and awful that
might be supposed passing in my mind. Such an impression I must have
made on the minds of the younger members. They had been taught to hate
me, but their hatred was now combined with fear, and such a union is the
most terrible amid all the complications of human passion. Desolate as
my cell was, I retired to it early, as I was excluded from the exercises
of the community. The bell for vespers would ring, I would hear the
steps of those who were hastening to join in the service of God, and
tedious as that service had once appeared to me, I would now have given
worlds to be permitted to join in it, as a defence against that
_horrible midnight mass of Satan_(2), that I was awaiting to be summoned
to. I knelt however in my cell, and repeated what prayers I could
recollect, while every toll of the bell struck on my heart, and the
chaunt of the choir from below sounded like a repulsive echo to an
answer which my fears already anticipated from heaven.

  (1) Vide Mosheim’s Ecclesiastical History for the truth of this part
  of the narrative. I have suppressed circumstances in the original too
  horrible for modern ears.

  (2) This expression is not exaggerated. In the dreams of sorcery, or
  of imposture, the evil spirit was supposed to perform a mass in
  derision; and in Beaumont and Fletcher there is mention of “_howling a
  black Santis_,” _i. e._ Satan’s mass.

“One evening that I still continued to pray, and audibly, as the monks
passed my cell they said, “Do _you_ presume to pray? Die, desperate
wretch,--die and be damned. Precipitate yourself into the infernal gulph
at once, no longer desecrate these walls by your presence.” At these
words I only redoubled my prayers; but this gave greater offence, for
churchmen cannot bear to hear prayers uttered in a form different from
their own. The cry of a solitary individual to God, sounds like
profanation in their ears. They ask, Why do they not employ our form?
How dare they hope to be heard? Alas! is it forms then that God regards?
or is it not rather the prayer of the heart which alone reaches him, and
prospers in its petition? As they called out, passing my cell, “Perish,
impious wretch, perish,--God will not hear you,” I answered them on my
knees with blessings,--which of us had the spirit of prayer? That night
was one of trial I could no longer support. My frame was exhausted, my
mind excited, and, owing to our frail nature, this battle of the senses
and soul is never long carried on without the worst side remaining
conqueror. I was no sooner laid down than the voice began to whisper. I
began to pray, but my head swam round, my eyes flashed fire,--fire
almost tangible, my cell appeared in flames. Recollect my frame worn out
with famine, my mind worn out with persecution. I struggled with what I
was conscious was delirium,--but this consciousness aggravated its
horror. It is better to be mad at once, than to believe that all the
world is sworn to think and _make_ you be so, in spite of your own
consciousness of your sanity. The whispers this night were so horrible,
so full of ineffable abominations, of--I cannot think of them,--that
they _maddened my very ear_. My senses seemed deranged along with my
intellect. I will give you an instance, it is but a slight one, of the
horrors which----” Here the Spaniard whispered Melmoth(3). The hearer
shuddered, and the Spaniard went on in an agitated tone.

  (3) We do not venture to guess at the _horrors_ of this whisper, but
  every one conversant with ecclesiastical history knows, that _Tetzel_
  offered indulgences in Germany, even on the condition that the sinner
  had been guilty of the _impossible_ crime of violating the mother of
  God.

“I could bear it no longer. I sprung from my bed, I ran through the
gallery like a maniac, knocking at the doors of the cells, and
exclaiming, “Brother such a one, pray for me,--pray for me, I beseech
you.” I roused the whole convent. Then I flew down to the church; it was
open, and I rushed in. I ran up the aisle, I precipitated myself before
the altar, I embraced the images, I clung to the crucifix with loud and
reiterated supplications. The monks, awakened by my outcries, or perhaps
on the watch for them, descended in a body to the church, but,
perceiving I was there, they would not enter,--they remained at the
doors, with lights in their hands, gazing on me. It was a singular
contrast between me, hurrying round the church almost in the dark, (for
there were but a few lamps burning dimly), and the groupe at the door,
whose expression of horror was strongly marked by the light, which
appeared to have deserted me to concentrate itself among them. The most
impartial person on earth might have supposed me deranged, or possessed,
or both, from the state in which they saw me. Heaven knows, too, what
construction might have been put on my wild actions, which the
surrounding darkness exaggerated and distorted, or on the prayers which
I uttered, as I included in them the horrors of the temptation against
which I implored protection. Exhausted at length, I fell to the ground,
and remained there, without the power of moving, but able to hear and
observe every thing that passed. I heard them debate whether they should
leave me there or not, till the Superior commanded them to remove that
abomination from the sanctuary; and such was the terror of me into which
they had _acted_ themselves, that he had to repeat his orders before he
could procure obedience to them. They approached me at last, with the
same caution that they would an infected corse, and dragged me out by
the habit, leaving me on the paved floor before the door of the church.
They then retired, and in this state I actually fell asleep, and
continued so till I was awoke by the bell for matins. I recollected
myself, and attempted to rise; but my having slept on a damp floor, when
in a fever from terror and excitement, had so cramped my limbs, that I
could not accomplish this without the most exquisite pain. As the
community passed in to matins, I could not suppress a few cries of pain.
They must have seen what was the matter, but not one of them offered me
assistance, nor did I dare to implore it. By slow and painful efforts, I
at last reached my cell; but, shuddering at the sight of the bed, I
threw myself on the floor for repose.

“I was aware that some notice must be taken of a circumstance so
extraordinary--that such a subversion of the order and tranquillity of a
convent, would force an inquiry, even if the object was less remarkable.
But I had a sad foreboding, (for suffering makes us full of presages),
that this inquiry, however conducted, would terminate unfavourably to
me. I was the Jonah of the vessel--let the storm blow from what point it
would, I felt the lot was to fall on me. About noon, I was summoned to
the apartment of the Superior. I went, but not as at former times, with
a mixture of supplication and remonstrance on my lips,--with hope and
fear in my heart,--in a fever of excitement or of terror,--I went
sullen, squalid, listless, reckless; my physical strength, borne down by
fatigue and want of sleep; my mental, by persecution, incessant and
insupportable. I went no longer shrinking from, and deprecating _their
worst_, but defying, almost desiring it, in the terrible and indefinite
curiosity of despair. The apartment was full of monks; the Superior
stood among them, while they formed a semicircle at a respectful
distance from him. I must have presented a miserable contrast to these
men arrayed against me in their pride of power,--their long and not
ungraceful habits, giving their figures an air of solemnity, perhaps
more imposing than splendour--while I stood opposed to them, ragged,
meagre, livid, and obdurate, the very personification of an evil spirit
summoned before the angels of judgment. The Superior addressed me in a
long discourse, in which he but slightly touched on the scandal given by
the attempt to repeal my vows. He also suppressed any allusion to the
circumstance which was known to every one in the convent but myself,
that my appeal would be decided on in a few days. But he adverted in
terms that (in spite of my consciousness that they were hollow) made me
shudder, to the horror and consternation diffused through the convent by
my late tremendous visitation, as he called it. “Satan hath desired to
have you,” he said, “because you have put yourself within his power, by
your impious reclamation of your vows. You are the Judas among the
brethren; a branded Cain amid a primitive family; a scape-goat that
struggles to burst from the hands of the congregation into the
wilderness. The horrors that your presence is hourly heaping on us here,
are not only intolerable to the discipline of a religious house, but to
the peace of civilized society. There is not a monk who can sleep within
three cells of you. You disturb them by the most horrible cries--you
exclaim that the infernal spirit is perpetually beside your bed--that he
is whispering in your ears. You fly from cell to cell, supplicating the
prayers of the brethren. Your shrieks disturb the holy sleep of the
community--that sleep which they snatch only in the intervals of
devotion. All order is broken, all discipline subverted, while you
remain among us. The imaginations of the younger members are at once
polluted and inflamed, by the idea of the infernal and impure orgies
which the demon celebrates in your cell; and of which we know not
whether your cries, (which all can hear), announce triumph in, or
remorse for. You rush at midnight into the church, deface the images,
revile the crucifix, spurn at the altar; and when the whole community is
forced, by this unparalleled atrocity of blasphemy, to drag you from the
spot you are desecrating, you disturb, by your cries, those who are
passing to the service of God. In a word, your howls, your distortions,
your demoniac language, habits, and gestures, have but too well
justified the suspicion entertained when you first entered the convent.
You were abominable from your very birth,--you were the offspring of
sin--you are conscious of it. Amid the livid paleness, that horrible
unnatural white that discolours your very lips, I see a tinge like
crimson burning on your cheek at the mention of it. The demon who was
presiding at your natal hour--the demon of impurity and
anti-monasticism--pursues you in the very walls of a convent. The
Almighty, in my voice, bids you begone;--depart, and trouble us no
more.--Stop,” he added, as he saw I was obeying his directions
literally, “hold, the interests of religion, and of the community, have
required that I should take particular notice of the extraordinary
circumstances that have haunted your unhallowed presence within these
walls. In a short time you may expect a visit from the Bishop--prepare
yourself for it as you may.” I considered these as the final words
addressed to me, and was about to retire, when I was recalled. I was
desired to utter some words, which every one was eager to put into my
mouth, of expostulation, of remonstrance, of supplication. I resisted
them all as steadily as if I had known (which I did not) that the Bishop
had himself instituted the examination into the deranged state of the
convent; and that instead of the Superior inviting the Bishop to examine
into the cause of the disturbance in his convent, (the very last step he
would have taken), the Bishop, (a man whose character will shortly be
developed), had been apprized of the _scandal_ of the convent, and had
determined to take the matter into his own hands. Sunk in solitude and
persecution, I knew not that all Madrid was on fire,--that the Bishop
had determined to be no longer a passive hearer of the extraordinary
scenes reported to pass in the convent,--that, in a word, my _exorcism_
and my appeal were quivering in alternate scales, and that the Superior
himself doubted which way the scale might incline. All this I was
ignorant of, for no one dared to tell it to me. I therefore was about to
retire without uttering a word in answer to the many whispered speeches
to humble myself to the Superior, to implore his intercession with the
Bishop to suspend this disgraceful examination that threatened _us_ all.
I broke from them as they surrounded me; and standing calm and sullen at
the door, I threw a retorting look at them, and said, “God forgive you
all, and grant you such an acquittal at his judgment-seat, as I hesitate
not to claim at that of the Bishop-visitant.” These words, though
uttered by a ragged demoniac, (as they thought me), made them tremble.
Truth is rarely heard in convents, and therefore its language is equally
emphatical and portentous.

“The monks crossed themselves, and, as I left the apartment, repeated,
“But how then,--what if we _prevented_ this mischief?”--“By what
means?”--“By any that the interests of religion may suggest,--the
character of the convent is at stake. The Bishop is a man of a strict
and scrutinizing character,--he will keep his eyes open to the
truth,--he will inquire into facts,--what will become of us? Were it not
better that----” “What?”--“You comprehend us.”--“And if I dared to
comprehend you, _the time is too short_.”--“We have heard of the death
of maniacs being very sudden, of----” “What do you dare to hint
at?”--“Nothing, we only spoke of what every one knows, that a profound
sleep is often a restorative to lunatics. _He_ is a lunatic, as all the
convent are ready to swear,--a wretch possessed by the infernal spirit,
whom he invocates every night in his cell,--he disturbs the whole
convent by his outcries.”

“The Superior all this time walked impatiently up and down his
apartment. He entangled his fingers in his rosary,--he threw on the
monks angry looks from time to time; at last he said, “I am myself
disturbed by his cries,--his wanderings,--his undoubted commerce with
the enemy of souls. I need rest,--I require a profound sleep to repair
my exhausted spirits,--_what would you prescribe?_” Several pressed
forward, not understanding the hint, and eagerly recommended the common
opiates--Mithridate, &c. &c. An old monk whispered in his ear,
“Laudanum,--it will procure a deep and sound sleep. Try it, my father,
if you want rest; but to make the experiment sure, were it not best to
try it first on another?” The Superior nodded, and the party were about
to disperse, when the Superior caught the old monk by his habit, and
whispered, “But no murder!”--“Oh no! only profound sleep.--What matter
when he wakes? It must be to suffering in this life or the next. _We_
are not guilty in the business. What signifies a few moments sooner or
later?” The Superior was of a timid and passionate character. He still
kept hold of the monk’s habit;--he whispered, “But it must not be
known.”--“But who can know it?” At this moment the clock struck, and an
old ascetic monk, who occupied a cell adjacent to the Superior’s, and
who had accustomed himself to the exclamation, “God knoweth all things,”
whenever the clock struck, repeated it aloud. The Superior quitted his
hold of the monk’s habit,--the monk crawled to his cell _God-struck_, if
I may use the expression,--the laudanum was not administered that
night,--the voice did not return,--I slept the entire night, and the
whole convent was delivered from the harassings of the infernal spirit.
Alas! none haunted it, but that spirit which the natural _malignity of
solitude_ raises within the circle of every heart, and forces us, from
the terrible economy of misery, to feed on the vitals of others, that we
may spare our own.

“This conversation was repeated to me afterwards by a monk who was on
his dying bed. He had witnessed it, and I have no reason to doubt his
sincerity. In fact, I always considered it as rather a palliation than
an aggravation of their cruelty to me. They had made me suffer worse
than many deaths,--the single suffering would have been
instantaneous,--the single act would have been mercy. The next day the
visit of the Bishop was expected. There was an indescribable kind of
terrified preparation among the community. This house was the first in
Madrid, and the singular circumstance of the son of one of the highest
families in Spain having entered it in early youth,--having protested
against his vows in a few months,--having been accused of being in a
compact with the infernal spirit a few weeks after,--the hope of a scene
of exorcism,--the doubt of the success of my appeal,--the probable
interference of the Inquisition,--the _possible_ festival of an auto da
fe,--had set the imagination of all Madrid on fire; and never did an
audience long more for the drawing up of the curtain at a popular opera,
than the religious and irreligious of Madrid did for the developement of
the scene which was acting at the convent of the Ex-Jesuits.

“In Catholic countries, Sir, religion is the national drama; the priests
are the principal performers, the populace the audience; and whether the
piece concludes with a “Don Giovanni” plunging in flames, or the
beatification of a saint, the applause and the enjoyment is the same.

“I feared my destiny was to be the former. I knew nothing of the Bishop,
and hoped nothing from his visit; but my hopes began to rise in
proportion to the visible fears of the society. I argued, with the
natural malignity of wretchedness, “If they tremble, I may exult.” When
suffering is thus weighed against suffering, the hand is never steady;
we are always disposed to make the balance incline a little on our own
side. The Bishop came early, and passed some hours with the Superior in
his own apartment. During this interval, there was a stillness in the
house that was strongly contrasted with its previous agitation. I stood
alone in my cell,--_stood_, for I had no seat left me. I said to myself,
“This event bodes neither good or evil to me. I am not guilty of what
they accuse me of. They never can prove it,--an accomplice with
Satan!--the victim of diabolical delusion!--Alas! my only crime is my
involuntary subjection to the delusions they have practised on me. This
man, this Bishop, cannot give me freedom, but he may at least do me
justice.” All this time the community were in a fever--the character of
the house was at stake--my situation was notorious. They had laboured to
represent me as a possessed being beyond their walls, and to _make_ me
appear as one within them. The hour of trial approached. For the honour
of human nature,--from the dread of violating decency,--from the dread
of apparently violating truth, I will not attempt to relate the means
they had recourse to the morning of the Bishop’s visitation, to qualify
me to perform the part of a possessed, insane, and blasphemous wretch.
The four monks I have before mentioned, were the principal executioners,
(I must call them so).--Under pretence that there was no part of my
person which was not under the influence of the demon, * * * * * * *

“This was not enough. I was deluged almost to suffocation with
aspersions of holy water. Then followed, &c. * * * * *

“The result was, that I remained half-naked, half-drowned, gasping,
choaking, and delirious with rage, shame, and fear, when I was summoned
to attend the Bishop, who, surrounded by the Superior and the community,
awaited me in the church. This was the moment they had fixed on--I
yielded myself to them. I said, stretching out my arms, “Yes, drag me
naked, mad--religion and nature alike violated in my abused
figure--before your Bishop. If he speaks truth,--if he feels
conscience,--woe be to you, hypocritical, tyrannical wretches. You have
half-driven me mad!--half-murdered me, by the unnatural cruelties you
have exercised on me!--and in this state you drag me before the Bishop!
Be it so, I must follow you.” As I uttered these words, they bound my
arms and legs with ropes, carried me down, and placed me at the door of
the church, standing close to me. The Bishop was at the altar, the
Superior near him; the community filled the choir. They flung me down
like a heap of carrion, and retreated as if they fled from the pollution
of my touch. This sight struck the Bishop: He said, in a loud voice,
“Rise, _unhappy_, and come forward.” I answered, in a voice whose tones
appeared to thrill him, “Bid them unbind me, and I will obey you.” The
Bishop turned a cold and yet indignant look on the Superior, who
immediately approached and whispered him. This whispering consultation
was carried on for some time; but, though lying on the ground, I could
perceive the Bishop shook his head at every whisper of the Superior; and
the end of the business was an order to unbind me. I did not fare much
the better for this order, for the four monks were still close to me.
They held my arms as they led me up the steps to the altar. I was then,
for the first time, placed opposite to the Bishop. He was a man, the
effect of whose physiognomy was as indelible as that of his
character.--The one left its impress on the senses, as strongly as the
other did on the soul. He was tall, majestic, and hoary; not a feeling
agitated his frame--not a passion had left its trace on his features. He
was a marble statue of Episcopacy, chiselled out by the hand of
Catholicism,--a figure magnificent and motionless. His cold black eyes
did not seem to see you, when they were turned on you. His voice, when
it reached you, did not address _you_, but your _soul_. Such was his
exterior:--for the rest, his character was unimpeachable, his discipline
exemplary, his life that of an Anchorite hewed out in stone. But he was
partially suspected of what is called _liberality_ in opinions, (that
is, of an inclination to Protestantism), and the sanctity of his
character went bail in vain for this imputed heterodoxy, which the
Bishop could hardly redeem by his rigid cognizance of every conventual
abuse in his district, among which my convent happened to be. Such was
the man before whom I stood. At the command to unloose me, the Superior
shewed much agitation; but the command was positive, and I was released.
I was then between the four monks, who held me, and I felt that my
appearance must have justified the impression he had received. I was
ragged, famished, livid, and on fire, with the horrible treatment I had
just received. I hoped, however, that my submission to whatever was to
be performed, might, in some degree, redeem the opinion of the Bishop.
He went with evident reluctance through the forms of exorcism, which
were delivered in Latin, while all the time, the monks crossed
themselves, and the _Acolytes_ were not sparing of holy water and of
incense. Whenever the terms “diabole te adjuro” occurred, the monks who
held me twisted my arms, so that I appeared to make contortions, and
uttered cries of pain. This, at first, seemed to disturb the Bishop; but
when the form of exorcism was over, he commanded me to approach the
altar alone. I attempted to do so; but the four monks surrounding me,
made it appear an act of great difficulty. He said, “Stand apart--let
him alone.” They were compelled to obey. I advanced alone, trembling. I
knelt. The Bishop, placing his stole on my head, demanded, “Did I
believe in God, and the holy Catholic church?” Instead of answering, I
shrieked, flung off the stole, and trampled in agony on the steps of the
altar. The Bishop retreated, while the Superior and the rest advanced. I
collected courage as I saw them approach; and, without uttering a word,
pointed to the pieces of broken glass which had been thrown on the steps
where I stood, and which had pierced me through my torn sandals. The
Bishop instantly ordered a monk to sweep them away with the sleeve of
his tunic. The order was obeyed in a moment, and the next I stood before
him without fear or pain. He continued to ask, “Why do you not pray in
the church?”--“Because its doors are shut against me.”--“How? what is
this? A memorial is in my hands urging many complaints against you, and
this among the first, that you do not pray in the church.”--“I have told
you the doors of the church are shut against me.--Alas! I could no more
open them, than I could open the hearts of the community--every thing is
shut against me here.” He turned to the Superior, who answered, “The
doors of the church are always shut to the enemies of God.” The Bishop
said, with his usual stern calmness, “I am asking a plain
question--evasive and circuitous answers will not do. Have the doors of
the church been shut against this wretched being?--have you denied him
the privilege of addressing God?”--“I did so, because I thought and
believed--” “I ask not what you thought or believed; I ask a plain
answer to a matter-of-fact question. Did you, or did you not, deny him
access to the house of God?”--“I had reason to believe that--” “I warn
you, these answers may compel me to make you exchange situations in one
moment with the object you accuse. Did you, or did you not, shut the
doors of the church against him?--answer yes or no.” The Superior,
trembling with fear and rage, said, “I did; and I was justified in doing
so.”--“That is for another tribunal to judge. But it seems you plead
guilty to the fact of which you accuse him.” The Superior was dumb. The
Bishop then examining his paper, addressed me again, “How is it that the
monks cannot sleep in their cells from the disturbance you cause?”--“I
know not--you must ask them.”--“Does not the evil spirit visit you
nightly? Are not your blasphemies, your execrable impurities, disgorged
even in the ears of those who have the misfortune to be placed near you?
Are you not the terror and the torment of the whole community?” I
answered, “I am what they have made me. I do not deny there are
extraordinary noises in my cell, but they can best account for them. I
am assailed by whispers close to my bed-side: It seems these whispers
reach the ears of the brethren, for they burst into my cell, and take
advantage of the terror with which I am overwhelmed, to put the most
incredible constructions on it.”--“Are there no cries, then, heard in
your cell at night?”--“Yes, cries of terror--cries uttered not by one
who is celebrating infernal orgies, but dreading them.”--“But the
blasphemies, the imprecations, the impurities, which proceed from your
lips?”--“Sometimes, in irrepressible terror, I have repeated the sounds
that were suggested to my ears; but it was always with an exclamation of
horror and aversion, that proved these sounds were not _uttered_ but
_echoed_ by me,--as a man may take up a reptile in his hand, and gaze on
its hideousness a moment, before he flings it from him. I take the whole
community to witness the truth of this. The cries I uttered, the
expressions I used, were evidently those of hostility to the infernal
suggestions which had been breathed into my ears. Ask the whole
community--they must testify, that when they broke into my cell, they
found me alone, trembling, convulsed. That I was the victim of those
disturbances, they affected to complain of; and though I never was able
to guess the means by which this persecution was effected, I am not rash
in ascribing it to the hands that covered the walls of my cell with
representations of demons, the traces of which still remain.”--“You are
also accused of having burst into the church at midnight, defaced the
images, trampled on the crucifix, and performed all the acts of a demon
violating the sanctuary.” At this accusation, so unjust and cruel, I was
agitated beyond controul. I exclaimed, “I flew to the church for
protection in a paroxysm of terror, which their machinations had filled
me with! I flew there at night, because it was shut against me during
the day, as you have discovered! I prostrated myself before the cross,
instead of trampling on it! I embraced the images of the blessed saints,
instead of violating them! And I doubt whether prayers more sincere were
ever offered within these walls, than those I uttered that night amid
helplessness, terror, and persecutions!”--“Did you not obstruct and
deter the community next morning by your cries, as they attempted to
enter the church?”--“I was paralyzed from the effects of lying all night
on the stone pavement, where they had flung me. I attempted to rise and
crawl away at their approach, and a few cries of pain were extorted from
me by my efforts to do so--efforts rendered more painful by their
refusing to offer me the slightest assistance. In a word, the whole is a
fabrication. I flew to the church to implore for mercy, and they
represent it as the outrages of an apostate spirit. Might not the same
arbitrary and absurd construction be put on the daily visits of
multitudes of afflicted souls, who weep and groan audibly as I did? If I
attempted to overturn the crucifix, to deface the images, would not the
marks of this violence remain? Would they not have been preserved with
care, to substantiate the accusation against me? Is there a trace of
them?--there is not, there cannot be, because they never existed.” The
Bishop paused. An appeal to his feelings would have been vain, but this
appeal to facts had its full effect. After some time, he said, “You can
have no objection, then, to render before the whole community the same
homage to the representations of the Redeemer and the holy saints, that
you say it was your purpose to render them that night?”--“None.” A
crucifix was brought me, which I kissed with reverence and unction, and
prayed, while the tears streamed from my eyes, an interest in the
infinite merits of the sacrifice it represented. The Bishop then said,
“Make a deed of faith, of love, of hope.” I did so; and though they were
extempore, my expressions, I could perceive, made the dignified
ecclesiastics who attended on the Bishop, cast on each other looks in
which were mingled compassion, interest, and admiration. The Bishop
said, “Where did you learn those prayers?”--“My heart is my only
teacher--I have no other--I am allowed no book.”--“How!--recollect what
you say.”--“I repeat I have none. They have taken away my breviary, my
crucifix;--they have stript my cell of all its furniture. I kneel on the
floor--I pray from the heart. If you deign to visit my cell, you will
find I have told you the truth.” At these words, the Bishop cast a
terrible look on the Superior. He recovered himself, however,
immediately, for he was a man unaccustomed to any emotion, and felt it
at once a suspension of his habits, and an infringement of his rank. In
a cold voice he bid me retire; then, as I was obeying him, he recalled
me,--my appearance for the first time seemed to strike him. He was a man
so absorbed in the contemplation of that waveless and frozen tide of
duty in which his mind was anchored, without fluctuation, progress, or
improvement, that physical objects must be presented before him a long
time before they made the least impression on him,--his senses were
almost ossified. Thus he had come to examine a supposed demoniac; but he
had made up his mind that there must be injustice and imposture in the
case, and he acted in the matter with a spirit, decision, and integrity,
that did him honour.

“But, all the time, the horror and misery of my appearance, which would
have made the first impression on a man whose feelings were at all
_external_, made the last. They struck him as I slowly and painfully
crawled from the steps of the altar, and the impression was forcible in
proportion to its slowness. He called me back and inquired, as if he saw
me for the first time, “How is it your habit is so scandalously ragged?”
At these words I thought I could disclose a scene that would have added
to the Superior’s humiliation, but I only said, “It is the consequence
of the ill treatment I have experienced.” Several other questions of the
same kind, relating to my appearance, which was deplorable enough,
followed, and at last I was forced to make a full discovery. The Bishop
was incensed at the detail more than was credible. Rigid minds, when
they yield themselves to emotion, do it with a vehemence inconceivable,
for to them every thing is a duty, and passion (when it occurs) among
the rest. Perhaps the novelty of emotion, too, may be a delightful
surprise to them.

“More than all this was the case now with the good Bishop, who was as
pure as he was rigid, and shrunk with horror, disgust, and indignation,
at the detail I was compelled to give, which the Superior trembled at my
uttering, and which the community dared not to contradict. He resumed
his cold manner; for to him feeling was an effort, and rigour a habit,
and he ordered me again to retire. I obeyed, and went to my cell. The
walls were as bare as I had described them, but, even contrasted with
all the splendour and array of the scene in the church, they seemed
emblazoned with my triumph. A dazzling vision passed before me for a
moment, then all subsided; and, in the solitude of my cell, I knelt and
implored the Almighty to touch the Bishop’s heart, and impress on him
the moderation and simplicity with which I had spoken. As I was thus
employed, I heard steps in the passage. They ceased for a moment, and I
was silent. It appeared the persons overheard me, and paused; and these
few words, uttered in solitude, made, I found, a deep impression on
them. A few moments after the Bishop, with some dignified attendants,
followed by the Superior, entered my cell. The former all stopped,
horror-struck at its appearance.

“I have told you, Sir, that my cell now consisted of four bare walls and
a bed;--it was a scandalous, degrading sight. I was kneeling in the
middle of the floor, God knows, without the least idea of producing an
effect. The Bishop gazed around him for some time, while the
ecclesiastics who attended him testified their horror by looks and
attitudes that needed no interpretation. The Bishop, after a pause,
turned to the Superior, “Well, what do you say to this?” The Superior
hesitated, and at last said, “I was ignorant of this.”--“That is false,”
said the Bishop; “and even if it was true, it would be your crimination,
not your apology. Your duty binds you to visit the cells every day; how
could you be ignorant of the shameful state of this cell, without
neglecting your own duties?” He took several turns about the cell,
followed by the ecclesiastics, shrugging their shoulders, and throwing
on each other looks of disgust. The Superior stood dismayed. They went
out, and I could hear the Bishop say, in the passage, “All this disorder
must be rectified before I quit the house.” And to the Superior, “You
are unworthy of the situation you hold,--you ought to be deposed.” And
he added in severer tones, “Catholics, monks, Christians, this is
shocking,--horrible! tremble for the consequences of my next visit, if
the same disorders exist,--I promise you it shall be repeated soon.” He
then returned, and standing at the door of my cell, said to the
Superior, “Take care that all the abuses committed in this cell are
rectified before to-morrow morning.” The Superior signified his
submission to this order in silence.

“That evening I went to sleep on a bare mattress, between four dry
walls. I slept profoundly, from exhaustion and fatigue. I awoke in the
morning far beyond the time for matins, and found myself surrounded by
all the comforts that can be bestowed on a cell. As if magic had been
employed during my sleep, crucifix, breviary, desk, table, every thing
was replaced. I sprung from bed, and actually gazed in extasy around my
cell. As the day advanced, and the hour for refection approached, my
extasy abated, and my terrors increased;--it is not easy to pass from
extreme humiliation and utter abhorrence, to your former state in the
society of which you are a member. When the bell rung I went down. I
stood at the door for a moment,--then, with an impulse, like despair, I
entered, and took my usual place. No opposition was made,--not a word
was said. The community separated after dinner. I watched for the toll
of the bell for vespers,--I imagined that would be decisive. The bell
tolled at last,--the monks assembled. I joined them without
opposition,--I took my place in the choir,--my triumph was complete, and
I trembled at it. Alas! in what moment of success do we not feel a
sensation of terror? Our destiny always acts the part of the ancient
slave to us, who was required every morning to remind the monarch that
he was a man; and it seldom neglects to fulfil its own predictions
before the evening. Two days passed away,--the storm that had so long
agitated us, seemed to have sunk into a sudden calm. I resumed my former
place,--I performed the customary duties,--no one congratulated or
reviled me. They all seemed to consider me as one beginning monastic
life _de novo_. I passed two days of perfect tranquillity, and I take
God to witness, I enjoyed this triumph with moderation. I never reverted
to my former situation,--I never reproached those who had been agents in
it,--I never uttered a syllable on the subject of the visitation, which
had made me and the whole convent change places in the space of a few
hours, and the oppressed take the part (if he pleased) of the oppressor.
I bore my success with temperance, for I was supported by the hope of
liberation. The Superior’s triumph was soon to come.

“On the third morning I was summoned to the parlour, where a messenger
put into my hands a packet, containing (as I well understood) the result
of my appeal. This, according to the rules of the convent, I was
compelled to put first into the hands of the Superior to read, before I
was permitted to read it myself. I took the packet, and slowly walked to
the Superior’s apartment. As I held it in my hand, I considered it, felt
every corner, weighed it over and over again in my hand, tried to catch
an omen from its very shape. Then a withering thought crossed me, that,
if its intelligence was auspicious, the messenger would have put it into
my hands with an air of triumph, that, in spite of convent etiquette, I
might break open the seals which inclosed the sentence of my liberation.
We are very apt to take our presages from our destination, and mine
being that of a monk, no wonder its auguries were black,--and were
verified.

“I approached the Superior’s cell with the packet. I knocked, was
desired to enter, and, my eyes cast down, could only distinguish the
hems of many habits, whose wearers were all assembled in the Superior’s
apartment. I offered the packet with reverence. The Superior cast a
careless eye over it, and then flung it on the floor. One of the monks
approached to take it up. The Superior exclaimed, “Hold, let _him_ take
it up.” I did so, and retired to my cell, making first a profound
reverence to the Superior. I then went to my cell, where I sat down with
the fatal packet in my hands. I was about to open it, when a voice from
within me seemed to say,--It is useless, you must know the contents
already. It was some hours before I perused it,--it contained the
account of the failure of my appeal. It seemed, from the detail, that
the advocate had exerted his abilities, zeal, and eloquence to the
utmost; and that, at one time, the court had been near deciding in
favour of my claims, but the precedent was reckoned too dangerous. The
advocate on the other side had remarked, “If this succeeds, we shall
have all the monks in Spain appealing against their vows.” Could a
stronger argument have been used in favour of my cause? An impulse so
universal must surely originate in nature, justice, and truth.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

On reverting to the disastrous issue of his appeal, the unfortunate
Spaniard was so much overcome, that it was some days before he could
resume his narrative.




CHAPTER VII.

    Pandere res alta terrâ et caligine mersas.

    I’ll shew your Grace the strangest sight,--
    Body o’me, what is it, Butts?--

    HENRY THE EIGHTH.


“Of the desolation of mind into which the rejection of my appeal plunged
me, I can give no account, for I retain no distinguishing image. All
colours disappear in the night, and despair has no diary,--monotony is
her essence and her curse. Hours have I walked in the garden, without
retaining a single impression but that of the sounds of my
footsteps;--thought, feeling, passion, and all that employs them,--life
and futurity, extinct and swallowed up. I was already like an inhabitant
of the land where “all things are forgotten.” I hovered on the regions
of mental twilight, where the “light is as darkness.” The clouds were
gathering that portended the approach of utter night,--they were
scattered by a sudden and extraordinary light.

“The garden was my constant resort,--a kind of instinct supplying the
place of that choice I had no longer energy enough to make, directed me
there to avoid the presence of the monks. One evening I saw a change in
its appearance. The fountain was out of repair. The spring that supplied
it was beyond the walls of the convent, and the workmen, in prosecuting
the repairs, had found it necessary to excavate a passage under the
garden-wall, that communicated with an open space in the city. This
passage, however, was closely watched during the day while the workmen
were employed, and well secured at night by a door erected for the
purpose, which was chained, barred, and bolted, the moment the workmen
quitted the passage. It was, however, left open during the day; and this
tantalizing image of escape and freedom, amid the withering certainty of
eternal imprisonment, gave a kind of awakened sting to the pains that
were becoming obtuse. I entered the passage, and drew as close as
possible to the door that shut me out from life. My seat was one of the
stones that were scattered about, my head rested on my hand, and my eyes
were sadly fixed on the _tree and the well_, the scene of that false
miracle. I knew not how long I sat thus. I was aroused by a slight noise
near me, and perceived a paper, which some one was thrusting under the
door, where a slight inequality in the ground rendered the attempt just
practicable. I stooped and attempted to seize it. It was withdrawn; but
a moment after a voice, whose tones my agitation did not permit me to
distinguish, whispered, “Alonzo.”--“Yes,--yes,” I answered eagerly. The
paper was instantly thrust into my hands, and I heard a sound of steps
retreating rapidly. I lost not a moment in reading the few words it
contained. “Be here to-morrow evening at the same hour. I have suffered
much on your account,--destroy this.” It was the hand of my brother
Juan, that hand so well remembered from our late eventful
correspondence,--that hand whose traces I never beheld without feeling
corresponding characters of hope and confidence retraced in my soul, as
lines before invisible appear on exposure to the heat that seems to
vivify them. I am surprised that between this and the following evening
my agitation did not betray me to the community. But perhaps it is only
agitation arising from frivolous causes, that vents itself in external
indications,--I was absorbed in mine. It is certain, at least, that my
mind was all that day vacillating like a clock that struck every minute
the alternate sounds, “_There is hope,--there is no hope._” The
day,--the eternal day, was at last over. Evening came on; how I watched
the advancing shades! At vespers, with what delight did I trace the
gradual mellowing of the gold and purple tinges that gleamed through the
great eastern window, and calculated that their western decline, though
slower, must come at last!--It came. Never was a more propitious
evening. It was calm and dark--the garden deserted, not a form to be
seen, not a step to be heard in the walks.--I hurried on. Suddenly I
thought I heard the sound of something pursuing me. I paused,--it was
but the beating of my own heart, audible in the deep stillness of that
eventful moment. I pressed my hand on my breast, as a mother would on an
infant whom she tried to pacify;--it did not cease to throb, however. I
entered the passage. I approached the door, of which hope and despair
seemed to stand the alternate portresses. The words still rung in my
ears, “Be here to-morrow evening at the same hour.” I stooped, and saw,
with eyes that devoured the sight, a piece of paper appear under the
door. I seized and buried it in my habit. I trembled with such ecstacy,
that I thought I never should be able to carry it undiscovered to my
cell. I succeeded, however; and the contents, when I read them,
justified my emotion. To my unspeakable uneasiness, great part of it was
illegible, from being crushed amid the stones and damp clay contiguous
to the door, and from the first page I could hardly extract that he had
been kept in the country almost a prisoner, through the influence of the
Director; that one day, while shooting with only one attendant, the hope
of liberation suddenly filled him with the idea of terrifying this man
into submission. Presenting his loaded fowling piece at the terrified
wretch, he threatened him with instant death, if he made the least
opposition. The man suffered himself to be bound to a tree; and the next
page, though much defaced, gave me to understand he had reached Madrid
in safety, and heard for the first time the event of my ill-fated
appeal. The effect of this intelligence on the impetuous, sanguine, and
affectionate Juan, could be easily traced in the broken and irregular
lines in which he vainly attempted to describe it. The letter then
proceeded. “I am now in Madrid, pledged body and soul never to quit it
till you are liberated. If you possess resolution, this is not
impossible,--the doors even of convents are not inaccessible to a silver
key. My first object, that of obtaining a communication with you,
appeared as impracticable as your escape, yet it has been accomplished.
I understood that repairs were going on in the garden, and stationed
myself at the door evening after evening, whispering your name, but it
was not till the sixth that you were there.”

“In another part he detailed his plans more fully. “Money and secrecy
are the primary objects,--the latter I can insure by the disguises I
wear, but the former I scarce know how to obtain. My escape was so
sudden, that I was wholly unprovided, and have been obliged to dispose
of my watch and rings since I reached Madrid, to purchase disguises and
procure subsistence. I could command what sums I pleased by disclosing
my name, but this would be fatal. The report of my being in Madrid would
immediately reach my father’s ears. My resource must be a Jew; and when
I have obtained money, I have little doubt of effecting your liberation.
I have already heard of a person in the convent under very extraordinary
circumstances, who would probably not be disinclined to * * * * * * *

“Here a long interval occurred in the letter, which appeared to be
written at different times. The next lines that I could trace, expressed
all the light-heartedness of this most fiery, volatile, and generous of
created beings. * * * * * *

“Be not under the least uneasiness about me, it is impossible that I
should be discovered. At school I was remarkable for a dramatic talent,
a power of personation almost incredible, and which I now find of
infinite service. Sometimes I strut as a _Majo_(4), with enormous
whiskers. Sometimes I assume the accent of a Biscayan, and, like the
husband of Donna Rodriguez, “am as good a gentleman as the king, because
I came from the mountains.” But my favourite disguise is that of a
mendicant or a fortune-teller,--the former procures me access to the
convent, the other money and intelligence. Thus I am paid, while I
appear to be the buyer. When the wanderings and stratagems of the day
are over, you would smile to see the loft and pallet to which the heir
of Monçada retires. This masquerade amuses _me_ more than the
spectators. A consciousness of our superiority is often more delightful
when confined to our own breasts, than when expressed by others.
Besides, I feel as if the squalid bed, the tottering seat, the cobwebbed
rafters, the rancid oil, and all the other _agremens_ of my new abode,
were a kind of atonement for the wrongs I have done you, Alonzo. My
spirits sometimes sink under privations so new to me, but still a kind
of playful and wild energy, peculiar to my character, supports me. I
shudder at my situation when I retire at night, and place, for the first
time _with my own hands_, the lamp on the miserable hearth; but I laugh
when, in the morning, I attire myself in fantastic rags, discolour my
face, and modulate my accent, so that the people in the house, (where I
tenant a garret), when they meet me on the stairs, do not know the being
they saw the preceding evening. I change my abode and costume every day.
Feel no fears for me, but come every evening to the door in the passage,
for every evening I shall have fresh intelligence for you. My industry
is indefatigable, my zeal unquenchable, my heart and soul are on fire in
the cause. Again I pledge myself, soul and body, never to quit this spot
till you are free,--_depend on me, Alonzo_.”

  (4) Something between a bully and a rake.

“I will spare you, Sir, the detail of the feelings,--feelings! Oh my
God, pardon me the prostration of heart with which I kissed those lines,
with which I could have consecrated the hand that traced them, and which
are worthy only to be devoted to the image of the great Sacrifice. Yet a
being so young, so generous, so devoted, with a heart at once so wild
and warm, sacrificing all that rank, and youth, and pleasure could
offer,--submitting to the vilest disguises, undergoing the most
deplorable privations, struggling with what must have been most
intolerable to a proud voluptuous boy, (and I knew he was all this),
hiding his revoltings under a gaiety that was assumed, and a magnanimity
that was real--and all this for me!----Oh what I felt! * * * * * *

“The next evening I was at the door; no paper appeared, though I sat
watching for it till the declining light made it impossible for me to
discover it, had it been there. The next I was more fortunate; it
appeared. The same disguised voice whispered “Alonzo,” in tones that
were the sweetest music that ever reached my ears. This billet contained
but a very few lines, (so I found no difficulty in _swallowing it_
immediately after perusal). It said, “I have found a Jew, at last, who
will advance me a large sum. He pretends not to know me, though I am
satisfied he does.--But his usurious interest and illegal practices are
my full security. I shall be master of the means of liberating you in a
few days; and I have been fortunate enough to discover how those means
may be applied. There is a wretch----”

“Here the billet ended; and for four following evenings the state of the
repairs excited so much curiosity in the convent, (where it is so easy
to excite curiosity), that I dared not to remain in the passage, without
the fear of exciting suspicion. All this time I suffered not only the
agony of suspended hope, but the dread of this accidental communication
being finally closed; for I knew the workmen could not have more than a
few days to employ on their task. This I conveyed the intelligence of to
my brother in the same way in which I received his billets. Then I
reproached myself for hurrying him. I reflected on the difficulties of
his concealment--of his dealing with Jews--of his bribing the servants
of the convent. I thought of all he had undertaken, and all he had
undergone. Then I dreaded that all might be in vain. I would not live
over those four days again to be sovereign of the earth. I will give you
one slight proof of what I must have felt, when I heard the workmen say,
“It will be finished soon.” I used to rise at an hour before matins,
displace the stones, trample on the mortar, which I mingled with the
clay, so as to render it totally useless; and finally, _re-act
Penelope’s web_ with such success, that the workmen believed the devil
himself was obstructing their operations, and latterly never came to
their task unless armed with a vessel of holy water, which they dashed
about with infinite sanctimony and profusion. On the fifth evening I
caught the following lines beneath the door. “All is settled--I have
fixed the Jew on _Jewish terms_. He affects to be ignorant of my real
rank, and certain (_future_) wealth, but he knows it all, and dare not,
for his own sake, betray me. The Inquisition, to which I could expose
him in a moment, is my best security--I must add, my _only_. There is a
wretch in your convent, who took sanctuary from _parricide_, and
consented to become a monk, to escape the vengeance of heaven in this
life at least. I have heard, that this monster cut his own father’s
throat, as he sat at supper, to obtain a small sum which he had lost at
gambling. His partner, who was a loser also, had, it seems, made a vow
to an image of the Virgin, that was in the neighbourhood of the wretched
house where they gamed, to present two wax tapers before it in the event
of his success. He lost; and, in the fury of a gamester, as he repassed
the image, he struck and spit at it. This was very shocking--but what
was it to the crime of him who is now an inmate of your convent? The one
defaced an image, the other murdered his father: Yet the former expired
under tortures the most horrible, and the other, after some vain efforts
to elude justice, _took sanctuary_, and is now a lay-brother in your
convent. On the crimes of this wretch I build all my hopes. His soul
must be saturated with avarice, sensuality, and desperation. There is
nothing he will hesitate at if he be bribed;--for money he will
undertake your liberation--for money he will undertake to strangle you
in your cell. He envies Judas the thirty pieces of silver for which the
Redeemer of mankind was sold. _His_ soul might be purchased at
half-price. Such is the instrument with which I must work.--It is
horrible, but necessary. I have read, that from the most venomous
reptiles and plants, have been extracted the most sanative medicines. I
will squeeze the juice, and trample on the weed.

“Alonzo, tremble not at these words. Let not your habits prevail over
your character. Entrust your liberation to me, and the instruments I am
compelled to work with; and doubt not, that the hand which traces these
lines, will soon be clasping that of a brother in freedom.”

“I read these lines over and over again in the solitude of my cell, when
the excitement of watching for, secreting, and perusing it _for the
first time_, were over, and many doubts and fears began to gather round
me like twilight clouds. In proportion as Juan’s confidence increased,
mine appeared to diminish. There was a terrifying contrast between the
fearlessness, independence, and enterprise of _his_ situation, and the
loneliness, timidity, and danger of mine. While the hope of escape,
through his courage and address, still burnt like an inextinguishable
light in the depth of my heart, I still dreaded entrusting my destiny to
a youth so impetuous, though so affectionate; one who had fled from his
parents’ mansion, was living by subterfuge and imposture in Madrid, and
had engaged, as his coadjutor, a wretch whom nature must revolt from.
Upon whom and what did my hopes of liberation rest? On the affectionate
energies of a wild, enterprising, and unaided being, and the
co-operation of a demon, who might snatch at a bribe, and then shake it
in triumph in his ears, as the seal of our mutual and eternal despair,
while he flung the key of liberation into an abyss where no light could
penetrate, and from which no arm could redeem it.

“Under these impressions, I deliberated, I prayed, I wept in the agony
of doubt. At last I wrote a few lines to Juan, in which I honestly
stated my doubts and apprehensions. I stated first my doubts of the
possibility of my escape. I said, “Can it be imagined that a being whom
all Madrid, whom all Spain, is on the watch for, can elude their
detection? Reflect, dear Juan, that I am staked against a community, a
priesthood, a nation. The escape of a monk is almost impossible,--but
his concealment afterwards is downright impossible. Every bell in every
convent in Spain would ring out _untouched_ in pursuit of the fugitive.
The military, civil, and ecclesiastical powers, would all be on the “qui
vive.” Hunted, panting, and despairing, I might fly from place to
place--no place affording me shelter. The incensed powers of the
church--the fierce and vigorous gripe of the law--the execration and
hatred of society--the suspicions of the lowest order among whom I must
lurk, to shun and curse their penetration; think of encountering all
this, while the fiery cross of the Inquisition blazes in the van,
followed by the whole pack, shouting, cheering, hallooing on to the
prey. Oh Juan! if you knew the terrors under which I live--under which I
would rather die than encounter them again, even on the condition of
liberation! Liberation! Great God! what chance of liberation for a monk
in Spain? There is not a cottage where I could rest one night in
security--there is not a cavern whose echoes would not resound to the
cry of my apostacy. If I was hid in the bowels of the earth, they would
discover me, and tear me from its entrails. My beloved Juan, when I
consider the omnipotence of the ecclesiastical power in Spain, may I not
address it in the language applied to Omnipotence itself: “If I climb up
to heaven, thou art _there_;--if I go down to hell, thou art _there_
also;--if I take the wings of the morning, and flee unto the _uttermost
parts of the sea_, _even there_--” And suppose my liberation was
accomplished--suppose the convent plunged in a profound torpor, and the
unsleeping eye of the Inquisition winked at my apostacy--where am I to
reside? how am I to procure subsistence? The luxurious indolence of my
early years unfit me for active employment. The horrible conflict of
apathy the deepest, with hostility the most deadly, in monastic life,
disqualifies me for society. Throw the doors of every convent in Spain
open, and for what will their inmates be fit? For nothing that will
either embellish or improve it. What could I do to serve myself?--what
could I do that would not betray me? I should be a persecuted,
breathless fugitive,--a branded _Cain_. Alas!--perhaps expiring in
flames, I might see _Abel_ not _my_ victim, but that of the
Inquisition.”

“When I had written these lines, with an impulse for which all can
account but the writer, I tore them to atoms, burnt them deliberately by
the assistance of the lamp in my cell, and went to watch again at the
door in the passage--the door of hope. In passing through the gallery, I
encountered, for a moment, a person of a most forbidding aspect. I drew
on one side--for I had made it a point not to mix, in the slightest
degree, with the community, beyond what the discipline of the house
compelled me to. As he passed, however, he touched my habit, and gave a
most significant look. I immediately comprehended this was the person
Juan alluded to in his letter. And in a few moments after, on descending
to the garden, I found a note that confirmed my conjectures. It
contained these words: “I have procured the money--I have secured our
agent. He is an incarnate devil, but his resolution and intrepidity are
unquestionable. Walk in the cloister to-morrow evening--some one will
touch your habit--grasp his left wrist, that will be the signal. If he
hesitates, whisper to him--“Juan,” he will answer--“Alonzo.” That is
your man, consult with him. Every step that I have taken will be
communicated to you by him.”

“After reading these lines, I appeared to myself like a piece of
mechanism wound up to perform certain functions, in which its
co-operation was irresistible. The precipitate vigour of Juan’s
movements seemed to impel mine without my own concurrence; and as the
shortness of the time left me no opportunity for deliberation, it left
me also none for choice. I was like a clock whose hands are pushed
forward, and I struck the hours I was impelled to strike. When a
powerful agency is thus exercised on us,--when another undertakes to
think, feel, and act for us, we are delighted to transfer to him, not
only our physical, but our moral responsibility. We say, with selfish
cowardice, and self-flattering passiveness, “Be it so--you have decided
for me,”--without reflecting that at the bar of God there is no bail. So
I walked the next evening in the cloister. I composed my habit,--my
looks; any one would have imagined me plunged in profound
meditation,--and so I was, but not on the subjects with which they
conceived I was occupied. As I walked, some one touched my habit. I
started, and, to my consternation, one of the monks asked my pardon for
the sleeve of his tunic having touched mine. Two minutes after another
touched my habit. I felt the difference,--there was an intelligential
and communicative force in his grasp. He seized it as one who did not
fear to be known, and who had no need to apologise. How is it that crime
thus seizes us in life with a fearless grasp, while the touch of
conscience trembles on the verge of our garment. One would almost parody
the words of the well known Italian proverb, and say that guilt is
masculine, and innocence feminine. _I grasped his wrist_ with a
trembling hand, and whispered--“Juan,” in the same breath. He
answered--“Alonzo,” and passed me onward in a moment. I had then a few
moments leisure to reflect on a destiny thus singularly entrusted to a
being whose affections honoured humanity, and a being whose crimes
disgraced it. I was suspended like Mahomet’s tomb between heaven and
earth. I felt an antipathy indescribable to hold any communication with
a monster who had tried to hide the stains of parricide, by casting over
their bloody and ineffaceable traces the shroud of monasticism. I felt
also an inexpressible terror of Juan’s passions and precipitancy; and I
felt ultimately that I was in the power of all I dreaded most, and must
submit to the operation of that power for my liberation.

“I was in the cloisters the following evening. I cannot say I walked
with a step so equal, but I am sure I did with a step much more
artificially regular. For the second time the same person touched my
habit, and whispered the name of Juan. After this I could no longer
hesitate. I said, in passing, “I am in your power.” A hoarse repulsive
voice answered, “No, I am in yours.” I murmured, “Well, then, I
understand you, we belong to each other.”--“Yes. We must not speak here,
but a fortunate opportunity presents itself for our communication.
To-morrow will be the eve of the feast of Pentecost; the vigil is kept
by the whole community, who go two and two every hour to the altar, pass
their hour in prayer, and then are succeeded by two more, and this
continues all night. Such is the aversion with which you have inspired
the community, that they have one and all refused to accompany you
during your hour, which is to be from two till three. You will therefore
be alone, and during your hour I will come and visit you,--we shall be
undisturbed and unsuspected.” At these words he quitted me. The next
night was the eve of Pentecost, the monks went two and two all night to
the altar,--at two o’clock my turn arrived. They rapped at my cell, and
I descended to the church alone.”




CHAPTER VIII.

    Ye monks and nuns throughout the land,
      Who go to church at night in pairs,
    Never take bell-ropes in your hands,
      To raise you up again from prayers.

    COLMAN.


“I am not superstitious, but, as I entered the church, I felt a chill of
body and soul inexpressible. I approached the altar, and attempted to
kneel,--an invisible hand repelled me. A voice seemed to address me from
the recesses of the altar, and demand what brought me there? I reflected
that those who had just quitted that spot had been absorbed in prayer,
that those who were to succeed me would be engaged in the same profound
homage, while I sought the church with a purpose of imposture and
deception, and abused the hour allotted to the divine worship in
contriving the means to escape from it. I felt I was a deceiver,
shrouding my fraud in the very veils of the temple. I trembled at my
purpose and at myself. I knelt, however, though I did not dare to pray.
The steps of the altar felt unusually cold,--I shuddered at the silence
I was compelled to observe. Alas! how can we expect that object to
succeed, which we dare not entrust to God. Prayer, Sir, when we are
deeply engaged in it, not only makes us eloquent, but communicates a
kind of answering eloquence to the objects around us. At former times,
while I poured out my heart before God, I felt as if the lamps burnt
brighter, and the images smiled,--the silent midnight air was filled
with forms and voices, and every breeze that sighed by the casement bore
to my ear the harpings of a thousand angels. Now all was stilled,--the
lamps, the images, the altar, the roof, seemed to behold me in silence.
They surrounded me like witnesses, whose presence alone is enough to
condemn you, without their uttering a word. I dared not look up,--I
dared not speak,--I dared not pray, lest it would unfold a thought I
could not supplicate a blessing on; and this kind of keeping a secret,
which God must know, is at once so vain and impious.

“I had not remained long in this state of agitation, when I heard a step
approach,--it was that of him I expected. “Rise,” said he, for I was on
my knees; “rise,--we have no time to lose. You have but an hour to
remain in the church, and I have much to tell you in that hour.” I rose.
“To-morrow night is fixed for your escape.”--“To-morrow night,--merciful
God!”--“Yes; in desperate steps there is always more danger from delay
than from precipitation. A thousand eyes and ears are on the watch
already,--a single sinister or ambiguous movement would render it
impossible to escape their vigilance. There may be some danger in
hastening matters thus, but it is unavoidable. To-morrow night, after
midnight, descend to the church, it is probable no one will then be
here. If any one should, (engaged in recollection or in penance), retire
to avoid suspicion. Return as soon as the church is empty,--I will be
here. Do you observe that door?” and he pointed to a low door which I
had often observed before, but never remembered to have seen opened; “I
have obtained the key of that door,--no matter by what means. It
formerly led to the vaults of the convent, but, for some extraordinary
reasons, which I have not time to relate, another passage has been
opened, and the former has not been employed or frequented for many
years. From thence branches another passage, which, I have heard, opens
by a trap-door into the garden.”--“Heard,” I repeated; “Good God! is it
on report, then, you depend in a matter so momentous? If you are not
certain that such a passage exists, and that you will be able to trace
its windings, may we not be wandering amid them all night? Or
perhaps----” “Interrupt me no more with those faint objections; I have
no time to listen to fears which I can neither sympathise with or
obviate. When we get through the trap-door into the garden, (if ever we
do), another danger awaits us.” He paused, I thought, like a man who is
watching the effect of the terrors he excites, not from malignity but
vanity, merely to magnify his own courage in encountering them. I was
silent; and, as he heard neither flattery nor fear, he went on. “Two
fierce dogs are let loose in the garden every night,--but they must be
taken care of. The wall is sixteen feet high,--but your brother has
provided a ladder of ropes, which he will fling over, and by which you
may descend on the other side in safety.”--“Safety! but then Juan will
be in danger.”--“Interrupt me no more,--the danger within the walls is
the least you have to dread, beyond them, where can you seek for refuge
or secrecy? Your brother’s money will enable you possibly to escape from
Madrid. He will bribe high, and every inch of your way must be paved
with his gold. But, after that, so many dangers present themselves, that
the enterprise and the danger seem but just begun. How will you cross
the Pyrennees? How----” and he passed his hand over his forehead, with
the air of a man engaged in an effort beyond his powers, and sorely
perplexed about the means to effect it. This expression, so full of
sincerity, struck me forcibly. It operated as a balance against all my
former prepossessions. But still the more confidence I felt in him, the
more I was impressed by his fears. I repeated after him, “How is it
possible for me to escape ultimately? I may, by your assistance,
traverse those intricate passages, whose cold dews I feel already
distilling on me. I may emerge into light, ascend and descend the wall,
but, after that, how am I to escape?--how am I even to live? All Spain
is but one great monastery,--I must be a prisoner every step that I
take.”--“Your brother must look to that,” said he abruptly; “I have done
what I have undertaken.” I then pressed him with several questions
relating to the details of my escape. His answer was monotonous,
unsatisfactory, and evasive, to a degree that again filled me first with
suspicion, and then with terror. I asked, “But how have you obtained
possession of the keys?”--“It is not your business to inquire.” It was
singular that he returned the same answer to every question I put to
him, relative to his becoming possessed of the means to facilitate my
escape, so that I was compelled to desist unsatisfied, and revert to
what he had told me.--“But, then, that terrible passage near the
vaults,--the chance, the fear that we may never emerge to light! Think
of wandering amid sepulchral ruins, of stumbling over the bones of the
dead, of encountering what I cannot describe,--the horror of being among
those who are neither the living or the dead;--those dark and shadowless
things that sport themselves with the reliques of the dead, and feast
and love amid corruption,--ghastly, mocking, and terrific. _Must_ we
pass near the vaults?”--“What matter? perhaps I have more reason to
dread them than you. Do _you_ expect the spirit of your father to start
from the earth to blast you?” At these words, which he uttered in a tone
intended to inspire me with confidence, I shuddered with horror. They
were uttered by a parricide, boasting of his crime in a church at
midnight, amid saints, whose images were silent, but seemed to tremble.
For relief I reverted to the unscaleable wall, and the difficulty of
managing the ladder of ropes without detection. The same answer was on
his lips,--“Leave that to me,--all that is settled.” While he answered
thus, he always turned his face away, and broke his words into
monosyllables. At last I felt that the case was desperate,--that I must
trust every thing to him. _To him!_ Oh, my God! what I felt when I said
this to myself! The conviction thrilled on my soul,--I am in his power.
And yet, even under the impression, I could not help recurring to the
impracticable difficulties that appeared to obstruct my escape. He then
lost patience,--reproached me with timidity and ingratitude; and, while
resuming his naturally ferocious and menacing tone, I actually felt more
confidence in him than when he had attempted to disguise it.
Half-remonstrance, half-invective as it was, what he said displayed so
much ability, intrepidity, and art, that I began to feel a kind of
doubtful security. I conceived, at least, that if any being on earth
could effect my liberation, this was the man. He had no conception of
fear,--no idea of conscience. When he hinted at his having murdered his
father, it was done to impress me with an idea of his hardihood. I saw
this from his expression, for I had involuntarily looked up at him. His
eye had neither the hollowness of remorse, or the wandering of fear,--it
glared on me bold, challenging, and prominent. He had but one idea
annexed to the word danger,--that of strong excitement. He undertook a
perilous attempt as a gamester would sit down to encounter an antagonist
worthy of him; and, if life and death were the stake, he only felt as if
he were playing at a higher rate, and the increased demands on his
courage and talent actually supplied him with the means of meeting them.
Our conference was now nearly at an end, when it occurred to me that
this man was exposing himself to a degree of danger which it was almost
incredible he should brave on my account; and this mystery, at least, I
was resolved to penetrate. I said, “But how will you provide for your
own safety? What will become of you when my escape is discovered? Would
not the most dreadful punishments attend even the suspicion of your
having been an agent in it, and what must be the result when that
suspicion is exchanged for the most undeniable certainty?” It is
impossible for me to describe the change his expression underwent while
I uttered these words. He looked at me for some time without speaking,
with an indefinable mixture of sarcasm, contempt, doubt, and curiosity
in his countenance, and then attempted to laugh, but the muscles of his
face were too stubborn and harsh to admit of this modulation. To
features like his, frowns were a habit, and smiles a convulsion. He
could produce nothing but a _rictus Sardonicus_, the terrors of which
there is no describing. It is very frightful to behold crime in its
merriment,--its smile must be purchased by many groans. My blood ran
cold as I looked at him. I waited for the sound of his voice as a kind
of relief. At length he said, “Do you imagine me such an ideot as to
promote your escape at the risk of imprisonment for life,--perhaps of
immurement,--perhaps of the Inquisition?” and again he laughed. “No, we
must escape together. Could you suppose I would have so much anxiety
about an event, in which I had no part but that of an assistant? It was
of my own danger I was thinking,--it was of my own safety I was
doubtful. Our situation has happened to unite very opposite characters
in the same adventure, but it is an union inevitable and _inseparable_.
Your destiny is now bound to mine by a tie which no human force can
break,--we part no more for ever. The secret that each is in possession
of, must be watched by the other. Our lives are in each other’s hands,
and a moment of absence might be that of treachery. We must pass life in
each watching every breath the other draws, every glance the other
gives,--in dreading sleep as an involuntary betrayer, and watching the
broken murmurs of each other’s restless dreams. We may hate each other,
torment each other,--worst of all, we may be weary of each other, (for
hatred itself would be a relief, compared to the tedium of our
inseparability), but separate we must never.” At this picture of the
liberty for which I had risked so much, my very soul recoiled. I gazed
on the formidable being with whom my existence was thus incorporated. He
was now retiring, when he paused at some distance to repeat his last
words, or perhaps to observe their effect. I was sitting on the
altar,--it was late,--the lamps in the church burned very dimly, and, as
he stood in the aisle, he was placed in such a position, with regard to
that which hung from the roof, that the light fell only on his face and
one hand, which he extended towards me. The rest of his figure,
enveloped in darkness, gave to this bodyless and spectre head an effect
truly appalling. The ferocity of his features, too, was softened into a
heavy and death-like gloom, as he repeated, “We part never,--I must be
near you for ever,” and the deep tones of his voice rolled like
subterranean thunder round the church. A long pause followed. He
continued to stand in the same posture, nor had I power to change mine.
The clock struck three, its sound reminded me that my hour had expired.
We separated, each taking different directions; and the two monks who
succeeded me luckily came a few minutes late, (both of them yawning most
fearfully), so our departure was unobserved.

“The day that followed I have no more power of describing, than of
analysing a dream to its component parts of sanity, delirium, defeated
memory, and triumphant imagination. The sultan in the eastern tale, who
plunged his head in a bason of water, and, before he raised it again,
passed through adventures the most vicissitudinous and incredible--was a
monarch, a slave, a husband, a widower, a father, childless,--in five
minutes, never underwent the changes of _mind_ that I did during that
memorable day. I was a prisoner,--free,--a happy being, surrounded by
smiling infants,--a victim of the Inquisition, writhing amid flames and
execrations. I was a maniac, oscillating between hope and despair. I
seemed to myself all that day to be pulling the rope of a bell, whose
alternate knell was _heaven_--_hell_, and this rung in my ears with all
the dreary and ceaseless monotony of the bell of the convent. Night came
at last. I might almost say _day came_, for that day had been my night.
Every thing was propitious to me,--the convent was all hushed. I put my
head several times out of my cell, to be assured of this,--_all was
hushed_. There was not a step in the corridor,--not a voice, not a
whisper to be heard under a roof containing so many souls. I stole from
my cell, I descended to the church. This was not unusual for those whose
consciences or nerves were disturbed, during the sleepless gloom of a
conventual night. As I advanced to the door of the church, where the
lamps were always kept burning, I heard a human voice. I retreated in
terror;--then I ventured to give a glance. An old monk was at prayers
before one of the images of the saints, and the object of his prayers
was to be relieved, not from the anguish of conscience, or the
annihilation of monasticism, but from the pains of a toothache, for
which he had been desired to apply his gums to the image of a saint
quite notorious for her efficacy in such cases(5). The poor, old,
tortured wretch, prayed with all the fervency of agony, and then rubbed
his gums over and over again on the cold marble, which increased his
complaint, his suffering, and his devotion. I watched, listened,--there
was something at once ludicrous and frightful in my situation. I felt
inclined to laugh at my own distress, while it was rising almost to
agony every moment. I dreaded, too, the approach of another intruder,
and feeling my fear about to be realized by the approach of some one, I
turned round, and, to my inexpressible relief, saw my companion. I made
him comprehend, by a sign, how I was prevented from entering the church;
he answered me in the same way, and retreated a few steps, but not
without shewing me a bunch of huge keys under his habit. This revived my
spirits, and I waited for another half-hour in a state of mental
excruciation, which, were it inflicted on the bitterest enemy I have on
earth, I think I would have cried, “Hold,--hold, spare him.” The clock
struck two,--I writhed and stamped with my feet, as loud as I dared, on
the floor of the passage. I was not at all tranquillized by the visible
impatience of my companion, who started, from time to time, from his
hiding-place behind a pillar of the cloister, flung on me a
glance----no, a glare--of wild and restless inquiry, (which I answered
with one of despondency), and retired, grinding curses between his
teeth, whose horrible grating I could hear distinctly in the intervals
of my long-withheld breath. At last I took a desperate step. I walked
into the church, and, going straight up to the altar, prostrated myself
on the steps. The old monk observed me. He believed that I had come
there with the same purpose, if not with the same feelings, as himself;
and he approached me, to announce his intention of joining in my
aspirations, and intreating an interest in them, _as the pain had now
reached from the lower jaw to the upper_. There is something that one
can hardly describe in this union of the lowest with the highest
interests of life. I was a prisoner, panting for emancipation, and
staking my existence on the step I was compelled to take,--my whole
interest for time, and perhaps for eternity, hung on a moment; and
beside me knelt a being whose destiny was decided already, who could be
nothing but a monk for the few years of his worthless existence, and who
was supplicating a short remission from a temporary pain, that I would
have endured my whole life for an hour’s liberty. As he drew near me,
and supplicated an interest in my prayers, I shrunk away. I felt a
difference in the object of our addresses to God, that I dared not
search my heart for the motive of. I knew not, at the moment, which of
us was right,--he, whose prayer did no dishonour to the place,--or I,
who was to struggle against a disorganized and unnatural state of life,
whose vows I was about to violate. I knelt with him, however, and prayed
for the removal of his pain with a sincerity that cannot be questioned,
as the success of my petitions might be the means of procuring his
absence. As I knelt, I trembled at my own hypocrisy. I was profaning the
altar of God,--I was mocking the sufferings of the being I supplicated
for,--I was the worst of all hypocrites, a hypocrite on my knees, and at
the altar. Yet, was I not compelled to be so? If I _was_ a hypocrite,
who had made me one? If I profaned the altar, who had dragged me there,
to insult it by vows my soul belied and reversed faster than my lips
could utter them? But this was no time for self-examination. I knelt,
prayed, and trembled, till the poor sufferer, weary of his ineffectual
and unanswered supplications, rose, and began to crawl away. For a few
minutes I shivered in horrible anxiety, lest some other intruder might
approach, but the quick decisive step that trod the aisle restored my
confidence in a moment,--it was my companion. He stood beside me. He
uttered a few curses, which sounded very shocking in my ears, more from
the force of habit, and influence of the place, than from the meaning
attached to them, and then hurried on _to the door_. A large bunch of
keys was in his hand, and I followed instinctively this pledge of my
liberation.

  (5) Vide Moore’s View of France and Italy.

“The door was very low--we descended to it by four steps. He applied his
key, muffling it in the sleeve of his habit to suppress the sound. At
every application he recoiled, gnashed his teeth, stamped--then applied
both hands. The lock did not give way--I clasped my hands in agony--I
tossed them over my head. “Fetch a light,” he said in a whisper; “take a
lamp from before one of those figures.” The levity with which he spoke
of the holy images appalled me, and the act appeared to me nothing short
of sacrilege; yet I went and took a lamp, which, with a shuddering hand,
I held to him as he again tried the key. During this second attempt, we
communicated in whispers those fears that left us scarce breath even for
whispers. “Was not that a noise?”--“No, it was the echo of this jarring,
stubborn lock. Is there no one coming?”--“Not one.”--“Look out into the
passage.”--“Then I cannot hold the light to you.”--“No matter--any thing
but detection.”--“Any thing for escape,” I retorted with a courage that
made him start, as I set down the lamp, and joined my strength to his to
turn the key. It grated, resisted; the lock seemed invincible. Again we
tried, with cranched teeth, indrawn breath, and fingers stripped almost
to the bone,--in vain.--Again--in vain.--Whether the natural ferocity of
his temper bore disappointment worse than mine, or that, like many men
of undoubted courage, he was impatient of a _slight_ degree of physical
pain, in a struggle where he would have risked and lost life without a
murmur,--or how it was, I know not,--but he sunk down on the steps
leading to the door, wiped away the big drops of toil and terror from
his forehead with the sleeve of his habit, and cast on me a look that
was at once the pledge of sincerity and of despair. The clock struck
three. The sound rung in my ears like the trumpet of the day of
doom--the trumpet that _will sound_. He clasped his hands with a fierce
and convulsive agony, that might have pictured the last struggles of the
impenitent malefactor,--that agony without remorse, that suffering
without requital or consolation, that, if I may say so, arrays crime in
the dazzling robe of magnanimity, and makes us admire the fallen spirit,
with whom we dare not sympathize. “We are undone,” he cried; “_you_ are
undone. At the hour of three another monk is to enter on his hour of
recollection.” And he added, in a lower tone of horror inexpressible, “I
hear his steps in the passage.” At the moment he uttered these words,
the key, that I had never ceased to struggle with, turned in the lock.
The door opened, the passage lay free to us. My companion recovered
himself at the sight, and in the next moment we were both in the
passage. Our first care was to remove the key, and lock the door on the
inside; and during this, we had the satisfaction to discover, that there
was no one in the church, no one approaching it. Our fears had deceived
us; we retired from the door, looked at each other with a kind of
breathless, half-revived confidence, and began our progress through the
vault in silence and in safety. In safety! my God! I yet tremble at the
thought of that subterranean journey, amid the vaults of a convent, with
a parricide for my companion. But what is there that danger will not
familiarize us with? Had I been told such a story of another, I would
have denounced him as the most reckless and desperate being on
earth--yet _I was the man_. I had secured the lamp, (whose light
appeared to reproach me with sacrilege at every gleam it shed on our
progress), and followed my companion in silence. Romances have made your
country, Sir, familiar with tales of subterranean passages, and
supernatural horrors. All these, painted by the most eloquent pen, must
fall short of the breathless horror felt by a being engaged in an
enterprise beyond his powers, experience, or calculation, driven to
trust his life and liberation to hands that reeked with a father’s
blood. It was in vain that I tried _to make up my mind_,--that I said to
myself, “This is to last but for a short time,”--that I struggled to
force on myself the conviction that it was necessary to have such
associates in desperate enterprises;--it was all in vain. I trembled at
my situation,--at myself, and that is a terror we can never overcome. I
stumbled over the stones,--I was chilled with horror at every step. A
blue mist gathered before my eyes,--it furred the edges of the lamp with
a dim and hazy light. My imagination began to operate, and when I heard
the curses with which my companion reproached my involuntary delay, I
began almost to fear that I was following the steps of a demon, who had
lured me there for purposes beyond the reach of imagination to picture.
Tales of superstition crowded on me like images of terror on those who
are in the dark. I had heard of infernal beings who deluded monks with
the hopes of liberation, seduced them into the vaults of the convent,
and then proposed conditions which it is almost as horrible to relate as
to undergo the performance of. I thought of being forced to witness the
unnatural revels of a diabolical feast,--of seeing the rotting flesh
distributed,--of drinking the dead corrupted blood,--of hearing the
anthems of fiends howled in insult, on that awful verge where life and
eternity mingle,--of hearing the hallelujahs of the choir, echoed even
through the vaults, where demons were yelling the _black mass_ of their
infernal Sabbath.--I thought of all that the interminable passages, the
livid light, and the diabolical companion, might suggest.

“Our wanderings in the passage seemed to be endless. My companion turned
to right, to left,--advanced, retreated, paused,--(the pause was
dreadful)!--Then advanced again, tried another direction, where the
passage was so low that I was obliged to crawl on my hands and knees to
follow him, and even in this posture my head struck against the ragged
roof. When we had proceeded for a considerable time, (at least so it
appeared to me, for minutes are hours in the _noctuary_ of
terror,--terror has no _diary_), this passage became so narrow and so
low, that I could proceed no farther, and wondered how my companion
could have advanced beyond me. I called to him, but received no answer;
and, in the darkness of the passage, or rather hole, it was impossible
to see ten inches before me. I had the lamp, too, to watch, which I had
held with a careful trembling hand, but which began to burn dim in the
condensed and narrow atmosphere. A gush of terror rose in my throat.
Surrounded as I was by damps and dews, my whole body felt in a fever. I
called again, but no voice answered. In situations of peril, the
imagination is unhappily fertile, and I could not help recollecting and
_applying_ a story I had once read of some travellers who attempted to
explore the vaults of the Egyptian pyramids. One of them, who was
advancing, as I was, on his hands and knees, stuck in the passage, and,
whether from terror, or from the natural consequences of his situation,
swelled so that it was impossible for him to retreat, advance, or allow
a passage for his companions. The party were on their return, and
finding their passage stopped by this irremoveable obstruction, their
lights trembling on the verge of extinction, and their guide terrified
beyond the power of direction or advice, proposed, in the selfishness to
which the feeling of vital danger reduces all, to cut off the limbs of
the wretched being who obstructed their passage. He heard this proposal,
and, contracting himself with agony at the sound, was reduced, by that
strong muscular spasm, to his usual dimensions, dragged out, and
afforded room for the party to advance. He was suffocated, however, in
the effort, and left behind a corse. All this detail, that takes many
words to tell, rushed on my soul in a moment;--on my soul?--no, on my
body. I was all physical feeling,--all intense corporeal agony, and God
only knows, and man only can feel, how that agony can absorb and
annihilate all other feeling within us,--how we could, in such a moment,
feed on a parent, to gnaw out our passage into life and liberty, as
sufferers in a wreck have been known to gnaw their own flesh, for the
support of that existence which the unnatural morsel was diminishing at
every agonizing bite.

“I tried to crawl backwards,--I succeeded. I believe the story I
recollected had an effect on me, I felt a contraction of muscles
corresponding to what I had read of. I felt myself almost liberated by
the sensation, and the next moment I was actually so;--I had got out of
the passage I knew not how. I must have made one of those extraordinary
exertions, whose energy is perhaps not only increased by, but dependent
on, our unconsciousness of them. However it was, I was extricated, and
stood breathless and exhausted, with the dying lamp in my hand, staring
around me, and seeing nothing but the black and dripping walls, and the
low arches of the vault, that seemed to lower over me like the frown of
an eternal hostility,--a frown that forbids hope or escape. The lamp was
rapidly extinguishing in my hand,--I gazed on it with a fixed eye. I
knew that my life, and, what was dearer than my life, my liberation,
depended on my watching its last glimpse, yet I gazed on it with the eye
of an ideot,--a stupified stare. The lamp glimmered more faintly,--its
dying gleams awoke me to recollection. I roused myself,--I looked
around. A strong flash discovered an object near me. I shuddered,--I
uttered cries, though I was unconscious of doing so, for a voice said to
me,--“Hush, be silent; I left you only to reconnoitre the passages. I
have made out the way to the trap-door,--be silent, and all is well.” I
advanced trembling, my companion appeared trembling too. He whispered,
“Is the lamp so nearly extinguished?”--“You see.”--“Try to keep it in
for a few moments.”--“I will; but, if I cannot, what then?”--“Then we
must perish,” he added, with an execration that I thought would have
brought down the vaults over our heads. It is certain, Sir, however,
that desperate sentiments are best suited to desperate emergencies, and
this wretch’s blasphemies gave me a kind of horrible confidence in his
courage. On he went, muttering curses before me; and I followed,
watching the last light of the lamp with agony increased by my fear
of further provoking my horrible guide. I have before mentioned how
our feelings, even in the most fearful exigencies, dwindle into
petty and wretched details. With all my care, however, the lamp
declined,--quivered,--flashed a pale light, like the smile of despair
on me, and was extinguished. I shall never forget the look my guide
threw on me by its sinking light. I had watched it like the last
beatings of an expiring heart, like the shiverings of a spirit about to
part for eternity. I saw it extinguished, and believed myself already
among those for “whom the blackness of darkness is reserved for ever.”

“It was at this moment that a faint sound reached our frozen ears;--it
was the chaunt of matins, performed by candle-light at this season of
the year, which was begun in the chapel now far above us. This voice of
heaven thrilled us,--we seemed the pioneers of darkness, on the very
frontiers of hell. This superb insult of celestial triumph, that amid
the strains of hope spoke despair to us, announced a God to those who
were stopping their ears against the sound of his name, had an effect
indescribably awful. I fell to the ground, whether from stumbling from
the darkness, or shrinking from emotion, I know not. I was roused by the
rough arm, and rougher voice of my companion. Amid execrations that
froze my blood, he told me this was no time for failing or for fear. I
asked him, trembling, what I was to do? He answered, “Follow me, and
feel your way in darkness.” Dreadful sounds!--Those who tell us _the
whole_ of our calamity always appear malignant, for our hearts, or our
imaginations, always flatter us that it is not so great as reality
proves it to be. Truth is told us by any mouth sooner than our own.

“In darkness, total darkness, and on my hands and knees, for I could no
longer stand, I followed him. This motion soon affected my head; I grew
giddy first, then stupified. I paused. He growled a curse, and I
instinctively quickened my movements, like a dog who hears the voice of
a chiding master. My habit was now in rags from my struggles, my knees
and hands stript of skin. I had received several severe bruises on my
head, from striking against the jagged and unhewn stones which formed
the irregular sides and roof of this eternal passage. And, above all,
the unnatural atmosphere, combined with the intensity of my emotion, had
produced a thirst, the agony of which I can compare to nothing but that
of a burning coal dropt into my throat, which I seemed to suck for
moisture, but which left only drops of fire on my tongue. Such was my
state, when I called out to my companion that I could proceed no
farther. “Stay there and rot, then,” was the answer; and perhaps the
most soothing words of encouragement could not have produced so strong
an effect on me. This confidence of despair, this bravado against
danger, that menaced the power in his very citadel, gave me a temporary
courage,--but what is courage amid darkness and doubt? From the
faultering steps, the suffocated breath, the muttered curses, I guessed
what was going on. I was right. The final--hopeless stop followed
instantly, announced by the last wild sob, the cranching of despairing
teeth, the clasping, or rather clap, of the locked hands, in the
terrible extacy of utter agony. I was kneeling behind him at that
moment, and I echoed every cry and gesture with a violence that started
my guide. He silenced me with curses. Then he attempted to pray; but his
prayers sounded so like curses, and his curses were so like prayers to
the evil one, that, choaking with horror, I implored him to cease. He
did cease, and for nearly half an hour neither of us uttered a word. We
lay beside each other like two panting dogs that I have read of, who lay
down to die close to the animal they pursued, whose fur they fanned with
their dying breath, while unable to mouthe her.

“Such appeared emancipation to us,--so near, and yet so hopeless. We lay
thus, not daring to speak to each other, for who could speak but of
despair, and which of us dared to aggravate the despair of the other.
This kind of fear which we know already felt by others, and which we
dread to aggravate by uttering, _even to those who know it_, is perhaps
the most horrible sensation ever experienced. The very thirst of my body
seemed to vanish in this fiery thirst of the soul for communication,
where all communication was unutterable, impossible, hopeless. Perhaps
the condemned spirits will feel thus at their final sentence, when they
know all that is to be suffered, and dare not disclose to each other
that horrible truth which is no longer a secret, but which the profound
silence of their despair would seem to make one. The secret of silence
is the only secret. Words are a blasphemy against that taciturn and
invisible God, whose presence enshrouds us in our last extremity. These
moments that appeared to me endless, were soon to cease. My companion
sprung up,--he uttered a cry of joy. I imagined him deranged,--he was
not. He exclaimed, “Light, light,--the light of heaven; we are near the
trap-door, I see the light through it.” Amid all the horrors of our
situation, he had kept his eye constantly turned upwards, for he knew
that, if we were near it, the smallest glimmering of light would be
visible in the intense darkness that enveloped us. He was right. I
started up,--I saw it too. With locked hands, with dropt and wordless
lips, with dilated and thirsting eyes, we gazed upwards. A thin line of
grey light appeared above our heads. It broadened, it grew brighter,--it
_was_ the light of heaven, and its breezes too came fluttering to us
through the chinks of the trap-door that opened into the garden.”




CHAPTER IX.


“Though life and liberty seemed so near, our situation was still very
critical. The morning light that aided our escape, might open many an
eye to mark it. There was not a moment to be lost. My companion proposed
to ascend first, and I did not venture to oppose him. I was too much in
his power to resist; and in early youth superiority of depravity always
seems like a superiority of power. We reverence, with a prostituted
idolatry, those who have passed through the degrees of vice before us.
This man was criminal, and crime gave him a kind of heroic immunity in
my eyes. Premature knowledge in life is always to be purchased by guilt.
He knew more than I did,--he was my all in this desperate attempt. I
dreaded him as a demon, yet I invoked him as a god.

“In the end I submitted to his proposal. I was very tall, but he was
much stronger than I. He rose on my shoulders, I trembled under his
weight, but he succeeded in raising the trap-door,--the full light of
day broke on us both. In a moment he dropt his hold of the door,--he
fell to the ground with a force that struck me down. He exclaimed, “The
workmen are there, they have come about the repairs, we are lost if we
are discovered. They are there, the garden is full of them already, they
will be there the whole day. That cursed lamp, it has undone us! Had it
but kept in for a few moments, we might have been in the garden, might
have crossed the wall, might have been at liberty, and now----” He fell
to the ground convulsed with rage and disappointment, as he spoke. To me
there was nothing so terrible in this intelligence. That we were
disappointed for a time was evident, but we had been relieved from the
most horrible of all fears, that of wandering in famine and darkness
till we perished,--we had found the way to the trap-door. I had
unfailing confidence in Juan’s patience and zeal. I was sure that if he
was watching for us on that night, he would watch for many a successive
night. Finally, I felt we had but twenty-four hours or less to wait, and
what was that to the eternity of hours that must otherwise be wasted in
a convent. I suggested all this to my companion as I closed the
trap-door; but I found in his complaints, imprecations, and tossing
restlessness of impatience and despair, the difference between man and
man in the hour of trial. He possessed active, and I passive fortitude.
Give him something to do, and he would do it at the risk of limb, and
life, and soul,--he never murmured. Give me something to suffer, to
undergo, to submit, and I became at once the _hero of submission_. While
this man, with all his physical strength, and all his mental hardihood,
was tossing on the earth with the imbecillity of an infant, in a
paroxysm of unappeasable passion, I was his consoler, adviser, and
supporter. At last he suffered himself to hear reason; he agreed that we
must remain twenty-four hours more in the passage, on which he bestowed
a whole litany of curses. So we determined to stand in stillness and
darkness till night; but such is the restlessness of the human heart,
that this arrangement, which a few hours before we would have embraced
as the offer of a benignant angel for our emancipation, began to
display, as we were compelled to examine its aspect more closely,
certain features that were repulsive almost to hideousness. We were
exhausted nearly to death. Our physical exertions had been, for the last
few hours, almost incredible; in fact, I am convinced that nothing but
the consciousness that we were engaged in a struggle for life or death,
could have enabled us to support it, and now that the struggle was over,
we began to feel our weakness. Our mental sufferings had not been
less,--we had been excruciated body and soul alike. Could our mental
struggles have operated like our bodily ones, we would have been seen to
weep drops of blood, as we felt we were doing at every step of our
progress. Recollect too, Sir, the unnatural atmosphere we had breathed
so long, amid darkness and danger, and which now began to show its
anti-vital and pestilent effect, in producing alternately on our bodies
deluges of perspiration, succeeded by a chill that seemed to freeze the
very marrow. In this state of mental fever, and bodily exhaustion, we
had now to wait many hours, in darkness, without food, till Heaven
pleased to send us night. But how were those hours to be passed? The
preceding day had been one of strict abstinence,--we began already to
feel the gnawings of hunger, a hunger not to be appeased. We must fast
till the moment of liberation, and we must fast amid stone walls, and
damp seats on floors of stone, which diminished every moment the
strength necessary to contend with their impenetrable hardness,--their
withering chillness.

“The last thought that occurred to me was,--with what a companion those
hours must be passed. With a being whom I abhorred from my very soul,
while I felt that his presence was at once an irrepealable curse, and an
invincible necessity. So we stood, shivering under the trap-door, not
daring to whisper our thoughts to each other, but feeling _that despair
of incommunication_ which is perhaps the severest curse that can be
inflicted on those who are compelled to be together, and compelled, by
the same necessity that imposes their ungenial union, not even to
communicate their fears to each other. We _hear_ the throb of each
others hearts, and yet dare not say, “My heart beats in unison with
yours.”

“As we stood thus, the light became suddenly eclipsed. I knew not from
what this arose, till I felt a shower, the most violent perhaps that
ever was precipitated on the earth, make its way even through the
trap-door, and drench me in five minutes to the skin. I retreated from
the spot, but not before I had received it in every pore of my body.
You, Sir, who live in happy Ireland, blessed by God with an exemption
from those vicissitudes of the atmosphere, can have no idea of their
violence in continental countries. This rain was followed by peals of
thunder, that made me fear God was pursuing me into the abysses where I
had shrunk to escape from his vengeance, and drew from my companion
blasphemies more loud than thunder, as he felt himself drenched by the
shower, that now, flooding the vault, rose almost to our ancles. At last
he proposed our retiring to a place which he said he was acquainted
with, and which would shelter us. He added, that it was but a few steps
from where we stood, and that we could easily find our way back. I did
not dare to oppose him, and followed to a dark recess, only
distinguished from the rest of the vault by the remains of what had once
been a door. It was now light, and I could distinguish objects plainly.
By the deep hollows framed for the shooting of the bolt, and the size of
the iron hinges that still remained, though covered with rust, I saw it
must have been of no common strength, and probably intended to secure
the entrance to a dungeon,--there was no longer a door, yet I shuddered
to enter it. As we did so, both of us, exhausted in body and mind, sunk
on the hard floor. We did not say a word to each other, an inclination
to sleep irresistibly overcame us; and whether that sleep was to be my
last or not, I felt a profound indifference. Yet I was now on the verge
of liberty, and though drenched, famishing, and comfortless, was, in any
rational estimate, an object much more enviable than in the
heart-withering safety of my cell. Alas! it is too true that our souls
always contract themselves on the approach of a blessing, and seem as if
their powers, exhausted in the effort to obtain it, had no longer energy
to embrace the object. Thus we are always compelled to substitute the
pleasure of the pursuit for that of the attainment,--to reverse the
means for the end, or confound them, in order to extract any enjoyment
from either, and at last fruition becomes only another name for
lassitude. These reflections certainly did not occur to me, when, worn
out with toil, terror, and famine, I fell on the stone floor in a sleep
that was not sleep,--it seemed the suspension both of my mortal and
immortal nature. I ceased from animal and intellectual life at once.
There are cases, Sir, where the thinking power appears to accompany us
to the very verge of slumber, where we sleep full of delightful
thoughts, and sleep only to review them in our dreams: But there are
also cases when we feel that our sleep is a “sleep for ever,”--when we
resign the hope of immortality for the hope of a profound repose,--when
we demand from the harassings of fate, “Rest, rest,” and no more,--when
the soul and body faint together, and all we ask of God or man is to let
us sleep.

“In such a state I fell to the ground; and, at that moment, would have
bartered all my hopes of liberation for twelve hours profound repose, as
Esau sold his birth-right for a small but indispensible refreshment. I
was not to enjoy even this repose long. My companion was sleeping too.
Sleeping! great God! what was his sleep?--that in whose neighbourhood no
one could close an eye, or, worse, an ear. He talked as loudly and
incessantly as if he had been employed in all the active offices of
life. I heard involuntarily the secret of his dreams. I knew he had
murdered his father, but I did not know that the vision of parricide
haunted him in his broken visions. My sleep was first broken by sounds
as horrible as any I ever had heard at my bed-side in the convent. I
heard sounds that disturbed me, but I was not yet fully awake. They
increased, they redoubled,--the terrors of my habitual associations
awoke me. I imagined the Superior and the whole community pursuing us
with lighted torches. I felt the blaze of the lights in contact with my
very eye-balls. I shrieked. I said, “Spare my sight, do not blind me, do
not drive me mad, and I will confess all.” A deep voice near me
muttered, “Confess.” I started up fully awake,--it was only the voice of
my sleeping companion. I stood on my feet, I viewed him as he lay. He
heaved and wallowed on his bed of stone, as if it had been down. He
seemed to have a frame of adamant. The jagged points of stone, the
hardness of the floor, the ruts and rudenesses of his inhospitable bed,
produced no effect on him. He could have slept, but his dreams were from
within. I have heard, I have read, of the horrors attending the dying
beds of the guilty. They often told us of such in the convent. One monk
in particular, who was a priest, was fond of dwelling on a death-bed
scene he had witnessed, and of describing its horrors. He related that
he had urged a person, who was sitting calmly in his chair, though
evidently dying, to intrust him with his confession. The dying person
answered, “I will, when those leave the room.” The monk, conceiving that
this referred to the relatives and friends, motioned them to retire.
They did so, and again the monk renewed his demands on the conscience of
the penitent. The room was now empty. The monk renewed his adjuration to
the dying man to disclose the secrets of his conscience. The answer was
the same,--“I will, when those are gone.”--“_Those!_”--“Yes, those whom
you cannot see, and cannot banish,--send them away, and I will tell you
the truth.”--“Tell it now, then; there are none here but you and
me.”--“There are,” answered the dying man. “There are none that I can
see,” said the monk, gazing round the room. “But there are those that I
do see,” replied the dying wretch, “and that see me; that are watching,
waiting for me, the moment the breath is out of my body. I see them, I
feel them,--stand on my right side.” The monk changed his position. “Now
they are on the left.” The monk shifted again. “Now they are on my
right.” The monk commanded the children and relatives of the dying
wretch to enter the room, and surround the bed. They obeyed the command.
“Now they are every where,” exclaimed the sufferer, and expired(6).

  (6) Fact,--me ipso teste.

“This terrible story came freshly to my recollection, accompanied by
many others. I had heard much of the terrors that surrounded the dying
bed of the guilty, but, from what I was compelled to hear, I almost
believe them to be less than the terrors of a guilty sleep. I have said
my companion began at first with low mutterings, but among them I could
distinguish sounds that reminded me too soon of all I wished to forget,
at least while we were together. He murmured, “An old man?--yes,--well,
the less blood in him. Grey hairs?--no matter, my crimes have helped to
turn them grey,--he ought to have rent them from the roots long ago.
They are white, you say?--well, to-night they shall be dyed in blood,
then they will be white no longer. Aye,--he will hold them up at the day
of judgment, like a banner of condemnation against me. He will stand at
the head of an army stronger than the army of martyrs,--the host of
those whose murderers have been their own children. What matter whether
they cut their parents’ hearts or their throats. I have cut _one_
through and through, to the very core,--now for the other, it will give
him less pain, I feel that,”--and he laughed, shuddered, and writhed on
his stony bed. Trembling with horror ineffable, I tried to awake him. I
shook his muscular arms, I rolled him on his back, on his face,--nothing
could awake him. It seemed as if I was only rocking him on his cradle of
stone. He went on, “Secure the purse, I know the drawer of the cabinet
where it lies, but secure him first. Well, then, you cannot,--you
shudder at his white hairs, at his calm sleep!--ha! ha! that villains
should be fools. Well, then, I must be the man, it is but a short
struggle with him or me,--he may be damned, and I must. Hush,--how the
stairs creak, they will not tell him it is his son’s foot that is
ascending?--They dare not, the stones of the wall would give them the
lie. Why did you not oil the hinges of the door?--now for it. He sleeps
intensely,--aye, how calm he looks!--the calmer the fitter for heaven.
Now,--now, my knee is on his breast,--where is the knife?--where is the
knife?--if he looks at me I am lost. The knife,--I am a coward; the
knife,--if he opens his eyes I am gone; the knife, ye cursed
cravens,--who dare shrink when I have griped my father’s throat?
There,--there,--there,--blood to the hilt,--the old man’s blood; look
for the money, while I wipe the blade. I cannot wipe it, the grey hairs
are mingled with the blood,--those hairs brushed my lips the last time
he kissed me. I was a child then. I would not have taken a world to
murder him then, now,--now, what am I? Ha! ha! ha! Let Judas shake his
bag of silver against mine,--he betrayed his Saviour, and I have
murdered my father. Silver against silver, and soul against soul. I have
got more for mine,--he was a fool to sell his for thirty. But for which
of us will the last fire burn hotter?--no matter, I am going to try.” At
these horrible expressions, repeated over and over, I called, I shrieked
to my companion to awake. He did so, with a laugh almost as wild as the
chattering of his dreams. “Well, what have you heard? I murdered
him,--you knew that long before. You trusted me in this cursed
adventure, which will risk the life of both, and can you not bear to
hear me speak to myself, though I am only telling what you knew
before?”--“No, I cannot bear it,” I answered, in an agony of horror;
“not even to effect my escape, could I undertake to sustain another hour
like the past,--the prospect of seclusion here for a whole day amid
famine, damps, and darkness, listening to the ravings of a ----. Look
not at me with that glare of mockery, I know it all, I shudder at your
sight. Nothing but the iron link of necessity could have bound me to you
even for a moment. I _am_ bound to you,--I must bear it while it
continues, but do not make those moments insupportable. My life and
liberty are in your hands,--I must add my reason, too, in the
circumstances in which we are plunged,--I cannot sustain your horrible
eloquence of sleep. If I am forced to listen to it again, you may bear
me alive from these walls, but you will bear me away an ideot, stupified
by terrors which my brain is unable to support. Do not sleep, I adjure
you. Let me watch beside you during this wretched day,--this day which
is to be measured by darkness and suffering, instead of light and
enjoyment. I am willing to famish with hunger, to shudder with cold, to
couch on these hard stones, but I cannot bear your dreams,--if you
sleep, I must rouse you in defence of my reason. All physical strength
is failing me fast, and I am become more jealous of the preservation of
my intellect. Do not cast at me those looks of defiance, I am your
inferior in strength, but despair makes us equal.” As I spoke, my voice
sounded like thunder in my own ears, my eyes flashed visibly to myself.
I felt the power that passion gives us, and I saw that my companion felt
it too. I went on, in a tone that made myself start, “If you dare to
sleep, I will wake you,--if you dose even, you shall not have a moment
undisturbed,--you shall wake with me. For this long day we must starve
and shiver together, I have wound myself up to it. I can bear every
thing,--every thing but the dreams of him whose sleep reveals to him the
vision of a murdered parent. Wake,--rave,--blaspheme,--but sleep you
shall not!”

“The man stared at me for some time, almost incredulous of my being
capable of such energy of passion and command. But when he had, by the
help of his dilated eyes, and gaping mouth, appeared to satisfy himself
fully of the fact, his expression suddenly changed. He appeared to feel
a community of nature with me for the first time. Any thing of ferocity
appeared congenial and balsamic to him; and, with oaths, that froze my
blood, swore he liked me the better for my resolution. “I _will_ keep
awake,” he added, with a yawn that distended like the jaws of an Ogre
preparing for his cannibal feast. Then suddenly relaxing, “But how shall
we keep awake? We have nothing to eat, nothing to drink, what shall we
do to keep awake?” And incontinently he uttered a volley of curses. Then
he began to sing. But what songs?--full of such ribaldry and looseness,
that, bred as I was first in domestic privacy, and then in the
strictness of a convent, made me believe it was an incarnate demon that
was howling beside me. I implored him to cease, but this man could pass
so instantaneously from the extremes of atrocity to those of
levity,--from the ravings of guilt and horror ineffable, to songs that
would insult a brothel, that I knew not what to make of him. This _union
of antipodes_, this unnatural alliance of the extremes of guilt and
light-mindedness, I had never met or imagined before. He started from
the visions of a parricide, and sung songs that would have made a harlot
blush. How ignorant of life I must have been, not to know that guilt and
insensibility often join to tenant and deface the same mansion, and that
there is not a more strong and indissoluble alliance on earth, than that
between the hand that dare do any thing, and the heart that can feel
nothing.

“It was in the midst of one of his most licentious songs, that my
companion suddenly paused. He gazed about him for some time; and faint
and dismal as the light was by which we beheld each other, I thought I
could observe an extraordinary expression overshadow his countenance. I
did not venture to notice it. “Do you know where we are?” he whispered.
“Too well;--in the vault of a convent, beyond the help or reach of
man,--without food, without light, and almost without hope.”--“Aye, so
its last inhabitants might well say.”--“Its last inhabitants!--who were
they?”--“I can tell you, if you can bear it.”--“_I cannot bear it_,” I
cried, stopping my ears, “I will not listen to it. I feel by the
narrator it must be something horrid.”--“It was indeed a horrid night,”
said he, unconsciously adverting to some circumstance in the narrative;
and his voice sunk into mutterings, and he forbore to mention the
subject further. I retired as far from him as the limits of the vault
admitted; and, burying my head between my knees, tried to _forbear to
think_. What a state of mind must that be, in which we are driven to
wish we no longer had one!--when we would willingly become “as the
beasts that perish,” to forget that privilege of humanity, which only
seems an undisputed title to superlative misery! To sleep was
impossible. Though sleep seems to be only a necessity of nature, it
always requires an act of the mind to concur in it. And if I had been
willing to rest, the gnawings of hunger, which now began to be exchanged
for the most deadly sickness, would have rendered it impossible. Amid
this complication of physical and mental suffering, it is hardly
credible, Sir, but it is not the less true, that my principal one arose
from the inanity, the want of occupation, inevitably attached to my
dreary situation. To inflict a suspension of the action on a being
conscious of possessing the powers of action, and burning for their
employment,--to forbid all interchange of mutual ideas, or acquirement
of new ones to an intellectual being,--to do this, is to invent a
torture that might make Phalaris blush for his impotence of cruelty.

“I had felt other sufferings almost intolerable, but I felt this
impossible to sustain; and, will you believe it, Sir, after wrestling
with it during an hour (as I counted hours) of unimaginable misery, I
rose, and supplicated my companion to relate the circumstance he had
alluded to, as connected with our dreadful abode. His ferocious good
nature took part with this request in a moment; and though I could see
that his strong frame had suffered more than my comparatively feeble
one, from the struggles of the night and the privations of the day, he
prepared himself with a kind of grim alacrity for the effort. He was now
in his element. He was enabled to daunt a feeble mind by the narration
of horrors, and to amaze an ignorant one with a display of crimes;--and
he needed no more to make him commence. “I remember,” said he, “an
extraordinary circumstance connected with this vault. I wondered how I
felt so familiar with this door, this arch, at first.--I did not
recollect immediately, so many strange thoughts have crossed my mind
every day, that events which would make a life-lasting impression on
others, pass like shadows before me, while thoughts appear like
substances. _Emotions are my events_--you know what brought me to this
cursed convent--well, don’t shiver or look _paler_--you were pale
before. However it was, I found myself in the convent, and I was obliged
to subscribe to its discipline. A part of it was, that extraordinary
criminals should undergo what they called extraordinary penance; that
is, not only submit to every ignominy and rigour of conventual life,
(which, fortunately for its penitents, is never wanting in such amusing
resources), but act the part of executioner whenever any distinguished
punishment was to be inflicted or witnessed. They did me the honour to
believe me particularly qualified for this species of recreation, and
perhaps they did not flatter me. I had all the humility of a saint on
trial; but still I had a kind of confidence in my talents of this
description, provided they were put to a proper test; and the monks had
the goodness to assure me, that I never could long be without one in a
convent. This was a very tempting picture of my situation, but I found
these worthy people had not in the least exaggerated. An instance
occurred a few days after I had the happiness to become a member of this
amiable community, of whose merits you are doubtless sensible. I was
desired to attach myself to a young monk of distinguished family, who
had lately taken the vows, and who performed his duties with that
heartless punctuality that intimated to the community that his heart was
elsewhere. I was soon put in possession of the business; from their
ordering me to _attach_ myself to him, I instantly conceived I was bound
to the most deadly hostility against him. The friendship of convents is
always a treacherous league--we watch, suspect, and torment each other,
for the love of God. This young monk’s only crime was, that he was
suspected of cherishing an earthly passion. He was, in fact, as I have
stated, the son of a distinguished family, who (from the fear of his
contracting what is called a degrading marriage, _i. e._ of marrying a
woman of inferior rank whom he loved, and who would have made him happy,
as fools, that is, half mankind, estimate happiness) forced him to take
the vows. He appeared at times broken-hearted, but at times there was a
light of hope in his eye, that looked somewhat ominous in the eyes of
the community. It is certain, that hope not being an indigenous plant in
the parterre of a convent, must excite suspicion with regard both to its
origin and its growth.

“Some time after, a young novice entered the convent. From the moment he
did so, a change the most striking took place in the young monk. He and
the novice became inseparable companions--there was something suspicious
in that. My eyes were on the watch in a moment. Eyes are particularly
sharpened in discovering misery when they can hope to aggravate it. The
attachment between the young monk and the novice went on. They were for
ever in the garden together--they inhaled the odours of the
flowers--they cultivated the same cluster of carnations--they entwined
themselves as they walked together--when they were in the choir, their
voices were like mixed incense. Friendship is often carried to excess in
conventual life, but this friendship was too like love. For instance,
the psalms sung in the choir sometimes breathe a certain language; at
these words, the young monk and the novice would direct their voices to
each other in sounds that could not be misunderstood. If the least
correction was inflicted, one would intreat to undergo it for the other.
If a day of relaxation was allowed, whatever presents were sent to the
cell of one, were sure to be found in the cell of the other. This was
enough for me. I saw that secret of mysterious happiness, which is the
greatest misery to those who never can share it. My vigilance was
redoubled, and it was rewarded by the discovery of a secret--a secret
that I had to communicate and raise my consequence by. You cannot guess
the importance attached to the discovery of a secret in a convent,
(particularly when the remission of our own offences depends on the
discovery of those of others.)

“One evening as the young monk and his darling novice were in the
garden, the former plucked a peach, which he immediately offered to his
favourite; the latter accepted it with a movement I thought rather
awkward--it seemed like what I imagined would be the reverence of a
female. The young monk divided the peach with a knife; in doing so, the
knife grazed the finger of the novice, and the monk, in agitation
inexpressible, tore his habit to bind up the wound. I saw it all--my
mind was made up on the business--I went to the Superior that very
night. The result may be conceived. They were watched, but cautiously at
first. They were probably on their guard; for, for some time it defied
even my vigilance to make the slightest discovery. It is a situation
incomparably tantalizing, when suspicion is satisfied of her own
suggestions, as of the truth of the gospel, but still wants the _little
fact_ to make them credible to others. One night that I had, by
direction of the Superior, taken my station in the gallery, (where I was
contented to remain hour after hour, and night after night, amid
solitude, darkness, and cold, for the chance of the power of retaliating
on others the misery inflicted on myself)--One night, I thought I heard
a step in the gallery--I have told you that I was in the dark--a light
step passed me. I could hear the broken and palpitating respiration of
the person. A few moments after, I heard a door open, and knew it to be
the door of the young monk. I knew it; for by long watching in the dark,
and accustoming myself to number the cells, by the groan from one, the
prayer from another, the faint shriek of restless dreams from a third,
my ear had become so finely graduated, that I could instantly
distinguish the opening of _that door_, from which (to my sorrow) no
sound had ever before issued. I was provided with a small chain, by
which I fastened the handle of the door to a contiguous one, in such a
manner, that it was impossible to open either of them from the inside. I
then hastened to the Superior, with a pride of which none but the
successful tracer of a guilty secret in convents, can have any
conception. I believe the Superior was himself agitated by the luxury of
the same feelings, for he was awake and up in his apartment, attended by
_four monks_, whom you may remember.” I shuddered at the remembrance. “I
communicated my intelligence with a voluble eagerness, not only unsuited
to the respect I owed these persons, but which must have rendered me
almost unintelligible, yet they were good enough not only to overlook
this violation of decorum, which would in any other case have been
severely punished, but even to supply certain pauses in my narrative,
with a condescension and facility truly miraculous. I felt what it was
to acquire importance in the eyes of a Superior, and gloried in all the
dignified depravity of an informer. We set out without losing a
moment,--we arrived at the door of the cell, and I pointed out with
triumph the chain unremoved, though a slight vibration, perceptible at
our approach, showed the wretches within were already apprised of their
danger. I unfastened the door,--how they must have shuddered! The
Superior and his satellites burst into the cell, and _I_ held the light.
You tremble,--why? I was guilty, and I wished to witness guilt that
palliated mine, at least in the opinion of the convent. I had only
violated the laws of nature, but they had outraged the decorum of a
convent, and, of course, in the creed of a convent, there was no
proportion between our offences. Besides, I was anxious to witness
misery that might perhaps equal or exceed my own, and this is a
curiosity not easily satisfied. It is actually possible to become
_amateurs in suffering_. I have heard of men who have travelled into
countries where horrible executions were to be daily witnessed, for the
sake of that excitement which the sight of suffering never fails to
give, from the spectacle of a tragedy, or an _auto da fe_, down to the
writhings of the meanest reptile on whom you can inflict torture, and
feel that torture is the result of your own power. It is a species of
feeling of which we never can divest ourselves,--a triumph over those
whose sufferings have placed them below us, and no wonder,--suffering is
always an indication of weakness,--we glory in our impenetrability. _I_
did, as we burst into the cell. The wretched husband and wife were
locked in each others arms. You may imagine the scene that followed.
Here I must do the Superior reluctant justice. He was a man (of course
from his conventual feelings) who had no more idea of the intercourse
between the sexes, than between two beings of a different species. The
scene that he beheld could not have revolted him more, than if he had
seen the horrible loves of the baboons and the Hottentot women, at the
Cape of Good Hope; or those still more loathsome unions between the
serpents of South America and their human victims(7), when they can
catch them, and twine round them in folds of unnatural and ineffable
union. He really stood as much astonished and appalled, to see two human
beings of different sexes, who dared to love each other in spite of
monastic ties, as if he had witnessed the horrible conjunctions I have
alluded to. Had he seen vipers engendering in that frightful knot which
seems the pledge of mortal hostility, instead of love, he could not have
testified more horror,--and I do him the justice to believe he felt all
he testified. Whatever affectation he might employ on points of
conventual austerity, there was none here. Love was a thing he always
believed connected with sin, even though consecrated by the name of a
sacrament, and called marriage, as it is in our church. But, love in a
convent!--Oh, there is no conceiving his rage; still less is it possible
to conceive the majestic and overwhelming extent of that rage, when
strengthened by principle, and sanctified by religion. I enjoyed the
scene beyond all power of description. I saw those wretches, who had
triumphed over me, reduced to my level in a moment,--their passions all
displayed, and the display placing me a hero triumphant above all. I had
crawled to the shelter of their walls, a wretched degraded outcast, and
what was my crime? Well,--you shudder, I have done with that. I can only
say want drove me to it. And here were beings whom, a few months before,
I would have knelt to as to the images round the shrine,--to whom, in
the moments of my desperate penitence, I would have clung as to the
“horns of the altar,” all brought as low, and lower than myself. “Sons
of the morning,” as I deemed them in the agonies of my humiliation, “how
were they fallen!” I feasted on the degradation of the apostate monk and
novice,--I enjoyed, to the core of my ulcerated heart, the passion of
the Superior,--I felt that they were all men like myself. Angels, as I
had thought them, they had all proved themselves mortal; and, by
watching their motions, and flattering their passions, and promoting
their interest, or setting up my own in opposition to them all, while I
made them believe it was only theirs I was intent on, I might make shift
to contrive as much misery to others, and to carve out as much
occupation to myself, as if I were actually living in the world. Cutting
my father’s throat was a noble feat certainly, (I ask your pardon, I did
not mean to extort that groan from you), but here were hearts to be
cut,--and to the core, every day, and all day long, so I never could
want employment.”

  (7) Vide Charlevoix’s History of Paraguay.

“Here he wiped his hard brow, drew his breath for a moment, and then
said, “I do not quite like to go through the details by which this
wretched pair were deluded into the hope of effecting their escape from
the convent. It is enough that I was the principal agent,--that the
Superior connived at it,--that I led them through the very passages you
have traversed to-night, they trembling and blessing me at every
step,--that----” “Stop,” I cried; “wretch! you are tracing my course
this night step by step.”--“What?” he retorted, with a ferocious laugh,
“you think I am betraying you, then; and if it were true, what good
would your suspicions do you,--you are in my power? My voice might
summon half the convent to seize you this moment,--my arm might fasten
you to that wall, till those dogs of death, that wait but my whistle,
plunged their fangs into your very vitals. I fancy you would not find
their bite less keen, from their tusks being so long sharpened by an
immersion in holy water.” Another laugh, that seemed to issue from the
lungs of a demon, concluded this sentence. “I know I am in your power,”
I answered; “and were I to trust to that, or to your heart, I had better
dash out my brains at once against these walls of rock, which I believe
are not harder than the latter. But I know your interests to be some way
or other connected with my escape, and therefore I trust you,--because I
must. Though my blood, chilled as it is by famine and fatigue, seems
frozen in every drop while I listen to you, yet listen I must, and trust
my life and liberation to you. I speak to you with the horrid confidence
our situation has taught me,--I hate,--I dread you. If we were to meet
in life, I would shrink from you with loathings of unspeakable
abhorrence, but here mutual misery has mixed the most repugnant
substances in unnatural coalition. The force of that alchemy must cease
at the moment of my escape from the convent and from you; yet, for these
miserable hours, my life is as much dependent on your exertions and
presence, as my power of supporting them is on the continuance of your
horrible tale,--go on, then. Let us struggle through this dreadful day.
_Day!_ a name unknown _here_, where noon and night shake hands that
never unlock. Let us struggle through it, “hateful and hating one
another;” and when it has passed, let us curse and part.”

“As I uttered these words, Sir, I felt that terrible _confidence of
hostility_ which the worst beings are driven to in the worst of
circumstances, and I question whether there is a more horrible situation
than that in which we cling to each other’s hate, instead of each
other’s love,--in which, at every step of our progress, we hold a dagger
to our companion’s breast, and say, “If you faulter for a moment, this
is in your heart. I hate,--I fear, but I must bear with you.” It was
singular to me, though it would not be so to those who investigate human
nature, that, in proportion as my situation inspired me with a ferocity
quite unsuited to our comparative situations, and which must have been
the result of the madness of despair and famine, my companion’s respect
for me appeared to increase. After a long pause, he asked, might he
continue his story? I could not speak, for, after the slightest
exertion, the sickness of deadly hunger returned on me, and I could only
signify, by a feeble motion of my hand, that he might go on.

“They were conducted here,” he continued; “I had suggested the plan, and
the Superior consented to it. He would not be present, but his dumb nod
was enough. I was the conductor of their (intended) escape; they
believed they were departing with the connivance of the Superior. I led
them through those very passages that you and I have trod. I had a map
of this subterranean region, but my blood ran cold as I traversed it;
and it was not at all inclined to resume its usual temperament, as I
felt what was to be the destination of my attendants. Once I turned the
lamp, on pretence of trimming it, to catch a glimpse of the devoted
wretches. They were embracing each other,--the light of joy trembled in
their eyes. They were whispering to each other hopes of liberation and
happiness, and blending my name in the interval they could spare from
their prayers for each other. That sight extinguished the last remains
of compunction with which my horrible task had inspired me. They dared
to be happy in the sight of one who must be for ever miserable,--could
there be a greater insult? I resolved to punish it on the spot. This
very apartment was near,--I knew it, and the map of their wanderings no
longer trembled in my hand. I urged them to enter this recess, (the door
was then entire), while I went to examine the passage. They entered it,
thanking me for my precaution,--they knew not they were never to quit it
alive. But what were their lives for the agony their happiness cost me?
The moment they were inclosed, and clasping each other, (a sight that
made me grind my teeth), I closed and locked the door. This movement
gave them no immediate uneasiness,--they thought it a friendly
precaution. The moment they were secured, I hastened to the Superior,
who was on fire at the insult offered to the sanctity of his convent,
and still more to the purity of his penetration, on which the worthy
Superior piqued himself as much as if it had ever been possible for him
to acquire the smallest share of it. He descended with me to the
passage,--the monks followed with eyes on fire. In the agitation of
their rage, it was with difficulty they could discover the door after I
had repeatedly pointed it out to them. The Superior, with his own hands,
drove several nails, which the monks eagerly supplied, into the door,
that effectually joined it to the staple, _never to be disjoined_; and
every blow he gave, doubtless he felt as if it was a reminiscence to the
accusing angel, to strike out a sin from the catalogue of his
accusations. The work was soon done,--the work never to be undone. At
the first sound of steps in the passage, and blows on the door, the
victims uttered a shriek of terror. They imagined they were detected,
and that an incensed party of monks were breaking open the door. These
terrors were soon exchanged for others,--and worse,--as they heard the
door nailed up, and listened to our departing steps. They uttered
another shriek, but O how different was the accent of its despair!--they
knew their doom. * * * * * It was my penance (no,--my delight) to watch
at the door, under the pretence of precluding the possibility of their
escape, (of which they knew there was no possibility); but, in reality,
not only to inflict on me the indignity of being the convent gaoler, but
of teaching me that callosity of heart, and induration of nerve, and
stubbornness of eye, and apathy of ear, that were best suited to my
office. But they might have saved themselves the trouble,--I had them
all before ever I entered the convent. Had I been the Superior of the
community, I should have undertaken the office of watching the door. You
will call this cruelty, I call it curiosity,--that curiosity that brings
thousands to witness a tragedy, and makes the most delicate female feast
on groans and agonies. I had an advantage over them,--the groan, the
agony I feasted on, were real. I took my station at _the door_--that
door which, like that of Dante’s hell, might have borne the inscription,
“Here is no hope,”--with a face of mock penitence, and genuine--cordial
delectation. I could hear every word that transpired. For the first
hours they tried to comfort each other,--they suggested to each other
hopes of liberation,--and as my shadow, crossing the threshold, darkened
or restored the light, they said, “That is he;”--then, when this
occurred repeatedly, without any effect, they said, “No,--no, it is not
he,” and swallowed down the sick sob of despair, to hide it from each
other. Towards night a monk came to take my place, and to offer me food.
I would not have quitted my place for worlds; but I talked to the monk
in his own language, and told him I would make a merit with God of my
sacrifices, and was resolved to remain there all night, with the
permission of the Superior. The monk was glad of having a substitute on
such easy terms, and I was glad of the food he left me, for I was hungry
now, but I reserved the appetite of my soul for richer luxuries. I heard
them talking within. While I was eating, I actually lived on the famine
that was devouring them, but of which they did not dare to say a word to
each other. They debated, deliberated, and, as misery grows ingenious in
its own defence, they at last assured each other that it was impossible
the Superior had locked them in there to perish by hunger. At these
words I could not help laughing. This laugh reached their ears, and they
became silent in a moment. All that night, however, I heard their
groans,--those groans of physical suffering, that laugh to scorn all the
sentimental sighs that are exhaled from the hearts of the most
intoxicated lovers that ever breathed. I heard them all that night. I
had read French romances, and all their unimaginable nonsense. Madame
Sevignè herself says she would have been tired of her daughter in a long
tete-a-tete journey, but clap me two lovers into a dungeon, without
food, light, or hope, and I will be damned (that I am already, by the
bye) if they do not grow sick of each other within the first twelve
hours. The second day hunger and darkness had their usual influence.
They shrieked for liberation, and knocked loud and long at their dungeon
door. They exclaimed they were ready to submit to any punishment; and
the approach of the monks, which they would have dreaded so much the
preceding night, they now solicited on their knees. What a jest, after
all, are the most awful vicissitudes of human life!--they supplicated
now for what they would have sacrificed their souls to avert
four-and-twenty hours before. Then the agony of hunger increased, they
shrunk from the door, and grovelled apart from each other. _Apart!_--how
I watched that. They were rapidly becoming objects of hostility to each
other,--oh what a feast to me! They could not disguise from each other
the revolting circumstances of their mutual sufferings. It is one thing
for lovers to sit down to a feast magnificently spread, and another for
lovers to couch in darkness and famine,--to exchange that appetite which
cannot be supported without dainties and flattery, for that which would
barter a descended Venus for a morsel of food. The second night they
raved and groaned, (as occurred); and, amid their agonies, (I must do
justice to women, whom I hate as well as men), the man often accused the
female as the cause of all his sufferings, but the woman never,--never
reproached him. Her groans might indeed have reproached him bitterly,
but she never uttered a word that could have caused him pain. There was
a change which I well could mark, however, in their physical feelings.
The first day they clung together, and every movement I felt was like
that of one person. The next the man alone struggled, and the woman
moaned in helplessness. The third night,--how shall I tell it?--but you
have bid me go on. All the horrible and loathsome excruciations of
famine had been undergone; the disunion of every tie of the heart, of
passion, of nature, had commenced. In the agonies of their famished
sickness they loathed each other,--they could have cursed each other, if
they had had breath to curse. It was on the fourth night that I heard
the shriek of the wretched female,--her lover, in the agony of hunger,
had fastened his teeth in her shoulder;--that bosom on which he had so
often luxuriated, became a meal to him now.” * * * * * “Monster! and you
laugh?”--“Yes, I laugh at all mankind, and the imposition they dare to
practise when they talk of hearts. I laugh at human passions and human
cares,--vice and virtue, religion and impiety; they are all the result
of petty localities, and artificial situation. One physical want, one
severe and abrupt lesson from the tintless and shrivelled lip of
necessity, is worth all the logic of the empty wretches who have
presumed to prate it, from Zeno down to Burgersdicius. Oh! it silences
in a second all the feeble sophistry of _conventional_ life, and
ascetitious passion. Here were a pair who would not have believed all
the world on their knees, even though angels had descended to join in
the attestation, that it was possible for them to exist without each
other. They had risked every thing, trampled on every thing human and
divine, to be in each others sight and arms. One hour of hunger
undeceived them. A trivial and ordinary want, whose claims at another
time they would have regarded as a vulgar interruption of their
spiritualised intercourse, not only, by its natural operation, sundered
it for ever, but, before it ceased, converted that intercourse into a
source of torment and hostility inconceivable, except among cannibals.
The bitterest enemies on earth could not have regarded each other with
more abhorrence than _these lovers_. Deluded wretches! you boasted of
having hearts, I boast I have none, and which of us gained most by the
vaunt, let life decide. My story is nearly finished, and so I hope is
the day. When I was last here I had something to excite me;--talking of
those things is poor employment to one who has been a witness to them.
On the _sixth_ day all was still. The door was unnailed, we
entered,--they were no more. They lay far from each other, farther than
on that voluptuous couch into which their passion had converted the mat
of a convent bed. She lay contracted in a heap, a lock of her long hair
in her mouth. There was a slight scar on her shoulder,--the rabid
despair of famine had produced no farther outrage. He lay extended at
his length,--his hand was between his lips; it seemed as if he had not
strength to execute the purpose for which he had brought it there. The
bodies were brought out for interment. As we removed them into the
light, the long hair of the female, falling over a face no longer
disguised by the novice’s dress, recalled a likeness I thought I could
remember. I looked closer, she was my own sister,--my only one,----and I
had heard her voice grow fainter and fainter. I had heard----” and his
own voice grew fainter--it ceased.

“Trembling for a life with which my own was linked, I staggered towards
him. I raised him half up in my arms, and recollecting there must be a
current of air through the trap-door, I attempted to trail him along
thither. I succeeded, and, as the breeze played over him, I saw with
delight unutterable the diminution of the light that streamed through
it. It was _evening_,--there was no longer any necessity, no longer any
time for delay. He recovered, for his swoon arose not from exhausted
sensibility, but from mere inanition. However it was, I found my
interest in watching his recovery; and, had I been adequate to the task
of observing extraordinary vicissitudes of the human mind, I would have
been indeed amazed at the change that he manifested on his recovery.
Without the least reference to his late story, or late feelings, he
started from my arms at the discovery that the light had diminished, and
prepared for our escape through the trap-door, with a restored energy of
strength, and sanity of intellect, that might have been deemed
miraculous if it had occurred in a convent:--Happening to occur full
thirty feet below the proper surface for a miracle, it must be put to
the account of strong excitement merely. I could not indeed dare to
believe a miracle was wrought in favour of my profane attempt, and so I
was glad to put up with second causes. With incredible dexterity he
climbed up the wall, with the help of the rugged stones and my
shoulders,--threw open the trap-door, pronounced that all was safe,
assisted me to ascend after him,--and, with gasping delight, I once more
breathed the breath of heaven. The night was perfectly dark. I could not
distinguish the buildings from the trees, except when a faint breeze
gave motion to the latter. To this darkness, I am convinced, I owe the
preservation of my reason under such vicissitudes,--the glory of a
resplendent night would have driven me mad, emerging from darkness,
famine, and cold. I would have wept, and laughed, and knelt, and turned
idolater. I would have “worshipped the host of heaven, and the moon
walking in her brightness.” Darkness was my best security, in every
sense of the word. We traversed the garden, without feeling the ground
under our feet. As we approached the wall, I became again deadly
sick,--my senses grew giddy, I reeled. I whispered to my companion, “Are
there not lights gleaming from the convent windows?”--“No, the lights
are flashing from your own eyes,--it is only the effect of darkness,
famine, and fear,--come on.”--“But I hear a sound of bells.”--“The bells
are ringing only in your ears,--an empty stomach is your sexton, and you
fancy you hear bells. Is this a time to faulter?--come on, come on.
Don’t hang such a dead weight on my arm,--don’t fall, if you can help
it. Oh God, he has swooned!”

“These were the last words I heard. I had fallen, I believe, into his
arms. With that instinct that acts most auspiciously in the absence of
both thought and feeling, he dragged me in his brawny arms to the wall,
_and twisted my cold fingers_ in the ropes of the ladder. The touch
restored me in a moment; and, almost before my hand had touched the
ropes, my feet began to ascend them. My companion followed extempore. We
reached the summit,--I tottered from weakness and terror. I felt a
sickly dread, that, though the ladder was there, Juan was not. A moment
after a lanthorn flashed in my eyes,--I saw a figure below. I sprung
down, careless, in that wild moment, whether I met the dagger of an
assassin, or the embrace of a brother. “Alonzo, dear Alonzo,” murmured a
voice. “Juan, dear Juan,” was all I could utter, as I felt my shivering
breast held close to that of the most generous and affectionate of
brothers. “How much you must have suffered,--how much I have suffered,”
he whispered; “during the last horrible twenty-four hours, I almost gave
you up. Make haste, the carriage is not twenty paces off.” And, as he
spoke, the shifting of a lanthorn shewed me those imperious and
beautiful features, which I had once dreaded as the pledge of eternal
emulation, but which I now regarded as the smile of the proud but
benignant god of my liberation. I pointed to my companion, I could not
speak,--hunger was consuming my vitals. Juan supported me, consoled me,
encouraged me; did all, and more, than man ever did for man,--than man
ever did, perhaps, for the most shrinking and delicate of the other sex
under his protection. Oh, with what agony of heart I retrace his manly
tenderness! We waited for my companion,--he descended the wall. “Make
haste, make haste,” Juan whispered; “I am famishing too. I have not
tasted food for four-and-twenty hours, watching for you.” We hurried on.
It was a waste place,--I could only distinguish a carriage by the light
of a dim lanthorn, but that was enough for me. I sprung lightly into it.
“_He is safe_,” cried Juan, following me. “_But are you?_” answered a
voice of thunder. Juan staggered back from the step of the carriage,--he
fell. I sprung out, I fell too--on his body. I was bathed in his
blood,----he was no more.”




CHAPTER X.

    Men who with mankind were foes.
     * * * *
    Or who, in desperate doubt of grace.--
     * * * *

    SCOTT’S MARMION.


“One wild moment of yelling agony,--one flash of a fierce and fiery
light, that seemed to envelope and wither me soul and body,--one sound,
that swept through my ears and brain like the last trumpet, as it will
thrill on the senses of those who slept in guilt, and awake in
despair,--one such moment, that condenses and crowds all imaginable
sufferings in one brief and intense pang, and appears exhausted itself
by the blow it has struck,--one such moment I remember, and no more.
Many a month of gloomy unconsciousness rolled over me, without date or
notice. One thousand waves may welter over a sunk wreck, and be felt as
_one_. I have a dim recollection of refusing food, of resisting change
of place, &c. but they were like the faint and successless attempts we
make under the burden of the night-mare; and those with whom I had to
do, probably regarded any opposition I could make no more than the
tossings of a restless sleeper.

“From dates that I have since been enabled to collect, I must have been
four months at least in this state; and ordinary persecutors would have
given me up as a hopeless subject for any further sufferings; but
religious malignity is too industrious, and too ingenious, to resign the
hope of a victim but with life. If the fire is extinguished, it sits and
watches the embers. If the strings of the heart crack in its hearing, it
listens if it be the _last_ that has broken. It is a spirit that
delights to ride on the _tenth wave_, and view it whelm and bury the
sufferer for ever. * * * * * * *

“Many changes had taken place, without any consciousness on my part of
them. Perhaps the profound tranquillity of my _last_ abode contributed
more than any thing else to the recovery of my reason. I distinctly
remember awaking at once to the full exercise of my senses and reason,
and finding myself in a place which I examined with the most amazed and
jealous curiosity. My memory did not molest me in the least. Why I was
there? or what I had suffered before I was brought there? it never
occurred to me to inquire. The return of the intellectual powers came
slowly in, like the waves of an advancing tide, and happily for me
memory was the last,--the occupation of my senses was at first quite
enough for me. You must expect no romance-horrors, Sir, from my
narrative. Perhaps a life like mine may revolt the taste that has
feasted to fastidiousness; but truth sometimes gives full and dreadful
compensation, in presenting us facts instead of images.

“I found myself lying on a bed, not very different from that in my cell,
but the apartment was wholly unlike the latter. It was somewhat larger,
and covered with matting. There was neither crucifix, painting, or
vessel for holy water;--the bed, a coarse table which supported a
lighted lamp, and a vessel containing water for the purpose, were all
the furniture. There was no window; and some iron knobs in the door, to
which the light of the lamp gave a kind of dismal distinctness and
prominence, proved that it was strongly secured. I raised myself on my
arm, and gazed round me with the apprehensiveness of one who fears that
the slightest motion may dissolve the spell, and plunge him again in
darkness. At that moment the recollection of all the past struck me like
a thunder-bolt. I uttered a cry, that seemed to drain me of breath and
being at once, and fell back on the bed, not senseless but exhausted. I
remembered every event in a moment, with an intenseness that could only
be equalled by actual and present agency in them,--my escape,--my
safety,--my despair. I felt Juan’s embrace,--then I felt his blood
stream over me. I saw his eyes turn in despair, before they closed for
ever, and I uttered another cry, such as had never before been heard
within those walls. At the repetition of this sound the door opened, and
a person, in a habit I had never seen before, approached, and signified
to me by signs, that I must observe the most profound silence. Nothing,
indeed, could be more expressive of this meaning, than his denying
himself the use of his voice to convey it. I gazed on this apparition in
silence,--my amazement had all the effect of an apparent submission to
his injunctions. He retired, and I began to wonder where I was. Was it
among the dead? or some subterranean world of the mute and voiceless,
where there was no air to convey sounds, and no echo to repeat them, and
the famished ear waited in vain for its sweetest banquet,--the voice of
man? These wanderings were dispelled by the re-entrance of the person.
He placed bread, water, and a small portion of meat on the table,
motioned me to approach, (which I did mechanically), and, when I was
seated, _whispered_ me, That my unhappy situation having hitherto
rendered me incapable of understanding the regulations of the place
where I was, he had been compelled to postpone acquainting me with them;
but _now_ he was obliged to warn me, that my voice must never be raised
beyond the key in which he addressed me, and which was sufficient for
all proper purposes of communication; finally, he assured me that cries,
exclamations of any kind, or even _coughing too loud_(8), (which might
be interpreted as a signal), would be considered as an attempt on the
inviolable habits of the place, and punished with the utmost severity.
To my repeated questions of “Where am I? what is this place, with its
mysterious regulations?” he replied in a whisper, that his business was
to issue orders, not to answer questions; and so saying he departed.
However extraordinary these injunctions appeared, the manner in which
they were issued was so imposing, peremptory, and _habitual_,--it seemed
so little a thing of local contrivance and temporary display,--so much
like the established language of an absolute and long-fixed system, that
obedience to it seemed inevitable. I threw myself on the bed, and
murmured to myself, “Where am I?” till sleep overcame me.

  (8) This is a fact well established.

“I have heard that the first sleep of a recovered maniac is intensely
profound. Mine was not so, it was broken by many troubled dreams. One,
in particular, brought me back to the convent. I thought I was a boarder
in it, and studying Virgil. I was reading that passage in the second
book, where the vision of Hector appears to Æneas in his dream, and his
ghastly and dishonoured form suggests the mournful exclamation,

    “----Heu quantum mutatus ab illo,--
    ----Quibus ab oris, Hector expectate venis?”

Then I thought Juan was Hector,--that the same pale and bloody phantom
stood calling me to fly--“Heu fuge,” while I vainly tried to obey him.
Oh that dreary mixture of truth and delirium, of the real and visionary,
of the conscious and unconscious parts of existence, that visits the
dreams of the unhappy! He was Pantheus, and murmured,

    “Venit summa dies, et ineluctabile tempus.”

I appeared to weep and struggle in my dream. I addressed the figure that
stood before me sometimes as Juan, and sometimes as the image of the
Trojan vision. At last the figure uttered, with a kind of querulous
shriek,--that _vox stridula_ which we hear only in dreams,

    “Proximus ardet Ucalegon,”

and I started up fully awake, in all the horrors of an expected
conflagration.

“It is incredible, Sir, how the senses and the mind can operate thus,
during the apparent suspension of both; how sound can affect organs that
seem to be shut, and objects affect the sight, while its sense appears
to be closed,--can impress on its dreaming consciousness, images more
horribly vivid than even reality ever presented. I awoke with the idea
that flames were raging in contact with my eye-balls, and I saw only a
pale light, held by a paler hand--close to my eyes indeed, but withdrawn
the moment I awoke. The person who held it shrouded it for a moment, and
then advanced and flashed its full light on me, and along with it--the
person of my companion. The associations of our last meeting rushed on
me. I started up, and said, “Are we free, then?”--“Hush,--one of us is
free; but you must not speak so loud.”--“Well, I have heard that before,
but I cannot comprehend the necessity of this whispering secrecy. If I
am free, tell me so, and tell me whether Juan has survived that last
horrible moment,--my intellect is but just respiring. Tell me how Juan
fares.”--“Oh, sumptuously. No prince in all the land reposes under a
more gorgeous canopy,--marble pillars, waving banners, and nodding
plumes. He had music too, but he did not seem to heed it. He lay
stretched on velvet and gold, but he appeared insensible of all these
luxuries. There was a curl on his cold white lip, too, that seemed to
breathe ineffable scorn on all that was going on,--but he was proud
enough even in his life-time.”--“His life-time!” I shrieked; “then he
_is_ dead?”--“Can you doubt that, when you know who struck the blow?
None of my victims ever gave me the trouble of a second.”--“You,--you?”
I swam for some moments in a sea of flames and blood. My frenzy
returned, and I remember only uttering curses that would have exhausted
divine vengeance in all its plenitude to fulfil. I might have continued
to rave till my reason was totally lost, but I was silenced and stunned
by his laugh bursting out amid my curses, and overwhelming them.

“That laugh made me cease, and lift up my eyes to him, as if I expected
to see another being,--it was still the same. “And you dreamt,” he
cried, “in your temerity, you dreamt of setting the vigilance of a
convent at defiance? Two boys, one the fool of fear, and the other of
temerity, were fit antagonists for that stupendous system, whose roots
are in the bowels of the earth, and whose head is among the
stars,--_you_ escape from a convent! _you_ defy a power that has defied
sovereigns! A power whose influence is unlimited, indefinable, and
unknown, even to those who exercise it, as there are mansions so vast,
that their inmates, to their last hour, have never visited all the
apartments;--a power whose operation is like its motto,--one and
indivisible. The soul of the Vatican breathes in the humblest convent in
Spain,--and you, an insect perched on a wheel of this vast machine,
imagined you were able to arrest its progress, while its rotation was
hurrying on to crush you to atoms.” While he was uttering these words,
with a rapidity and energy inconceivable, (a rapidity that literally
made one word seem to devour another), I tried, with that effort of
intellect which seems like the gasping respiration of one whose breath
has long been forcibly suppressed or suspended, to comprehend and follow
him. The first thought that struck me was one not very improbable in my
situation, that he was not the person he appeared to be,--that it was
not the companion of my escape who now addressed me; and I summoned all
the remains of my intellect to ascertain this. A few questions must
determine this point, if I had breath to utter them. “Were you not the
agent in my escape? Were you not the man who---- What tempted you to
this step, in the defeat of which you appear to rejoice?”--“A
bribe.”--“And you have betrayed me, you say, and boast of your
treachery,--what tempted you to this?”--“A higher bribe. Your brother
gave gold, but the convent promised me salvation,--a business I was very
willing to commit to their hands, as I was totally incompetent to manage
it myself.”--“Salvation, for treachery and murder?”--“Treachery and
murder,--hard words. Now, to talk sense, was not yours the vilest
treachery? You reclaimed your vows,--you declared before God and man,
that the words you uttered before both were the babble of an infant;
then you seduced your brother from his duty to his and your
parents,--you connived at his intriguing against the peace and sanctity
of a monastic institution, and dare _you_ talk of treachery? And did you
not, with a callosity of conscience unexampled in one so young, accept,
nay, cling to an associate in your escape whom you knew you were
seducing from his vows,--from all that man reveres as holy, and all that
God (if there be a God) must regard as binding on man? You knew my
crime, you knew my atrocity, yet you brandished me as your banner of
defiance against the Almighty, though its inscription was, in glaring
characters,--impiety--parricide--irreligion. Torn as the banner was, it
still hung near the altar, till you dragged it away, to wrap yourself
from detection in its folds,--and _you_ talk of treachery?--there is not
a more traitorous wretch on earth than yourself. Suppose that I was all
that is vile and culpable, was it for you to double-dye the hue of my
crime in the crimson of your sacrilege and apostacy? And for murder, I
know I am a parricide. I cut my father’s throat, but he never felt the
blow,--nor did I,--I was intoxicated with wine, with passion, with
blood,--no matter which; but you, with cold deliberate blows, struck at
the hearts of father and mother. You killed by inches,--I murdered at a
blow,--which of us is the murderer?--And _you_ prate of treachery and
murder? I am as innocent as the child that is born this hour, compared
to you. Your father and mother have separated,--she is gone into a
convent, to hide her despair and shame at your unnatural conduct,--your
father is plunging successively into the abysses of voluptuousness and
penitence, wretched in both; your brother, in his desperate attempt to
liberate you, has perished,--you have scattered desolation over a whole
family,--you have stabbed the peace and heart of each of them, with a
hand that deliberated and paused on its blow, and then struck it
calmly,--and you dare to talk of treachery and murder? You are a
thousand times more culpable than I am, guilty as you think me. I stand
a blasted tree,--I am struck to the heart, to the root,--I wither
alone,--but you are the Upas, under whose poisonous droppings all things
living have perished,--father--mother--brother, and last yourself;--the
erosions of the poison, having nothing left to consume, strike inward,
and prey on your own heart. Wretch, condemned beyond the sympathy of
man, beyond the redemption of the Saviour, what can you say to this?”--I
answered only, “Is Juan dead, and were you his murderer,--were you
indeed? I believe all you say, I must be very guilty, but is Juan dead?”
As I spoke, I lifted up to him eyes that no longer seemed to see,--a
countenance that bore no expression but that of the stupefaction of
intense grief. I could neither utter nor feel reproaches,--I had
suffered beyond the power of complaint. I awaited his answer; he was
silent, but his diabolical silence spoke. “And my mother retired to a
convent?” he nodded. “And my father?” he smiled, and I closed my eyes. I
could bear any thing but his smile. I raised my head a few moments
after, and saw him, with an habitual motion, (it could not have been
more), make the sign of the cross, as a clock in some distant passage
struck. This sight reminded me of the play so often acted in Madrid, and
which I had seen in my few days of liberation,--El diablo Predicador.
You smile, Sir, at such a recollection operating at such a moment, but
it is a fact; and had you witnessed that play under the singular
circumstances I did, you would not wonder at my being struck with the
coincidence. In this performance the infernal spirit is the hero, and in
the disguise of a monk he appears in a convent, where he torments and
persecutes the community with a mixture of malignity and mirth truly
Satanic. One night that I saw it performed, a groupe of monks were
carrying the Host to a dying person; the walls of the theatre were so
slight, that we could distinctly hear the sound of the bell which they
ring on that occasion. In an instant, actors, audience, and all, were on
their knees, and the devil, who happened to be on the stage, knelt among
the rest, and crossed himself with visible marks of a devotion equally
singular and edifying. You will allow the coincidence to be irresistibly
striking.

“When he had finished his monstrous profanation of the holy sign, I
fixed my eyes on him with an expression not to be mistaken. He saw it.
There is not so bitter a reproach on earth as silence, for it always
seems to refer the guilty to their own hearts, whose eloquence seldom
fails to fill up the pause very little to the satisfaction of the
accused. My look threw him into a rage, that I am now convinced not the
most bitter upbraidings could have caused. The utmost fury of
imprecation would have fallen on his ear like the most lulling
harmony;--it would have convinced him that his victim was suffering all
he could possibly inflict. He betrayed this in the violence of his
exclamations. “What, wretch!” he cried;--“Do you think it was for your
masses and your mummeries, your vigils, and fasts, and mumbling over
senseless unconsoling beads, and losing my rest all night watching for
the matins, and then quitting my frozen mat to nail my knees to stone
till they grew there,--till I thought the whole pavement would rise with
me when I rose,--do you think it was for the sake of listening to
sermons that the preachers did not believe,--and prayers that the lips
that uttered them yawned at in the listlessness of their
infidelity,--and penances that might be hired out to a lay-brother to
undergo for a pound of coffee or of snuff,--and the vilest
subserviencies to the caprice and passion of a Superior,--and the
listening to men with God for ever in their mouths, and the world for
ever in their hearts,--men who think of nothing but the aggrandizement
of their temporal distinction, and screen, under the most revolting
affectation of a concern in spiritualities, their ravening cupidity
after earthly eminence:--Wretch! do you dream that it was for
this?--that this _atheism of bigotry_,--this creed of all the priests
that ever have existed in connexion with the state, and in hope of
extending their interest by that connexion,--could have any influence
over _me_? I had sounded every depth in the mine of depravity before
them. I knew them,--I despised them. I crouched before them in body, I
spurned them in my soul. With all their sanctimony, they had hearts so
worldly, that it was scarce worth while to watch their hypocrisy, the
secret developed itself so soon. There was no discovery to be made, no
place for detection. I have seen them on their high festivals, prelates,
and abbots, and priests, in all their pomp of office, appearing to the
laity like descended gods, blazing in gems and gold, amid the lustre of
tapers and the floating splendour of an irradiated atmosphere alive with
light, and all soft and delicate harmonies and delicious odours, till,
as they disappeared amid the clouds of incense so gracefully tossed from
the gilded censers, the intoxicated eye dreamed it saw them ascending to
Paradise. Such was the _scene_, but what was _behind the scene_?--_I saw
it all._ Two or three of them would rush from service into the vestry
together, under the pretence of changing their vestments. One would
imagine that these men would have at least the decency to refrain, while
in the intervals of the holy mass. No, I overheard them. While shifting
their robes, they talked incessantly of promotions and appointments,--of
this or that prelate, dying or dead,--of a wealthy benefice being
vacant,--of one dignitary having bargained hard with the state for the
promotion of a relative,--of another who had well-founded hopes of
obtaining a bishoprick, for what? neither for learning or piety, or one
feature of the pastoral character, but because he had valuable benefices
to resign in exchange, that might be divided among numerous candidates.
Such was their conversation,--such and such only were their thoughts,
till the last thunders of the allelujah from the church made them start,
and hurry to resume their places at the altar. Oh what a compound of
meanness and pride, of imbecillity and pretension, of sanctimony so
transparently and awkwardly worn, that the naked frame of the natural
mind was visible to every eye beneath it,--that mind which is “earthly,
sensual, devilish.” Was it to live among such wretches, who, all-villain
as I was, made me hug myself with the thought that at least I was not
like them, a passionless prone reptile,--a thing made of forms and
dressings, half satin and shreds, half ave’s and credo’s,--bloated and
abject,--creeping and aspiring,--winding up and up the pedestal of power
at the rate of an inch a day, and tracking its advance to eminence by
the flexibility of its writhings, the obliquity of its course, and the
filth of its slime,--was it for this?”--he paused, half-choaked with his
emotions.

“This man might have been a better being under better circumstances; he
had at least a disdain of all that was mean in vice, with a wild avidity
for all that was atrocious. “Was it for this,” he continued, “that I
have sold myself to work their works of darkness,--that I have become in
this life as it were an apprentice to Satan, to take anticipated lessons
of torture,--that I have sealed those indentures here, which must be
fulfilled below? No, I despise--I loathe it all, the agents and the
system,--the men and their matters. But it is the creed of that system,
(and true or false it avails not,--some kind of creed is necessary, and
the falser perhaps the better, for falsehood at least flatters), that
the greatest criminal may expiate his offences, by vigilantly watching,
and severely punishing, those of the enemies of heaven. Every offender
may purchase his immunity, by consenting to become the executioner of
the offender whom he betrays and denounces. In the language of the laws
of another country, they may turn “king’s evidence,” and buy their own
lives at the price of another’s,--a bargain which every man is very
ready to make. But, in religious life, this kind of transfer, this
substitutional suffering, is adopted with an avidity indescribable. How
we love to punish those whom the church calls the enemies of God, while
conscious that, though our enmity against him is infinitely greater, we
become acceptable in his sight by tormenting those who may be less
guilty, but who are in our power! I hate you, not because I have any
natural or social cause to do so, but because the exhaustion of my
resentment on you, may diminish that of the Deity towards me. If I
persecute and torment the enemies of God, must I not be the friend of
God? Must not every pang I inflict on another, be recorded in the book
of the All-remembering, as an expurgation of at least one of the pangs
that await me hereafter? I have no religion, I believe in no God, I
repeat no creed, but I have that superstition of fear and of futurity,
that seeks its wild and hopeless mitigation in the sufferings of others
when our own are exhausted, or when (a much more common case) we are
unwilling to undergo them. I am convinced that my own crimes will be
obliterated, by whatever crimes of others I can promote or punish. Had I
not, then, every motive to urge you to crime? Had I not every motive to
watch and aggravate your punishment? Every coal of fire that I heaped on
your head, was removing one from that fire that burns for ever and ever
for mine. Every drop of water that I withheld from your burning tongue,
I expect will be repaid to me in slaking the fire and brimstone into
which I must one day be hurled. Every tear that I draw, every groan that
I extort, will, I am convinced, be repaid me in the remission of my
own!--guess what a price I set on yours, or those of any other victim.
The man in ancient story trembled and paused over the scattered limbs of
his child, and failed in the pursuit,--the true penitent rushes over the
mangled members of nature and passion, collects them with a hand in
which there is no pulse, and a heart in which there is no feeling, and
holds them up them in the face of the Divinity as a peace-offering. Mine
is the best theology,--the theology of utter hostility to all beings
whose sufferings may mitigate mine. In this flattering theory, your
crimes become my virtues,--I need not any of my own. Guilty as I am of
the crime that outrages nature, your crimes (the crimes of those who
offend against the church) are of a much more heinous order. But your
guilt is my exculpation, your sufferings are my triumph. I need not
repent, I need not believe; if you suffer, I am saved,--that is enough
for me. How glorious and easy it is to erect at once the trophy of our
salvation, on the trampled and buried hopes of another’s! How subtle and
sublime that alchemy, that can convert the iron of another’s contumacy
and impenitence into the precious gold of your own redemption! I have
literally worked out _my_ salvation by _your_ fear and trembling. With
this hope I appeared to concur in the plan laid by your brother, every
feature of which was in its progress disclosed to the Superior. With
this hope I passed that wretched night and day in the dungeon with you,
for, to have effected our escape by day-light, would have startled
credulity as gross as even yours. But all the time I was feeling the
dagger I bore in my breast, and which I had received for a purpose amply
accomplished. As for you,--the Superior consented to your attempt to
escape, merely that he might have you more in his power. He and the
community were tired of you, they saw you would never make a monk,--your
appeal had brought disgrace on them, your presence was a reproach and a
burden to them. The sight of you was as thorns in their eyes,--they
judged you would make a better victim than a proselyte, and they judged
well. You are a much fitter inmate for your present abode than your
last, and from hence there is no danger of your escaping.”--“And where,
then, am I?”--“_You are in the prison of the Inquisition._”




CHAPTER XI.

    Oh! torture me no more, I will confess.

    HENRY THE SIXTH.

    You have betrayed her to her own reproof.

    COMEDY OF ERRORS.


“And it was true,--I was a prisoner in the Inquisition. Great
emergencies certainly inspire us with the feelings they demand; and many
a man has braved a storm on the wide wild ocean, who would have shrunk
from its voice as it pealed down his chimney. I believe so it fared with
me,--the storm had risen, and I braced myself to meet it. I was in the
Inquisition, but I knew that my crime, heinous as it was, was not one
that came properly under the cognizance of the Inquisition. It was a
conventual fault of the highest class, but liable only to be punished by
the ecclesiastical power. The punishment of a monk who had dared to
escape from his convent, might be dreadful enough,--immurement, or death
perhaps, but still I was not legitimately a prisoner of the Inquisition.
I had never, under all my trials, spoken a disrespectful word of the
holy Catholic church, or a doubtful one of our most holy faith,--I had
not dropped one heretical, obnoxious, or equivocal expression, relative
to a single point of duty, or article of faith. The preposterous charges
of sorcery and possession, brought against me in the convent, had been
completely disproved at the visitation of the Bishop. My aversion to the
monastic state was indeed sufficiently known and fatally proved, but
that was no subject for the investigation or penalties of the
Inquisition. I had nothing to fear from the Inquisition,--at least so I
said to myself in my prison, and I believed myself. The seventh day
after the recovery of my reason was fixed on for my examination, and of
this I received due notice, though I believe it is contrary to the usual
forms of the Inquisition to give this notice; and the examination took
place on the day and hour appointed.

“You are aware, Sir, that the tales related in general of the interior
discipline of the Inquisition, must be in nine out of ten mere fables,
as the prisoners are bound by an oath never to disclose what happens
within its walls; and they who could violate this oath, would certainly
not scruple to violate truth in the details with which their
emancipation from it indulges them. I am forbidden, by an oath which I
shall never break, to disclose the circumstances of my imprisonment or
examination. I am at liberty to mention some general features of both,
as they are connected with my extraordinary narrative. My first
examination terminated rather favourably; my contumacy and aversion to
monasticism were indeed deplored and reprobated, but there was no
ulterior hint,--nothing to alarm the peculiar fears of an inmate of the
Inquisition. So I was as happy as solitude, darkness, straw, bread, and
water, could make me, or any one, till, on the fourth night after my
first examination, I was awoke by a light gleaming so strongly on my
eyes, that I started up. The person then retired with his light, and I
discovered a figure sitting in the farthest corner of my cell. Delighted
at the sight of a human form, I yet had acquired so much of the habit of
the Inquisition, that I demanded, in a cold and peremptory voice, who
had ventured to intrude on the cell of a prisoner? The person answered
in the blandest tones that ever soothed the human ear, that he was, like
myself, a prisoner in the Inquisition;--that, by its indulgence, he had
been permitted to visit me, and hoped----“And is _hope_ to be named
here?” I could not help exclaiming. He answered in the same soft and
deprecatory tone; and, without adverting to our peculiar circumstances,
suggested the consolation that might be derived from the society of two
sufferers who were indulged with the power of meeting and communicating
with each other.

“This man visited me for several successive nights; and I could not help
noticing three extraordinary circumstances in his visits and his
appearance. The first was, that he always (when he could) concealed his
eyes from me; he sat sideways and backways, shifted his position,
changed his seat, held up his hand before his eyes; but when at times he
was compelled or _surprised_ to turn their light on me, I felt that I
had never beheld such eyes blazing in a mortal face,--in the darkness of
my prison, I held up my hand to shield myself from their preternatural
glare. The second was, that he came and retired apparently without help
or hindrance,--that he came, like one who had a key to the door of my
dungeon, at all hours, without leave or forbiddance,--that he traversed
the prisons of the Inquisition, like one who had a master-key to its
deepest recesses. Lastly, he spoke not only in a tone of voice clear and
audible, totally unlike the whispered communications of the Inquisition,
but spoke his abhorrence of the whole system,--his indignation against
the Inquisition, Inquisitors, and all their aiders and abettors, from St
Dominic down to the lowest official,--with such unqualified rage of
vituperation, such caustic inveteracy of satire, such unbounded license
of ludicrous and yet withering severity, that I trembled.

“You know, Sir, or perhaps have yet to know, that there are persons
_accredited_ in the Inquisition, who are permitted to solace the
solitude of the prisoners, on the condition of obtaining, under the
pretence of friendly communication, those secrets which even torture has
failed to extort. I discovered in a moment that my visitor was not one
of these,--his abuse of the system was too gross, his indignation too
unfeigned. Yet, in his continued visits, there was one circumstance
more, which struck me with a feeling of terror that actually paralyzed
and annihilated all the terrors of the Inquisition.

“He constantly alluded to events and personages beyond his _possible
memory_,--then he checked himself,--then he appeared to go on, with a
kind of wild and derisive sneer at his own _absence_. But this perpetual
reference to events long past, and men long buried, made an impression
on me I cannot describe. His conversation was rich, various, and
intelligent, but it was interspersed with such reiterated mention of the
dead, that I might be pardoned for feeling as if the speaker was one of
them. He dealt much in anecdotical history, and I, who was very ignorant
of it, was delighted to listen to him, for he told every thing with the
fidelity of an eye-witness. He spoke of the _Restoration_ in England,
and repeated the well-remembered observation of the queen-mother,
Henriette of France,--that, had she known as much of the English on her
first arrival, as she did on her second, she never would have been
driven from the throne; then he added, to my astonishment, I was beside
her carriage(9), _it was the only one then in London_. He afterwards
spoke of the superb fetes given by Louis Quatorze, and described, with
an accuracy that made me start, the magnificent chariot in which that
monarch personated the god of day, while all the titled pimps and
harlots of the court followed as the rabble of Olympus. Then he reverted
to the death of the Duchesse d’Orleans, sister to Charles II.--to Pere
Bourdalone’s awful sermon, preached at the death-bed of the royal
beauty, dying of poison, (as suspected); and added, I saw the roses
heaped on her toilette, to array her for a fete that very night, and
near them stood the pix, and tapers, and oil, shrouded with the lace of
that very toilette. Then he passed to England; he spoke of the wretched
and well-rebuked pride of the wife of James II. who “thought it scorn”
to sit at the same table with an Irish officer who informed her husband
(then Duke of York) that _he_ had sat at table, as an officer in the
Austrian service, where the Duchess’s father (Duke of Modena) had stood
behind a chair, as a vassal to the Emperor of Germany.

  (9) I have read this somewhere, but cannot believe it. Coaches are
  mentioned by Beaumont and Fletcher, and even glass-coaches by Butler,
  in his “Remains.”

“These circumstances were trifling, and might be told by any one, but
there was a minuteness and circumstantiality in his details, that
perpetually forced on the mind the idea that he had himself seen what he
described, and been conversant with the personages he spoke of. I
listened to him with an indefinable mixture of curiosity and terror. At
last, while relating a trifling but characteristic circumstance that
occurred in the reign of Louis the Thirteenth, he used the following
expressions(10): “One night that the king was at an entertainment, where
Cardinal Richelieu also was present, the Cardinal had the insolence to
rush out of the apartment before his Majesty, just as the coach of the
latter was announced. The King, without any indignant notice of the
arrogance of the minister, said, with much _bon hommie_, “His Eminence
the Cardinal will always be first.”--“The first to attend your Majesty,”
answered the Cardinal, with admirable polite presence of mind; and,
snatching a flambeau from a page who _stood near me_, he lighted the
King to his carriage.” I could not help catching at the extraordinary
words that had escaped him; and I asked him, “Were you there?” He gave
some indirect answer; and, avoiding the subject, went on to amuse me
with some other curious circumstances of the private history of that
age, of which he spoke with a minute fidelity somewhat _alarming_. I
confess my pleasure in listening to them was greatly diminished by the
singular sensation with which this man’s presence and conversation
inspired me. He departed, and I regretted his absence, though I could
not account for the extraordinary feeling which I experienced during his
visits.

  (10) This circumstance is related, I believe, in the Jewish Spy.

“A few days after I was to encounter my second examination. The night
before it one of the _officials_ visited me. These are men who are not
the common officers of a prison, but accredited in some degree by the
higher powers of the Inquisition, and I paid due respect to his
communications, particularly as they were delivered more in detail, and
with more emphasis and energy than I could have expected from an inmate
of that speechless mansion. This circumstance made me expect something
extraordinary, and his discourse verified all, and more than I expected.
He told me in plain terms, that there had been lately a cause of
disturbance and inquietude, which had never before occurred in the
Inquisition. That it was reported a human figure had appeared in the
cells of some of the prisoners, uttering words not only hostile to the
Catholic religion, and the discipline of the most holy Inquisition, but
to religion in general, to the belief of a God and a future state. He
added, that the utmost vigilance of the officials, on the rack for
discovery, had never been able to trace this being in his visits to the
cells of the prisoners; that the guards had been doubled, and every
precaution that the circumspection of the Inquisition could employ, was
had recourse to, hitherto without success; and that the only intimation
they had of this singular visitor, was from some of the prisoners whose
cells he had entered, and whom he had addressed in language that seemed
lent him by the enemy of mankind, to accomplish the perdition of these
unhappy beings. He himself had hitherto eluded all discovery; but he
trusted, that, with the means lately adopted, it was impossible for this
agent of the evil one to insult and baffle the holy tribunal much
longer. He advised me to be prepared on this point, as it would
undoubtedly be touched on at my next examination, and perhaps more
urgently than I might otherwise imagine; and so, commending me to the
holy keeping of God, he departed.

“Not wholly unconscious of the subject alluded to in this extraordinary
communication, but perfectly innocent of any ulterior signification, as
far as related to myself, I awaited my next examination rather with hope
than fear. After the usual questions of--Why I was there? who had
accused me? for what offence? whether I could recollect any expression
that had ever intimated a disregard for the tenets of the holy church?
&c. &c. &c.--after all this had been gone through, in a detail that may
be spared the hearer, certain extraordinary questions were proposed to
me, that appeared to relate indirectly to the appearance of my late
visitor. I answered them with a sincerity that seemed to make a
frightful impression on my judges. I stated plainly, in answer to their
questions, that a person had appeared in my dungeon. “You must call it
cell,” said the Supreme. “In my cell, then. He spoke with the utmost
severity of the holy office,--he uttered words that it would not be
respectful for me to repeat. I could scarcely believe that such a person
would be permitted to visit the dungeons (cells, I should say) of the
holy Inquisition.” As I uttered these words, one of the judges,
trembling on his seat, (while his shadow, magnified by the imperfect
light, pictured the figure of a paralytic giant on the wall opposite to
me), attempted to address some question to me. As he spoke, there came a
hollow sound from his throat, his eyes were rolled upwards in their
sockets,--he was in an apoplectic paroxysm, and died before he could be
removed to another apartment. The examination terminated suddenly, and
in some confusion; but, as I was remanded back to my cell, I could
perceive, to my consternation, that I had left an impression the most
unfavourable on the minds of the judges. They interpreted this
accidental circumstance in a manner the most extraordinary and unjust,
and I felt the consequences of it at my next examination.

“That night I received a visit in my cell from one of the judges of the
Inquisition, who conversed with me a considerable time, and in an
earnest and dispassionate manner. He stated the atrocious and revolting
character under which I appeared from the first before the
Inquisition,--that of a monk who had apostatized, had been accused of
the crime of sorcery in his convent, and, in his impious attempt at
escape, had caused the death of his brother, whom he had seduced to join
in it, and had overwhelmed one of the first families with despair and
disgrace. Here I was going to reply, but he stopped me, and observed,
that he came not to listen, but to speak; and went on to inform me, that
though I had been acquitted of the charge of communication with the evil
spirit at the visitation of the Bishop, certain suspicions attached to
me had been fearfully strengthened, by the fact that the visits of the
extraordinary being, of whom I had heard enough to assure me of his
actuality, had never been known in the prison of the Inquisition till my
entrance into it. That the fair and probable conclusion was, that I was
really the victim of the enemy of mankind, whose power (through the
reluctant permission of God and St Dominic, and he crossed himself as he
spoke) had been suffered to range even through the walls of the holy
office. He cautioned me, in severe but plain terms, against the danger
of the situation in which I was placed, by the suspicions universally
and (he feared) too justly attached to me; and, finally, adjured me, as
I valued my salvation, to place my entire confidence in the mercy of the
holy office, and, if _the figure_ should visit me again, to watch what
its impure lips might suggest, and faithfully report it to the holy
office.

“When the Inquisitor had departed, I reflected on what he had said. I
conceived it was something like the conspiracies so often occurring in
the convent. I conceived that this might be an attempt to involve me in
some plot against myself, something in which I might be led to be active
in my own condemnation,--I felt the necessity of vigilant and breathless
caution. I knew myself innocent, and this is a consciousness that defies
even the Inquisition itself; but, within the walls of the Inquisition,
the consciousness, and the defiance it inspires, are alike vain. I
finally resolved, however, to watch every circumstance that might occur
within the walls of my cell very closely, threatened as I was at once by
the powers of the Inquisition, and those of the infernal demon, and I
had not long to watch. It was on the second night after my examination,
that I saw this person enter my cell. My first impulse was to call aloud
for the officials of the Inquisition. I felt a kind of vacillation I
cannot describe, between throwing myself into the power of the
Inquisition, or the power of this extraordinary being, more formidable
perhaps than all the Inquisitors on earth, from Madrid to Goa. I dreaded
imposition on both sides. I believed that they were playing off terror
against terror; I knew not what to believe or think. I felt myself
surrounded by enemies on every side, and would have given my heart to
those who would first throw off the mask, and announce themselves as my
decided and avowed enemy. After some reflection, I judged it best _to
distrust the Inquisition_, and to hear all that this extraordinary
visitor had to say. In my secret soul I believed him their secret
agent,--I did them great injustice. His conversation on this second
visit was more than usually amusing, but it was certainly such as might
justify all the suspicions of the Inquisitors. At every sentence he
uttered, I was disposed to start up and call for the officials. Then I
represented to myself his turning accuser, and pointing _me_ out as the
victim of their condemnation. I trembled at the idea of committing
myself by a word, while in the power of that dreadful body that might
condemn me to expire under the torture,--or, worse, to die the long and
lingering death of inanity,--the mind famished, the body scarcely
fed,--the annihilation of hopeless and interminable solitude,--the
terrible inversion of natural feeling, that makes life the object of
deprecation, and death of indulgence.

“The result was, that I sat and listened to the conversation (if it may
be called so) of this extraordinary visitor, who appeared to regard the
walls of the Inquisition no more than those of a domestic apartment, and
who seated himself beside me as quietly as if he had been reposing on
the most luxurious sofa that ever was arrayed by the fingers of
voluptuousness. My senses were so bewildered, my mind so disarranged,
that I can hardly remember his conversation. Part of it ran thus: “You
are a prisoner of the Inquisition. The holy office, no doubt, is
instituted for wise purposes, beyond the cognizance of sinful beings
like us; but, as far as we can judge, its prisoners are not only
insensible of, but shamefully ungrateful for, the benefits they might
derive from its provident vigilance. For instance, you, who are accused
of sorcery, fratricide, and plunging an illustrious and affectionate
family in despair, by your atrocious misconduct, and who are now
fortunately restrained from farther outrages against nature, religion,
and society, by your salutary confinement here;--you, I venture to say,
are so unconscious of these blessings, that it is your earnest desire to
escape from the further enjoyment of them. In a word, I am convinced
that the secret wish of your heart (unconverted by all the profusion of
charity which has been heaped on you by the holy office) is not on any
account to increase the burden of your obligation to them, but, on the
contrary, to diminish as much as possible the grief these worthy persons
must feel, as long as your residence pollutes their holy walls, by
abridging its period, even long before they intend you should do so.
Your wish is to escape from the prison of the holy office, if
possible,--you know it is.” I did not answer a word. I felt a terror at
this wild and fierce irony,--I felt a terror at the mention of escape,
(I had fatal reasons for this feeling),--a terror of every thing, and
every one near me, indescribable. I believed myself tottering on a
narrow ridge,--an Al-araf, between the alternate gulphs which the
infernal spirit and the Inquisition (not less dreaded) disclosed on each
side of my trembling march. I compressed my lips,--I hardly suffered my
breath to escape.

“The speaker went on. “With regard to your escape, though I can promise
that to you, (and that is what no _human power_ can promise you), you
must be aware of the difficulty which will attend it,--and, should that
difficulty terrify you, will you hesitate?” Still I was silent;--my
visitor perhaps took this for the silence of doubt. He went on. “Perhaps
you think that your lingering here, amid the dungeons of the
Inquisition, will infallibly secure your salvation. There is no error
more absurd, and yet more rooted in the heart of man, than the belief
that his sufferings will promote his spiritual safety.” Here I thought
myself safe in rejoining, that I felt,--I trusted, my sufferings here
would indeed be accepted as a partial mitigation of my well-merited
punishment hereafter. I acknowledged my many errors,--I professed myself
as penitent for my misfortunes as if they had been crimes; and the
energy of my grief combining with the innocence of my heart, I commended
myself to the Almighty with an unction I really felt,--I called on the
names of God, the Saviour, and the Virgin, with the earnest supplication
of sincere devoutness. When I had risen from my knees, my visitor had
retired. * * * * * * *

“Examination followed examination before the judges, with a rapidity
unexampled in the annals of the Inquisition. Alas! that they should be
_annals_,--that they should be more than records of _one day_ of abuse,
oppression, falsehood, and torture. At my next examination before the
judges, I was interrogated according to the usual forms, and afterwards
was led, by questions as artfully constructed, as if there was any
necessity for art to lead me, to speak to the question on which I longed
to disburden myself. The moment the subject was mentioned, I entered on
my narrative with an eagerness of sincerity that would have undeceived
any but Inquisitors. I announced that I had received another visit from
this unknown being. I repeated, with breathless and trembling eagerness,
every word of our late conference. I did not suppress a syllable of the
insults on the holy office, the wild and fiend-like acrimony of his
satire, the avowed atheism, the diabolism of his conversation,--I dwelt
on every particular. I hoped to _make merit_ with the Inquisition, by
accusing their enemy, and that of mankind. Oh! there is no telling the
agony of zeal with which we work between two mortal adversaries, hoping
to make a friend of one of them! I had suffered enough already from the
Inquisition, but at this moment I would have crouched at the knees of
the Inquisitors,--I would have pleaded for the place of the meanest
official in their prison,--I would have supplicated for the loathsome
office of their executioner,--I would have encountered any thing that
the Inquisition could inflict, to be spared the horror of being imagined
the ally of the enemy of souls. To my distraction, I perceived that
every word I uttered, in all the agony of truth,--in all the hopeless
eloquence of a soul struggling with the fiends who are bearing it beyond
the reach of mercy, was disregarded. The judges appeared struck, indeed,
by the earnestness with which I spoke. They gave, for a moment, a kind
of instinctive credit to my words, extorted by terror; but, a moment
after, I could perceive that _I_, and not my communication, was the
object of that terror. They seemed to view me through a distorting
atmosphere of mystery and suspicion. They urged me, over and over again,
for further particulars,--for ulterior circumstances,--for something
that was in _their_ minds, but not in mine. The more pains they took to
construct their questions skilfully, the more unintelligible they became
to me. I had told all I knew, I was anxious to tell all, but I could not
tell more than I knew, and the agony of my solicitude to meet the object
of the judges, was aggravated in proportion to my ignorance of it. On
being remanded to my cell, I was warned, in the most solemn manner, that
if I neglected to watch, remember, and report every word uttered by the
extraordinary being, whose visits they tacitly acknowledged they could
neither prevent or detect, I might expect the utmost severity of the
holy office. I promised all this,--all that could be demanded, and,
finally, as the last proof I could give of my sincerity, I implored that
some one might be allowed to pass the night in my cell,--or, if that was
contrary to the rules of the Inquisition, that one of the guard might be
stationed in the passage communicating with my cell, to whom I could, by
a signal agreed on, intimate when this nameless being burst on me, and
his impious intrusion might be at once detected and punished. In
speaking thus, I was indulged with a privilege very unusual in the
Inquisition, where the prisoner is only to answer questions, but never
to speak unless when called on. My proposal, however, caused some
consultation; and it was with horror I found, on its termination, that
not one of the officials, even under the discipline of the Inquisition,
would undertake the task of watching at the door of _my_ cell.

“I went back to it in an agony inexpressible. The more I had laboured to
clear myself, the more I had become involved. My only resource and
consolation was in a determination to obey, to the strictest letter, the
injunctions of the Inquisition. I kept myself studiously awake,--_he_
came not all that night. Towards the morning I slept,--Oh what a sleep
was mine!--the genii, or the demons of the place, seemed busy in the
dream that haunted me. I am convinced that a real victim of an _auto da
fe_ (so called) never suffered more during his horrible procession to
flames temporal and eternal, than I did during that dream. I dreamed
that the judgement had passed,--the bell had tolled,--and we marched out
from the prison of the Inquisition;--my crime was proved, and my
sentence determined, as an apostate monk and a _diabolical_ heretic. The
procession commenced,--the Dominicans went first, then followed the
penitents, arms and feet bare, each hand holding a wax taper, some with
_san benitos_, some without, all pale, haggard, and breathless, the hue
of their faces frightfully resembling that of their clay-coloured arms
and feet. Then followed those who had on their black dresses the _fuego
revolto_(11). Then followed--I saw _myself_; and this horrid tracing of
yourself in a dream,--this haunting of yourself by your own spectre,
while you still live, is perhaps a curse almost equal to your crimes
visiting you in the punishments of eternity. I saw myself in the garment
of condemnation, _the flames pointing upwards_, while the demons painted
on my dress were mocked by the demons who beset my feet, and hovered
round my temples. The Jesuits on each side of me, urged me to consider
the difference between these painted fires, and those which were about
to enwrap my writhing soul for an eternity of ages. All the bells of
Madrid seemed to be ringing in my ears. There was no light but a dull
twilight, such as one always sees in his sleep, (no man ever dreamed of
sun-light);--there was a dim and smoky blaze of torches in my eyes,
whose flames were soon to _be in my eyes_. I saw the stage before me,--I
was chained to the chair, amid the ringing of bells, the preaching of
the Jesuits, and the shouts of the multitude. A splendid amphitheatre
stood opposite,--the king and queen of Spain, and all the nobility and
hierarchy of the land, were there to see us burn. Our thoughts in dreams
wander; I had heard a story of an _auto da fe_, where a young Jewess,
not sixteen, doomed to be burnt alive, had prostrated herself before the
queen, and exclaimed, “Save me,--save me, do not let me burn, my only
crime is believing in the God of my fathers;”--the queen (I believe
Elizabeth of France, wife of Philip) wept, but the procession went on.
Something like this crossed my dream. I saw the supplicant rejected; the
next moment the figure was that of my brother Juan, who clung to me,
shrieking, “Save me, save me.” The next moment I was chained to my chair
again,--the fires were lit, the bells rang out, the litanies were
sung;--my feet were scorched to a cinder,--my muscles cracked, my blood
and marrow hissed, my flesh consumed like shrinking leather,--the bones
of my legs hung two black withering and moveless sticks in the ascending
blaze;--it ascended, caught my hair,--I was crowned with fire,--my head
was a ball of molten metal, my eyes flashed and melted in their
sockets;--I opened my mouth, it drank fire,--I closed it, the fire was
within,--and still the bells rung on, and the crowd shouted, and the
king and queen, and all the nobility and priesthood, looked on, and we
burned, and burned!--I was a cinder body and soul in my dream.

  (11) _Flames reversed_, intimating that the criminal is not to be
  burned.

“I awoke from it with the horrible exclamation--ever shrieked, never
heard--of those wretches, when the fires are climbing fast and
fell,--_Misericordia por amor di Dios!_ My own screams awoke me,--I was
in my prison, and beside me stood the tempter. With an impulse I could
not resist,--an impulse borrowed from the horrors of my dream, I flung
myself at his feet, and called on him to “save me.”

“I know not, Sir, nor is it a problem to be solved by human intellect,
whether this inscrutable being had not the power to influence my dreams,
and dictate to a tempting demon the images which had driven me to fling
myself at his feet for hope and safety. However it was, he certainly
took advantage of my agony, half-visionary, half-real as it was, and,
while proving to me that he had the power of effecting my escape from
the Inquisition, proposed to me that incommunicable condition which I am
forbid to reveal, except in the act of confession.”

Here Melmoth could not forbear remembering the _incommunicable
condition_ proposed to Stanton in the mad-house,--he shuddered, and was
silent. The Spaniard went on.

“At my next examination, the questions were more eager and earnest than
ever, and I was more anxious to be heard than questioned; so, in spite
of the eternal circumspection and formality of an inquisitorial
examination, we soon came to understand each other. I had an object to
gain, and they had nothing to lose by my gaining that object. I
confessed, without hesitation, that I had received another visit from
that most mysterious being, who could penetrate the recesses of the
Inquisition, without either its leave or prevention, (the judges
trembled on their seats, as I uttered these words);--that I was most
willing to disclose all that had transpired at our last conference, but
that I required to first confess to a priest, and receive absolution.
This, though quite contrary to the rules of the Inquisition, was, on
this extraordinary occasion, complied with. A black curtain was dropt
before one of the recesses; I knelt down before a priest, and confided
to him that tremendous secret, which, according to the rules of the
Catholic church, can never be disclosed by the confessor but to the
Pope. I do not understand how the business was managed, but I was called
on to repeat the same confession before the Inquisitors. I repeated it
word for word, saving only the words that my oath, and my consciousness
of the holy secret of confession, forbade me to disclose. The sincerity
of this confession, I thought, would have worked a miracle for me,--and
so it did, but not the miracle that I expected. They required from me
that incommunicable secret; I announced it was in the bosom of the
priest to whom I had confessed. They whispered, and seemed to debate
about the torture.

“At this time, as may be supposed, I cast an anxious and miserable look
round the apartment, where the large crucifix, thirteen feet high, stood
bending above the seat of the Supreme. At this moment I saw a person
seated at the table covered with black cloth, intensely busy as a
secretary, or person employed in taking down the depositions of the
accused. As I was led near the table, this person flashed a look of
recognition on me,--he was my dreaded companion,--he was an official now
of the Inquisition. I gave all up the moment I saw his ferocious and
lurking scowl, like that of the tiger before he springs from his jungle,
or the wolf from his den. This person threw on me looks, from time to
time, which I could not mistake, and I dared not interpret;--and I had
reason to believe that the tremendous sentence pronounced against me,
issued, if not from his lips, at least from his dictation.--“You, Alonzo
di Monçada, monk, professed of the order of ----, accused of the crimes
of heresy, apostacy, fratricide, (“Oh no,--no!” I shrieked, but no one
heeded me), and conspiracy with the enemy of mankind against the peace
of the community in which you professed yourself a votary of God, and
against the authority of the holy office; accused, moreover, of
intercourse in your cell, the prison of the holy office, with an
infernal messenger of the foe of God, man, and your own apostatized
soul; condemned on your own confession of the infernal spirit having had
access to your cell,--are hereby delivered to----”

“I heard no more. I exclaimed, but my voice was drowned in the murmur of
the officials. The crucifix suspended behind the chair of the judge,
rocked and reeled before my eyes; the lamp that hung from the ceiling,
seemed to send forth twenty lights. I held up my hands in
abjuration--they were held down by stronger hands. I tried to speak--my
mouth was stopped. I sunk on my knees--on my knees I was about to be
dragged away, when an aged Inquisitor giving a sign to the officials, I
was released for a few moments, and he addressed me in these
words--words rendered terrible by the sincerity of the speaker. From his
age, from his sudden interposition, I had expected mercy. He was a very
old man--he had been blind for twenty years; and as he rose to speak my
malediction, my thoughts wandered from Appius Claudius of
Rome,--blessing the loss of sight, that saved him from beholding the
disgrace of his country,--to that blind chief Inquisitor of Spain, who
assured Philip, that in sacrificing his son, he imitated the Almighty,
who had sacrificed his Son also for the salvation of mankind.--Horrid
profanation! yet striking application to the bosom of a Catholic. The
words of the Inquisitor were these: “Wretch, apostate, and
excommunicate, I bless God that these withered balls can no longer
behold you. The demon has haunted you from your birth--you were born in
sin--fiends rocked your cradle, and dipt their talons in the holy font,
while they mocked the sponsors of your unsanctified baptism.
Illegitimate and accursed, you were always the burden of the holy
church; and now, the infernal spirit comes to claim his own, and you
acknowledge him as your lord and master. He has sought and sealed you as
his own, even amid the prison of the Inquisition. Begone, accursed, we
deliver you over to the secular arm, praying that it may deal with you
not too severely.” At these terrible words, whose meaning I understood
but too well, I uttered one shriek of agony--the only _human_ sound ever
heard within the walls of the Inquisition. But I was borne away; and
that cry into which I had thrown the whole strength of nature, was
heeded no more than a cry from the torture room. On my return to my
cell, I felt convinced the whole was a scheme of inquisitorial art, to
involve me in self-accusation, (their constant object when they can
effect it), and punish me for a crime, while I was guilty only of an
extorted confession.

“With compunction and anguish unutterable, I execrated my own beast-like
and credulous stupidity. Could any but an idiot, a driveller, have been
the victim of such a plot? Was it in nature to believe that the prisons
of the Inquisition could be traversed at will by a stranger whom no one
could discover or apprehend? That such a being could enter cells
impervious to human power, and hold conversation with the prisoners at
his pleasure--appear and disappear--insult, ridicule, and
blaspheme--propose escape, and point out the means with a precision and
facility, that must be the result of calm and profound calculation--and
this within the walls of the Inquisition, almost in the hearing of the
judges--actually in the hearing of the guards, who night and day paced
the passages with sleepless and inquisitorial vigilance?--ridiculous,
monstrous, impossible! it was all a plot to betray me to
self-condemnation. My visitor was an agent and accomplice of the
Inquisition, and I was my own betrayer and executioner. Such was my
conclusion; and, hopeless as it was, it certainly seemed probable.

“I had now nothing to await but the most dreadful of all destinations,
amid the darkness and silence of my cell, where the total suspension of
the stranger’s visits confirmed me every hour in my conviction of their
nature and purport, when an event occurred, whose consequences alike
defeated fear, hope, and calculation. This was the great fire that broke
out within the walls of the Inquisition, about the close of the last
century.

“It was on the night of the 29th November 17--, that this extraordinary
circumstance took place--extraordinary from the well-known precautions
adopted by the vigilance of the holy office against such an accident,
and also from the very small quantity of fuel consumed within its walls.
On the first intimation that the fire was spreading rapidly, and
threatened danger, the prisoners were ordered to be brought from their
cells, and guarded in a court of the prison. I must acknowledge we were
treated with great humanity and consideration. We were conducted
deliberately from our cells, placed each of us between two guards, who
did us no violence, nor used harsh language, but assured us, from time
to time, that if the danger became imminent, we would be permitted every
fair opportunity to effect our escape. It was a subject worthy of the
pencil of Salvator Rosa, or of Murillo, to sketch us as we stood. Our
dismal garbs and squalid looks, contrasted with the equally dark, but
imposing and authoritative looks of the guards and officials, all
displayed by the light of torches, which burned, or appeared to burn,
fainter and fainter, as the flames rose and roared in triumph above the
towers of the Inquisition. The heavens were all on fire--and the
torches, held no longer in firm hands, gave a tremulous and pallid
light. It seemed to me like a wildly painted picture of the last day.
God appeared descending in the light that enveloped the skies--and we
stood pale and shuddering in the light below.

“Among the groupe of prisoners, there were fathers and sons, who perhaps
had been inmates of adjacent cells for years, without being conscious of
each others vicinity or existence--but they did not dare to recognize
each other. Was not this like the day of judgement, where similar mortal
relations may meet under different classes of the sheep and goats,
without presuming to acknowledge the strayed one amid the flock of a
different shepherd? There were also parents and children who _did_
recognize and stretch out their wasted arms to each other, though
feeling they must never meet,--some of them condemned to the flames,
some to imprisonment, and some to the official duties of the
Inquisition, as a mitigation of their sentence,--and was not this like
the day of judgement, where parent and child may be allotted different
destinations, and the arms that would attest the last proof of mortal
affection, are expanded in vain over the gulph of eternity. Behind and
around us stood the officials and guards of the Inquisition, all
watching and intent on the progress of the flames, but fearless of the
result with regard to themselves. Such may be the feeling of those
spirits who watch the doom of the Almighty, and know the destination of
those they are appointed to watch. And is not this like the day of
judgement? Far, far, above us, the flames burst out in volumes, in solid
masses of fire, spiring up to the burning heavens. The towers of the
Inquisition shrunk into cinders--that tremendous monument of the power,
and crime, and gloom of the human mind, was wasting like a scroll in the
fire. Will it not be thus also at the day of judgement? Assistance was
slowly brought--Spaniards are very indolent--the engines played
imperfectly--the danger increased--the fire blazed higher and
higher--the persons employed to work the engines, paralyzed by terror,
fell to the ground, and called on every saint they could think of, to
arrest the progress of the flames. Their exclamations were so loud and
earnest, that really the saints must have been deaf, or must have felt a
particular predilection for a conflagration, not to attend to them.
However it was, the fire went on. Every bell in Madrid rang out.--Orders
were issued to every Alcalde to be had.--The king of Spain himself,
((12)after a hard day’s shooting), attended in person. The churches were
all lit up, and thousands of the devout supplicated on their knees by
torchlight, or whatever light they could get, that the reprobate souls
confined in the Inquisition might feel the fires that were consuming its
walls, as merely a slight foretaste of the fires that glowed for them
for ever and ever. The fire went on, doing its dreadful work, and
heeding kings and priests no more than if they were firemen. I am
convinced twenty able men, accustomed to such business, could have
quenched the fire; but when our workmen should have played their
engines, they were all on their knees.

  (12) The passion of the late king of Spain for field sports was well
  known.

“The flames at last began to descend into the court. Then commenced a
scene of horror indescribable. The wretches who had been doomed to the
flames, imagined their hour was come. Idiots from long confinement, and
submissive as the holy office could require, they became delirious as
they saw the flames approaching, and shrieked audibly, “Spare me--spare
me--put me to as little torture as you can.” Others, kneeling to the
approaching flames, invoked them as saints. They dreamt they saw the
visions they had worshipped,--the holy angels, and even the blessed
virgin, descending in flames to receive their souls as parting from the
stake; and they howled out their allelujahs half in horror, half in
hope. Amid this scene of distraction, the Inquisitors stood their
ground. It was admirable to see their firm and solemn array. As the
flames prevailed, they never faultered with foot, or gave a sign with
hand, or winked with eye;--their duty, their stern and heartless duty,
seemed to be the only principle and motive of their existence. They
seemed a phalanx clad in iron impenetrable. When the fires roared, they
crossed themselves calmly;--when the prisoners shrieked, they gave a
signal for silence;--when they dared to pray, they tore them from their
knees, and hinted the inutility of prayer at such a juncture, when they
might be sure that the flames they were deprecating would burn hotter in
a region from which there was neither escape or hope of departure. At
this moment, while standing amid the groupe of prisoners, my eyes were
struck by an extraordinary spectacle. Perhaps it is amid the moments of
despair, that imagination has most power, and they who have suffered,
can best describe and feel. In the burning light, the steeple of the
Dominican church was as visible as at noon-day. It was close to the
prison of the Inquisition. The night was intensely dark, but so strong
was the light of the conflagration, that I could see the spire blazing,
from the reflected lustre, like a meteor. The hands of the clock were as
visible as if a torch was held before them; and this calm and silent
progress of time, amid the tumultuous confusion of midnight
horrors,--this scene of the physical and mental world in an agony of
fruitless and incessant motion, might have suggested a profound and
singular image, had not my whole attention been rivetted to a human
figure placed on a pinnacle of the spire, and surveying the scene in
perfect tranquillity. It was a figure not to be mistaken--it was the
figure of him who had visited me in the cells of the Inquisition. The
hopes of my justification made me forget every thing. I called aloud on
the guard, and pointed out the figure, visible as it was in that strong
light to every eye. No one had time, however, to give a glance towards
it. At that very moment, the archway of the court opposite to us gave
way, and sunk in ruins at our feet, dashing, as it fell, an ocean of
flame against us. One wild shriek burst from every lip at that moment.
Prisoners, guards, and Inquisitors, all shrunk together, mingled in one
groupe of terror.

“The next instant, the flames being suppressed by the fall of such a
mass of stone, there arose such a blinding cloud of smoke and dust, that
it was impossible to distinguish the face or figure of those who were
next you. The confusion was increased by the contrast of this sudden
darkness, to the intolerable light that had been drying up our sight for
the last hour, and by the cries of those who, being near the arch, lay
maimed and writhing under its fragments. Amid shrieks, and darkness, and
flames, a space lay open before me. The thought, the motion, were
simultaneous--no one saw--no one pursued;--and hours before my absence
could be discovered, or an inquiry be made after me, I had struggled
safe and secret through the ruins, and was in the streets of Madrid.

“To those who have escaped present and extreme peril, all other peril
seems trifling. The wretch who has swum from a wreck cares not on what
shore he is cast; and though Madrid was in fact only a wider prison of
the Inquisition to me, in knowing that I was no longer in the hands of
the officials, I felt a delirious and indefinite consciousness of
safety. Had I reflected for a moment, I must have known, that my
peculiar dress and _bare feet_ must betray me wherever I went. The
conjuncture, however, was very favourable to me--the streets were
totally deserted;--every inhabitant who was not in bed, or bed-rid, was
in the churches, deprecating the wrath of heaven, and praying for the
extinction of the flames.

“I ran on, I know not where, till I could run no longer. The pure air,
which I had been so long unaccustomed to breathe, acted like the most
torturing spicula on my throat and lungs as I flew along, and utterly
deprived me of the power of respiration, which at first it appeared to
restore. I saw a building near me, whose large doors were open. I rushed
in--it was a church. I fell on the pavement panting. It was the aisle
into which I had burst--it was separated from the chancel by large
grated railings. Within I could see the priests at the altar, by the
lamps recently and rarely lighted, and a few trembling devotees on their
knees, in the body of the chancel. There was a strong contrast between
the glare of the lamps within the chancel, and the faint light that
trembled through the windows of the aisle, scarcely showing me the
monuments, on one of which I leaned to rest my throbbing temples for a
moment. I could not rest--I dared not--and rising, I cast an involuntary
glance on the inscription which the monument bore. The light appeared to
increase maliciously, to aid my powers of vision. I read, “Orate pro
anima.” I at last came to the name--“Juan di Monçada.” I flew from the
spot as if pursued by demons--my brother’s early grave had been my
resting place.

END OF VOLUME SECOND.




    Transcriber’s Note:

    The following is a list of corrections made to the original.
    The first line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

  escaped damnation to all eternity. I tried to pacify him, to assure him
  escaped damnation to all eternity.” I tried to pacify him, to assure him

  I have never felt any fear so horrible. “I walked up and down, I repeated
  I have never felt any fear so horrible. I walked up and down, I repeated

  It was noon before I could work myself up to execute this resolution. I
  “It was noon before I could work myself up to execute this resolution. I

  God
  God.

  my late tremendous visitation, as he called it. Satan hath desired to
  my late tremendous visitation, as he called it. “Satan hath desired to

  have you, he said, because you have put yourself within his power, by
  have you,” he said, “because you have put yourself within his power, by

  The Superior all this time walked impatiently up and down his
  “The Superior all this time walked impatiently up and down his

  natural malignity of wretchedness, “If they tremble, I may exult. When
  natural malignity of wretchedness, “If they tremble, I may exult.” When

  Bishop paused. An appeal to his fealings would have been vain, but this
  Bishop paused. An appeal to his feelings would have been vain, but this

  the assistance of the lamp in my ce , and went to watch again at the
  the assistance of the lamp in my cell, and went to watch again at the

  they cut their parents hearts or their throats. I have cut _one_
  they cut their parents’ hearts or their throats. I have cut _one_

  criminals should undergo what they called extraorordinary penance; that
  criminals should undergo what they called extraordinary penance; that

  were issued to every Alcaide to be had.--The king of Spain himself,
  were issued to every Alcalde to be had.--The king of Spain himself,





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Melmoth the Wanderer Vol 2 (of 4), by 
Charles Robert Maturin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELMOTH THE WANDERER VOL 2 (OF 4) ***

***** This file should be named 53686-0.txt or 53686-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/6/8/53686/

Produced by David Edwards, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Melmoth the Wanderer Vol 3 (of 4), by 
Charles Robert Maturin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Melmoth the Wanderer Vol 3 (of 4)

Author: Charles Robert Maturin

Release Date: December 7, 2016 [EBook #53687]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELMOTH THE WANDERER VOL 3 (OF 4) ***




Produced by David Edwards, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






    Transcriber’s Notes:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including inconsistencies in spelling, hyphenation, and
    punctuation. Some corrections of spelling and punctuation have been
    made. They are listed at the end of the text.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.




  MELMOTH
  THE
  WANDERER:
  A
  TALE.

  BY THE AUTHOR OF “BERTRAM,” &c.

  IN FOUR VOLUMES.

  VOL. III.

  EDINBURGH:
  PRINTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY,
  AND HURST, ROBINSON, AND CO. CHEAPSIDE,
  LONDON.

  1820.




MELMOTH.




CHAPTER XII.

    Juravi lingua, mentem injuratam gero.----
    Who brought you first acquainted with the devil?

    SHIRLEY’S ST PATRICK FOR IRELAND.


“I ran on till I had no longer breath or strength, (without perceiving
that I was in a dark passage), till I was stopt by a door. In falling
against it, I burst it open, and found myself in a low dark room. When I
raised myself, for I had fallen on my hands and knees, I looked round,
and saw something so singular, as to suspend even my personal anxiety
and terror for a moment.

“The room was very small; and I could perceive by the rents, that I had
not only broken open a door, but a large curtain which hung before it,
whose ample folds still afforded me concealment if I required it. There
was no one in the room, and I had time to study its singular furniture
at leisure.

“There was a table covered with cloth; on it were placed a vessel of a
singular construction, a book, into whose pages I looked, but could not
make out a single letter. I therefore wisely took it for a book of
magic, and closed it with a feeling of exculpatory horror. (It happened
to be a copy of the Hebrew Bible, marked with the Samaritan points).
There was a knife too; and a cock was fastened to the leg of the table,
whose loud crows announced his impatience of further constraint(1).

  (1) Quilibet postea paterfamilias, cum _gallo_ præ manibus, in medium
  primus prodit. * * * * * * * *

  Deinde expiationem aggreditur et capiti suo ter gallum allidit,
  singulosque ictus his vocibus prosequitur. Hic Gallus sit permutio pro
  me, &c. * * * * * * * Gallo deinde imponens manus, eum statim mactat,
  &c.

  Vide Buxtorf, as quoted in Dr Magee (Bishop of Raphoe’s) work on the
  atonement. Cumberland in his Observer, I think, mentions the discovery
  to have been reserved for the feast of the Passover. It is just as
  probable it was made on the day of expiation.

“I felt that this apparatus was somewhat singular--it looked like a
preparation for a sacrifice. I shuddered, and wrapt myself in the
volumes of the drapery which hung before the door my fall had broken
open. A dim lamp, suspended from the ceiling, discovered to me all these
objects, and enabled me to observe what followed almost immediately. A
man of middle age, but whose physiognomy had something peculiar in it,
even to the eye of a Spaniard, from the clustering darkness of his
eye-brows, his prominent nose, and a certain lustre in the balls of his
eyes, entered the room, knelt before the table, kissed the book that lay
on it, and read from it some sentences that were to precede, as I
imagined, some horrible sacrifice;--felt the edge of the knife, knelt
again, uttered some words which I did not understand, (as they were in
the language of that book), and then called aloud on some one by the
name of Manasseh-ben-Solomon. No one answered. He sighed, passed his
hand over his eyes with the air of a man who is asking pardon of himself
for a short forgetfulness, and then pronounced the name of “Antonio.” A
young man immediately entered, and answered, “Did you call me,
Father?”--But while he spoke, he threw a hollow and wandering glance on
the singular furniture of the room.

“I called you, my son, and why did you not answer me?”--“I did not hear
you, father--I mean, I did not think it was on me you called. I heard
only a name I was never called by before. When you said ‘Antonio,’ I
obeyed you--I came.”--“But _that_ is the name by which you must in
future be called and be known, to me at least, unless you prefer
another.--You shall have your choice.”--“My father, I shall adopt
whatever name you choose.”--“No; the choice of your new name must be
your own--you must, for the future, either adopt the name you have
heard, or another.”--“What other, Sir?”--“_That of parricide._” The
youth shuddered with horror, less at the words than at the expression
that accompanied them; and, after looking at his father for some time in
a posture of tremulous and supplicating inquiry, he burst into tears.
The father seized the moment. He grasped the arms of his son, “My child,
I gave you life, and you may repay the gift--my life is in your power.
You think me a Catholic--I have brought you up as one for the
preservation of our mutual lives, in a country where the confession of
the true faith would infallibly cost both. I am one of that unhappy race
every where stigmatized and spoken against, yet on whose industry and
talent the ungrateful country that anathematizes us, depends for half
the sources of its national prosperity. I am a Jew, “an Israelite,” one
of those to whom, even by the confession of a Christian apostle,
“pertain the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving
of the law, and the service of God, and the promises; whose are the
fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh--” Here he paused, not
willing to go on with a quotation that would have contradicted his
sentiments. He added, “The Messias will come, whether suffering or
triumphant(2). I am a Jew. I called you at the hour of your birth by the
name of Manasseh-ben-Solomon. I called on you by that name, which I felt
had clung to the bottom of my heart from that hour, and which, echoing
from its abyss, I almost hoped you would have recognized. It was a
dream, but will you not, my beloved child, realize that dream? Will you
not?--will you not? The God of your fathers is waiting to embrace
you--and your father is at your feet, imploring you to follow the faith
of your father Abraham, the prophet Moses, and all the holy prophets who
are with God, and who look down on this moment of your soul’s
vacillation between the abominable idolatries of those who not only
adore the Son of the carpenter, but even impiously compel you to fall
down before the image of the woman his mother, and adore her by the
blasphemous name of Mother of God,--and the pure voice of those who call
on you to worship the God of your fathers, the God of ages, the eternal
God of heaven and earth, without son or mother, without child or
descendant, (as impiously presumed in their blasphemous creed), without
even worshipper, save those who, like me, sacrifice their hearts to him
in solitude, at the risk of those hearts being PIERCED BY THEIR OWN
CHILDREN.”

  (2) The Jews believe in two Messias, a suffering and a triumphant one,
  to reconcile the prophecies with their own expectations.

“At these words, the young man, overcome by all he saw and heard, and
quite unprepared for this sudden transition from Catholicism to Judaism,
burst into tears. The father seized the moment, “My child, you are now
to profess yourself the slave of these idolaters, who are cursed in the
law of Moses, and by the commandment of God,--or to enrol yourself among
the faithful, whose rest shall be in the bosom of Abraham, and who,
reposing there, shall see the unbelieving crawling over the burning
ashes of hell, and supplicate you in vain for a drop of water, according
to the legends of their own prophet. And does not such a picture excite
your pride to deny them a drop?”--“I would not deny them a drop,” sobbed
the youth, “I would give them these tears.”--“Reserve them for your
father’s grave,” added the Jew, “for to the grave you have doomed me.--I
have lived, sparing, watching, temporizing, with these accursed
idolaters, for _you_. And now--and now you reject a God who is alone
able to save, and a father kneeling to implore you to accept that
salvation.”--“No, I do not,” said the bewildered youth.--“What, then, do
you determine?--I am at your feet to know your resolution. Behold, the
mysterious instruments of your initiation are ready. There is the
uncorrupted book of Moses, the prophet of God, as these idolaters
themselves confess. There are all the preparations for the year of
expiation--determine whether those rites shall now dedicate you to the
true God, or seize your father, (who has put his life into your hands),
and drag him by the throat into the prisons of the Inquisition. You
may--you can--_will you?_”

“In prostrate and tremulous agony, the father held up his locked hands
to his child. I seized the moment--despair had made me reckless. I
understood not a word of what was said, except the reference to the
Inquisition. I seized on that last word--I grasped, in my despair, at
the heart of father and child. I rushed from behind the curtain, and
exclaiming, “If he does not betray you to the Inquisition, _I will_.” I
fell at his feet. This mixture of defiance and prostration, my squalid
figure, my inquisitorial habit, and my bursting on this secret and
solemn interview, struck the Jew with a horror he vainly gasped to
express, till, rising from my knees, on which I had fallen from my
weakness, I added, “Yes, I will betray you to the Inquisition, unless
you instantly promise to shelter me from it.” The Jew glanced at my
dress, perceived his danger and mine, and, with a _physical_ presence of
mind unparalleled, except in a man under strong impressions of mental
excitation and personal danger, bustled about to remove every trace of
the expiatory sacrifice, and of my inquisitorial costume, in a moment.
In the same breath he called aloud for _Rebekah_, to remove the vessels
from the table; bid _Antonio_ quit the apartment, and hastened to clothe
me in some dress that he had snatched from a wardrobe collected from
centuries; while he tore off my inquisitorial dress with a violence that
left me actually naked, and the habit in rags.

“There was something at once fearful and ludicrous in the scene that
followed. Rebekah, an old Jewish woman, came at his call; but, seeing a
third person, retreated in terror, while her master, in his confusion,
called her in vain by her _Christian_ name of Maria. Obliged to remove
the table alone, he overthrew it, and broke the leg of the unfortunate
animal fastened to it, who, not to be without his share in the tumult,
uttered the most shrill and intolerable screams, while the Jew,
snatching up the sacrificial knife, repeated eagerly, “Statim mactat
gallum,” and put the wretched bird out of its pain; then, trembling at
this open avowal of his Judaism, he sat down amid the ruins of the
overthrown table, the fragments of the broken vessels, and the remains
of the martyred cock. He gazed at me with a look of stupified and
ludicrous inanity, and demanded in delirious tones, what “my lords the
Inquisitors had pleased to visit his humble but highly-honoured mansion
for?” I was scarce less deranged than he was; and, though we both spoke
the same language, and were forced by circumstances into the same
strange and desperate confidence with each other, we really needed, for
the first half-hour, a rational interpreter of our exclamations, starts
of fear, and bursts of disclosure. At last our mutual terror acted
honestly between us, and we understood each other. The end of the matter
was, that, in less than an hour, I felt myself clad in a comfortable
garment, seated at a table amply spread, watched over by my involuntary
host, and watching him in turn with red wolfish eyes, which glanced from
his board to his person, as if I could, at a moment’s hint of danger
from _his_ treachery, have changed my meal, and feasted on his
life-blood. No such danger occurred,--my host was more afraid of me than
I had reason to be of him, and for many causes. He was a Jew _innate_,
an impostor,--a wretch, who, drawing sustenance from the bosom of our
holy mother the church, had turned her nutriment to poison, and
attempted to infuse that poison into the lips of his son. I was but a
fugitive from the Inquisition,--a prisoner, who had a kind of
instinctive and very venial dislike to giving the Inquisitors the
trouble of lighting the faggots for _me_, which would be much better
employed in consuming the adherent to the law of Moses. In fact,
impartiality considered, there was every thing in my favour, and the Jew
just acted as if he felt so,--but all this I ascribed to his terrors of
the Inquisition.

“That night I slept,--I know not how or where. I had wild dreams before
I slept, if I did sleep; and after,--such visions,--such _things_,
passed in dread and stern reality before me. I have often in my memory
searched for the traces of the first night I passed under the roof of
the Jew, but can find nothing,--nothing except a conviction of my utter
insanity. It might not have been so,--I know not how it was. I remember
his lighting me up a narrow stair, and my asking him, was he lighting me
_down_ the steps of the dungeons of the Inquisition?--his throwing open
a door, and my asking him, was it the door of the torture-room?--his
attempting to undress me, and my exclaiming, “Do not bind me too
tight,--I know I must suffer, but be merciful;”--his throwing me on the
bed, while I shrieked, “Well, you have bound me on the rack,
then?--strain it hard, that I may forget myself the sooner; but let your
surgeon not be near to watch my pulse,--let it cease to throb, and let
me cease to suffer.” I remember no more for many days, though I have
struggled to do so, and caught from time to time glimpses of thoughts
better lost. Oh, Sir, there are some _criminals of the imagination_,
whom if we could plunge into the _oubliettes_ of its magnificent but
lightly-based fabric, its lord would reign more happy. * * * * * * *

“Many days elapsed, indeed, before the Jew began to feel his immunity
somewhat dearly purchased, by the additional maintenance of a
troublesome, and, I fear, a deranged inmate. He took the first
opportunity that the recovery of my intellect offered, of hinting this
to me, and inquired mildly what I purposed to do, and where I meant to
go. This question for the first time opened to my view that range of
hopeless and interminable desolation that lay before me,--the
Inquisition had laid waste the whole track of life, as with fire and
sword. I had not a spot to stand on, a meal to earn, a hand to grasp, a
voice to greet, a roof to crouch under, in the whole realm of Spain.

“You are not to learn, Sir, that the power of the Inquisition, like that
of death, separates you, by its single touch, from all mortal relations.
From the moment its grasp has seized you, all human hands unlock their
hold of yours,--you have no longer father, mother, sister, or child. The
most devoted and affectionate of all those relatives, who, in the
natural intercourse of human life, would have laid their hands under
your feet to procure you a smoother passage over its roughnesses, would
be the first to grasp the faggot that was to reduce you to ashes, if the
Inquisition were to demand the sacrifice. I knew all this; and I felt,
besides, that, had I never been a prisoner in the Inquisition, I was an
isolated being, rejected by father and mother,--the involuntary murderer
of my brother, the only being on earth who loved me, or whom I could
love or profit by,--that being who seemed to flash across my brief
_human_ existence, to illuminate and to blast. The bolt had perished
with the victim. In Spain it was impossible for me to live without
detection, unless I plunged myself into an imprisonment as profound and
hopeless as that of the Inquisition. And, if a miracle were wrought to
convey me out of Spain, ignorant as I was of the language, the habits,
and the modes of obtaining subsistence, in that or any other country,
how could I support myself even for a day. Absolute famine stared me in
the face, and a sense of degradation accompanying my consciousness of my
own utter and desolate helplessness, was the keenest shaft in the
quiver, whose contents were lodged in my heart. My consequence was
actually lessened in my own eyes, by ceasing to become the victim of
persecution, by which I had suffered so long. _While people think it
worth their while to torment us, we are never without some dignity,
though painful and imaginary._ Even in the Inquisition I belonged to
somebody,--I was watched and guarded;--now, I was the outcast of the
whole earth, and I wept with equal bitterness and depression at the
hopeless vastness of the desert I had to traverse.

“The Jew, not at all disturbed by these feelings, went daily out for
intelligence, and returned one evening in such raptures, that I could
easily discover he had ascertained his own safety at least, if not mine.
He informed me that the current report in Madrid was, that I had
perished in the fall of the burning ruins on the night of the fire. He
added, that this report had received additional currency and strength
from the fact, that the bodies of those who had perished by the fall of
the arch, were, when discovered, so defaced by fire, and so crushed by
the massive fragments, as to be utterly undistinguishable;--their
remains had been collected, however, and mine were supposed to be among
the number. A mass had been performed for them, and _their cinders,
occupying but a single coffin_(3), were interred in the vaults of the
Dominican church, while some of the first families of Spain, in the
deepest mourning, and their faces veiled, testified their grief in
silence for those whom they would have shuddered to acknowledge their
mortal relationship to, had they been still living. Certainly a lump of
cinders was no longer an object even of religious hostility. My mother,
he added, was among the number of mourners, but with a veil so long and
thick, and attendance so few, that it would have been impossible to have
known the Duchess di Monçada, but for the whisper that her appearance
there had been enjoined for penance. He added, what gave me more perfect
satisfaction, that the holy office was very glad to accredit the story
of my death; they wished me to be believed dead, and what the
Inquisition wishes to be believed, is rarely denied belief in Madrid.
This signing my certificate of death, was to me the best security for
life. In the communicativeness of his joy, which had expanded his heart,
if not his hospitality, the Jew, as I swallowed my bread and water, (for
my stomach still loathed all animal food), informed me that there was a
procession to take place that evening, the most solemn and superb ever
witnessed in Madrid. The holy office was to appear in all the pomp and
plenitude of its glory, accompanied by the standards of St Dominic and
the cross, while all the ecclesiastical orders in Madrid were to attend
with their appropriate insignia, invested by a strong military guard,
(which, for some reason or other, was judged necessary or proper), and,
attended by the whole populace of Madrid, was to proceed to the
principal church to humiliate themselves for the recent calamity they
had undergone, and implore the saints to be more personally active in
the event of a future conflagration.

  (3) This extraordinary fact occurred after the dreadful fire which
  consumed sixteen persons in one house, in Stephen’s Green, Dublin,
  1816. The writer of this heard the screams of sufferers whom it was
  impossible to save, for an hour and a half.

“The evening came on--the Jew left me; and, under an impression at once
unaccountable and irresistible, I ascended to the highest apartment in
his house, and, with a beating heart, listened for the toll of the bells
that was to announce the commencement of the ceremony. I had not long to
wait. At the close of twilight, every steeple in the city was vibrating
with the tolls of their well-plied bells. I was in an upper room of the
house. There was but one window; but, hiding myself behind the blind,
which I withdrew from time to time, I had a full view of the spectacle.
The house of the Jew looked out on an open space, through which the
procession was to pass, and which was already so filled, that I wondered
how the procession could ever make its way through such a wedged and
impenetrable mass. At last, I could distinguish a motion like that of a
distant power, giving a kind of indefinite impulse to the vast body that
rolled and blackened beneath me, like the ocean under the first and
far-felt agitations of the storm.

“The crowd rocked and reeled, but did not seem to give way an inch. The
procession commenced. I could see it approach, marked as it was by the
crucifix, banner, and taper--(for they had reserved the procession till
a late hour, to give it the imposing effect of torch-light.) And I saw
the multitude at a vast distance give way at once. Then came on the
stream of the procession, rushing, like a magnificent river, between two
banks of human bodies, who kept as regular and strict distance, as if
they had been ramparts of stone,--the banners, and crucifixes, and
tapers, appearing like the crests of foam on advancing billows,
sometimes rising, sometimes sinking. At last they came on, and the whole
grandeur of the procession burst on my view, and nothing was ever more
imposing, or more magnificent. The habits of the ecclesiastics, the
glare of the torches struggling with the dying twilight, and seeming to
say to heaven, We have a sun though yours is set;--the solemn and
resolute look of the whole party, who trod as if their march were on the
bodies of kings, and looked as if they would have said, What is the
sceptre to the cross?--the black crucifix itself, trembling in the rear,
attended by the banner of St Dominick, with its awful inscription.--It
was a sight to convert all hearts, and I exulted I was a Catholic.
Suddenly a tumult seemed to arise among the crowd--I knew not from what
it could arise--all seemed so pleased and so elated.

“I drew away the blind, and saw, by torch-light, among a crowd of
officials who clustered round the standard of St Dominick, the figure of
my companion. His story was well known. At first a faint hiss was heard,
then a wild and smothered howl. Then I heard voices among the crowd
repeat, in audible sounds, “What is this for? Why do they ask why the
Inquisition has been half-burned?--why the virgin has withdrawn her
protection?--why the saints turn away their faces from us?--when a
parricide marches among the officials of the Inquisition. Are the hands
that have cut a father’s throat fit to support the banner of the cross?”
These were the words but of a few at first, but the whisper spread
rapidly among the crowd; and fierce looks were darted, and hands were
clenched and raised, and some stooped to the earth for stones. The
procession went on, however, and every one knelt to the crucifixes as
they advanced, held aloft by the priests. But the murmurs increased too,
and the words, “parricide, profanation, and victim,” resounded on every
side, even from those who knelt in the mire as the cross passed by. The
murmur increased--it could no longer be mistaken for that of adoration.
The foremost priests paused in terror ill concealed--and this seemed the
signal for the terrible scene that was about to follow. An officer
belonging to the guard at this time ventured to intimate to the chief
Inquisitor the danger that might be apprehended, but was dismissed with
the short and sullen answer, “Move on--the servants of Christ have
nothing to fear.” The procession attempted to proceed, but their
progress was obstructed by the multitude, who now seemed bent on some
deadly purpose. A few stones were thrown; but the moment the priests
raised their crucifixes, the multitude were on their knees again, still,
however, holding the stones in their hands. The military officers again
addressed the chief Inquisitor, and intreated his permission to disperse
the crowd. They received the same dull and stern answer, “The cross is
sufficient for the protection of its servants--whatever fears you may
feel, I feel none.” Incensed at the reply, a young officer sprung on his
horse, which he had quitted from respect while addressing the Suprema,
and was in a moment levelled by the blow of a stone that fractured his
skull. He turned his blood-swimming eyes on the Inquisitor, and died.
The multitude raised a wild shout, and pressed closer. Their intentions
were now too plain. They pressed close on that part of the procession
among which their victim was placed. Again, and in the most urgent
terms, the officers implored leave to disperse the crowd, or at least
cover the retreat of the obnoxious object to some neighbouring church,
or even to the walls of the Inquisition. And the wretched man himself,
with loud outcries, (as he saw the danger thickening around him), joined
in their petition. The Suprema, though looking pale, bated not a jot of
his pride. “These are my arms!” he exclaimed, pointing to the crucifixes,
“and their inscription is εν-τουτω-νικα. I forbid a sword to be drawn,
or a musket to be levelled. On, in the name of God.” And on they
attempted to move, but the pressure now rendered it impossible. The
multitude, unrepressed by the military, became ungovernable; the crosses
reeled and rocked like standards in a battle; the ecclesiastics, in
confusion and terror, pressed on each other. Amid that vast mass, every
particle of which seemed in motion, there was but one emphatic and
discriminate movement--that which bore a certain part of the crowd
strait on to the spot where their victim, though inclosed and inwrapt by
all that is formidable in earthly, and all that is awful in spiritual
power--sheltered by the crucifix and the sword--stood trembling to the
bottom of his soul. The Suprema saw his error too late, and now called
loudly on the military to advance, and disperse the crowd by any means.
They attempted to obey him; but by this time they were mingled among the
crowd themselves. All order had ceased; and besides, there appeared a
kind of indisposition to this service, from the very first, among the
military. They attempted to charge, however; but, entangled as they were
among the crowd, who clung round their horses hoofs, it was impossible
for them even to form, and the first shower of stones threw them into
total confusion. The danger increased every moment, for one spirit now
seemed to animate the whole multitude. What had been the stifled growl
of a few, was now the audible yell of all--“Give him to us--we must have
him;” and they tossed and roared like a thousand waves assailing a
wreck. As the military retreated, a hundred priests instantly closed
round the unhappy man, and with generous despair exposed themselves to
the fury of the multitude. While the Suprema, hastening to the dreadful
spot, stood in the front of the priests, with the cross uplifted,--his
face was like that of the dead, but his eye had not lost a single flash
of its fire, nor his voice a tone of its pride. It was in vain; the
multitude proceeded calmly, and even respectfully, (when not resisted),
to remove all that obstructed their progress; in doing so, they took
every care of the persons of priests whom they were compelled to remove,
repeatedly asking their pardon for the violence they were guilty of. And
this tranquillity of resolved vengeance was the most direful indication
of its never desisting till its purpose was accomplished. The last ring
was broken--the last resister overcome. Amid yells like those of a
thousand tigers, the victim was seized and dragged forth, grasping in
both hands fragments of the robes of those he had clung to in vain, and
holding them up in the impotence of despair.

“The cry was hushed for a moment, as they felt him in their talons, and
gazed on him with thirsty eyes. Then it was renewed, and the work of
blood began. They dashed him to the earth--tore him up again--flung him
into the air--tossed him from hand to hand, as a bull gores the howling
mastiff with horns right and left. Bloody, defaced, blackened with
earth, and battered with stones, he struggled and roared among them,
till a loud cry announced the hope of a termination to a scene alike
horrible to humanity, and disgraceful to civilization. The military,
strongly reinforced, came galloping on, and all the ecclesiastics, with
torn habits, and broken crucifixes, following fast in the rear,--all
eager in the cause of human nature--all on fire to prevent this base and
barbarous disgrace to the name of Christianity and of human nature.

“Alas! this interference only hastened the horrible catastrophe. There
was but a shorter space for the multitude to work their furious will. I
saw, I felt, but I cannot describe, the last moments of this horrible
scene. Dragged from the mud and stones, they dashed a mangled lump of
flesh right against the door of the house where I was. With his tongue
hanging from his lacerated mouth, like that of a baited bull; with one
eye torn from the socket, and dangling on his bloody cheek; with a
fracture in every limb, and a wound for every pore, he still howled for
“life--life--life--mercy!” till a stone, aimed by some pitying hand,
struck him down. He fell, trodden in one moment into sanguine and
discoloured mud by a thousand feet. The cavalry came on, charging with
fury. The crowd, saturated with cruelty and blood, gave way in grim
silence. But they had not left a joint of his little finger--a hair of
his head--a slip of his skin. Had Spain mortgaged all her reliques from
Madrid to Monserrat, from the Pyrennees to Gibraltar, she could not have
recovered the paring of a nail to canonize. The officer who headed the
troop dashed his horse’s hoofs into a bloody formless mass, and
demanded, “Where was the victim?” He was answered, “Beneath your horse’s
feet(4);” and they departed. * * * * * * * * *

  (4) This circumstance occurred in Ireland 1797, after the murder of
  the unfortunate Dr Hamilton. The officer was answered, on inquiring
  what was that heap of mud at his horse’s feet,--“The man you came
  for.”

“It is a fact, Sir, that while witnessing this horrible execution, I
felt all the effects vulgarly ascribed to fascination. I shuddered at
the first movement--the dull and deep whisper among the crowd. I
shrieked involuntarily when the first decisive movements began among
them; but when at last the human shapeless carrion was dashed against
the door, I echoed the wild shouts of the multitude with a kind of
savage instinct. I bounded--I clasped my hands for a moment--then I
echoed the screams of the thing that seemed no longer to live, but still
could scream; and I screamed aloud and wildly for life--life--and mercy!
One face was turned towards me as I shrieked in unconscious tones. The
glance, fixed on me for a moment, was in a moment withdrawn. The flash
of the well-known eyes made no impression on me then. My existence was
so purely mechanical, that, without the least consciousness of my own
danger, (scarce less than that of the victim, had I been detected), I
remained uttering shout for shout, and scream for scream--offering
worlds in imagination to be able to remove from the window, yet feeling
as if every shriek I uttered was as a nail that fastened me to
it--dropping my eye-lids, and feeling as if a hand held them open, or
cut them away--forcing me to gaze on all that passed below, like
Regulus, with his lids cut off, compelled to gaze on the sun that
withered up his eye-balls--till sense, and sight, and soul, failed me,
and I fell grasping by the bars of the window, and mimicking, in my
horrid trance, the shouts of the multitude, and the yell of the
devoted(5). I actually for a moment believed myself the object of their
cruelty. The drama of terror has the irresistible power of converting
its audience into its victims.

  (5) In the year 1803, when Emmett’s insurrection broke out in
  Dublin--(_the fact_ from which this account is drawn was related to me
  by an eye-witness)--Lord Kilwarden, in passing through Thomas Street,
  was dragged from his carriage, and murdered in the most horrid manner.
  Pike after pike was thrust through his body, till at last he was
  _nailed to a door_, and called out to his murderers to “put him out of
  his pain.” At this moment, a shoemaker, who lodged in the garret of an
  opposite house, was drawn to the window by the horrible cries he
  heard. He stood at the window, gasping with horror, his wife
  attempting vainly to drag him away. He saw the last blow struck--he
  heard the last groan uttered, as the sufferer cried, “put me out of
  pain,” while sixty pikes were thrusting at him. The man stood at his
  window as if nailed to it; and when dragged from it, became--an _idiot
  for life_.

“The Jew had kept apart from the tumult of the night. He had, I suppose,
been saying within himself, in the language of your admirable poet,

    “Oh, Father Abraham, what these Christians are!”

But when he returned at a late hour, he was struck with horror at the
state in which he found me. I was delirious,--raving, and all he could
say or do to soothe me, was in vain. My imagination had been fearfully
impressed, and the consternation of the poor Jew was, I have been told,
equally ludicrous and dismal. In his terror, he forgot all the technical
formality of the Christian names by which he had uniformly signalized
his household, since his residence in Madrid at least. He called aloud
on Manasseh-ben-Solomon his son, and Rebekah his maid, to assist in
holding me. “Oh, Father Abraham, my ruin is certain, this maniac will
discover all, and Manasseh-ben-Solomon, my son, will die uncircumcised.”

“These words operating on my delirium, I started up, and, grasping the
Jew by the throat, arraigned him as a prisoner of the Inquisition. The
terrified wretch, falling on his knees, vociferated, “My cock,--my
cock,--my cock! oh! I am undone!” Then, grasping my knees, “I am no
Jew,--my son, Manasseh-ben-Solomon, is a Christian; you will not betray
him, you will not betray _me_,--me who have saved your life.
Manasseh,--I mean Antonio,--Rebekah,--no, Maria, help me to hold him. Oh
God of Abraham, my cock, and my sacrifice of expiation, and this maniac
to burst on the recesses of our privacy, to tear open the veil of the
tabernacle!”--“Shut the tabernacle,” said Rebekah, the old domestic whom
I have before mentioned; “yea, shut the tabernacle, and close up the
veils thereof, for behold there be men knocking at the door,--men who
are children of Belial, and they knock with staff and stone; and,
verily, they are about to break in the door, and demolish the carved
work thereof with axes and hammers.”--“Thou liest,” said the Jew, in
much perturbation: “there is no carved work thereabout, nor dare they
break it down with axes and hammers; peradventure it is but an assault
of the children of Belial, in their rioting and drunkenness. I pray
thee, Rebekah, to watch the door, and keep off the sons of Belial, even
the sons of the mighty of the sinful city--the city of Madrid, while I
remove this blaspheming carrion, who struggleth with me,--yea,
struggleth mightily,” (and struggle I did mightily). But, as I
struggled, the knocks at the door became louder and stronger; and, as I
was carried off, the Jew continued to repeat, “Set thy face against
them, Rebekah; yea, set thy face like a flint.” As he retired, Rebekah
exclaimed, “Behold I have set my back against them, for my face now
availeth not. My back is that which I will oppose, and verily I shall
prevail.”--“I pray thee, Rebekah,” cried the Jew, “oppose thy FACE unto
them, and verily that shall prevail. Try not the adversary with thy
back, but oppose thy face unto them; and behold, if they are men, they
shall flee, even though they were a thousand, at the rebuke of one. I
pray thee try thy face once more, Rebekah, while I send this scape-goat
into the wilderness. Surely thy face is enough to drive away those who
knocked by night at the door of that house in Gibeah, in the matter of
the wife of the Benjamite.” The knocking all this time increased.
“Behold my back is broken,” cried Rebekah, giving up her watch and ward,
“for, of a verity, the weapons of the mighty do smite the lintels and
door-posts; and mine arms are not steel, neither are my ribs iron, and
behold I fail,--yea, I fail, and fall backwards into the hands of the
uncircumcised.” And so saying, she fell backwards as the door gave way,
and fell not, as she feared, into the hands of the uncircumcised, but
into those of two of her countrymen, who, it appeared, had some
extraordinary reason for this late visit and forcible entrance.

“The Jew, apprized who they were, quitted me, after securing the door,
and sat up the greater part of the night, in earnest conversation with
his visitors. Whatever was their subject, it left traces of the most
intense anxiety on the countenance of the Jew the next morning. He went
out early, did not return till a late hour, and then hastened to the
room I occupied, and expressed the utmost delight at finding me sane and
composed. Candles were placed on the table, Rebekah dismissed, the door
secured, and the Jew, after taking many uneasy turns about the narrow
apartment, and often clearing his throat, at length sat down, and
ventured to entrust me with the cause of his perturbation, in which,
with the fatal consciousness of the unhappy, I already began to feel _I_
must have a share. He told me, that though the report of my death, so
universally credited through Madrid, had at first set his mind at ease,
there was now a wild story, which, with all its falsehood and
impossibility, might, in its circulation, menace us with the most
fearful consequences. He asked me, was it possible I could have been so
imprudent as to expose myself to view on the day of that horrible
execution? and when I confessed that I had stood at a window, and had
involuntarily uttered cries that I feared might have reached some ears,
he wrung his hands, and a sweat of consternation burst out on his pallid
features. When he recovered himself, he told me it was universally
believed that my spectre had appeared on that terrible occasion,--that I
had been seen hovering in the air, to witness the sufferings of the
dying wretch,--and that my voice had been heard summoning him to his
eternal doom. He added, that this story, possessing all the credibility
of superstition, was now repeated by a thousand mouths; and whatever
contempt might be attached to its absurdity, it would infallibly operate
as a hint to the restless vigilance, and unrelaxing industry of the holy
office, and might ultimately lead to my discovery. He therefore was
about to disclose to me a secret, the knowledge of which would enable me
to remain in perfect security even in the centre of Madrid, until some
means might be devised of effecting my escape, and procuring me the
means of subsistence in some Protestant country, beyond the reach of the
Inquisition.

“As he was about to disclose this secret on which the safety of both
depended, and which I bent in speechless agony to hear, a knock was
heard at the door, very unlike the knocks of the preceding night. It was
single, solemn, peremptory,--and followed by a demand to open the doors
of the house in the name of the most holy Inquisition. At these terrible
words, the wretched Jew flung himself on his knees, blew out the
candles, called on the names of the twelve patriarchs, and slipped a
large rosary on his arm, in less time than it is possible to conceive
any human frame could go through such a variety of movements. The knock
was repeated,--I stood paralyzed; but the Jew, springing on his feet,
raised one of the boards of the floor in a moment, and, with a motion
between convulsion and instinct, pointed to me to descend. I did so, and
found myself in a moment in darkness and in safety.

“I had descended but a few steps, on the last of which I stood
trembling, when the officers of the Inquisition entered the room, and
stalked over the very board that concealed me. I could hear every word
that passed. “Don Fernan,” said an officer to the Jew, who re-entered
with them, after respectfully opening the door, “why were we not
admitted sooner?”--“Holy Father,” said the trembling Jew, “my only
domestic, Maria, is old and deaf, the youth my son is in his bed, and I
was myself engaged in my devotions.”--“It seems you can perform them in
the dark,” said another, pointing to the candles, which the Jew was
re-lighting.--“When the eye of God is on me, most reverend fathers, I am
never in darkness.”--“The eye of God _is_ on you,” said the officer,
sternly seating himself; “and so is another eye, to which he has deputed
the sleepless vigilance and resistless penetration of his own,--the eye
of the holy office. Don Fernan di Nunez,” the name by which the Jew
went, “you are not ignorant of the indulgence extended by the church, to
those who have renounced the errors of that accursed and misbelieving
race from which you are descended, but you must be also aware of its
incessant vigilance being directed towards such individuals, from the
suspicion necessarily attached to their doubtful conversion, and
possible relapse. We know that the black blood of Grenada flowed in the
tainted veins of your ancestry, and that not more than four centuries
have elapsed, since your forefathers trampled on that cross before which
you are now prostrate. You are an old man, Don Fernan, but not an _old
Christian_; and, under these circumstances, it behoves the holy office
to have a watchful scrutiny over your conduct.”

“The unfortunate Jew, invoking all the saints, protested he would feel
the strictest scrutiny with which the holy office might honour him, as a
ground of obligation and a matter of thanksgiving,--renouncing at the
same time the creed of his race in terms of such exaggeration and
vehemence, as made me tremble for his probable sincerity in any creed,
and his fidelity to me. The officers of the Inquisition, taking little
notice of his protestations, went on to inform him of the object of
their visit. They stated that a wild and incredible tale of the spectre
of a deceased prisoner of the Inquisition having been seen hovering in
the air near his house, had suggested to the wisdom of the holy office,
that the living individual might be concealed within its walls.

“I could not see the trepidation of the Jew, but I could feel the
vibration of the boards on which he stood communicated to the steps that
supported me. In a choaked and tremulous voice, he implored the officers
to search every apartment of his house, and to raze it to the ground,
and inter him under its dust, if aught were found in it which a faithful
and orthodox son of the church might not harbour. “That shall doubtless
be done,” said the officer, taking him at his word with the utmost _sang
froid_; “but, in the mean time, suffer me to apprize you, Don Fernan, of
the peril you incur, if at any future time, however remote, it shall be
discovered that you harboured or aided in concealing a prisoner of the
Inquisition, and an enemy of the holy church,--the very first and
lightest part of that penalty will be your dwelling being razed to the
ground.” The Inquisitor raised his voice, and paused with emphatic
deliberation between every clause of the following sentences, measuring
as it were the effect of his blows on the increasing terror of his
auditor. “You will be conveyed to our prison, under the suspected
character of a relapsed Jew. Your son will be committed to a convent, to
remove him from the pestilential influence of your presence;--and your
whole property shall be confiscated, to the last stone in your walls,
the last garment on your person, and the last denier in your purse.”

“The poor Jew, who had marked the gradations of his fear by groans more
audible and prolonged at the end of every tremendous denunciatory
clause, at the mention of confiscation so total and desolating, lost all
self-possession, and, ejaculating--“Oh Father Abraham, and all the holy
prophets!”--fell, as I conjectured from the sound, prostrate on the
floor. I gave myself up for lost. Exclusive of his pusillanimity, the
words he had uttered were enough to betray him to the officers of the
Inquisition; and, without a moment’s hesitation between the danger of
falling into their hands, and plunging into the darkness of the recess
into which I had descended, I staggered down a few remaining steps, and
attempted to feel my way along a passage, in which they seemed to
terminate.




CHAPTER XIII.

    There sat a spirit in the vault,
    In shape, in hue, in lineaments, like life.

    SOUTHEY’S THALABA.


“I am convinced, that, had the passage been as long and intricate as any
that ever an antiquarian pursued to discover the tomb of Cheops in the
Pyramids, I would have rushed on in the blindness of my desperation,
till famine or exhaustion had compelled me to pause. But I had no such
peril to encounter,--the floor of the passage was smooth, and the walls
were matted, and though I proceeded in darkness, I proceeded in safety;
and provided my progress removed me far enough from the pursuit or
discovery of the Inquisition, I scarcely cared how it might terminate.

“Amid this temporary magnanimity of despair, this state of mind which
unites the extremes of courage and pusillanimity, I saw a faint light.
Faint it was, but it was distinct,--I saw clearly it was light. Great
God! what a revulsion in my blood and heart, in all my physical and
mental feelings, did this sun of my world of darkness create! I venture
to say, that my speed in approaching it was in the proportion of one
hundred steps to one, compared to my crawling progress in the preceding
darkness. As I approached, I could discover that the light gleamed
through the broad crevices of a door, which, disjointed by subterranean
damps, gave me as full a view of the apartment within, as if it were
opened to me by the inmate. Through one of these crevices, before which
I knelt in a mixture of exhaustion and curiosity, I could reconnoitre
the whole of the interior.

“It was a large apartment, hung with dark-coloured baize within four
feet of the floor, and this intermediate part was thickly matted,
probably to intercept the subterranean damps. In the centre of the room
stood a table covered with black cloth; it supported an iron lamp of an
antique and singular form, by whose light I had been directed, and was
now enabled to descry furniture that appeared sufficiently
extraordinary. There were, amid maps and globes, several instruments, of
which my ignorance did not permit me then to know the use,--some, I have
since learned, were anatomical; there was an electrifying machine, and a
curious _model of a rack_ in ivory; there were few books, but several
scrolls of parchment, inscribed with large characters in red and
ochre-coloured ink; and around the room were placed _four_ skeletons,
not in cases, but in a kind of upright coffin, that gave their bony
emptiness a kind of ghastly and imperative prominence, as if they were
the real and rightful tenants of that singular apartment. Interspersed
between them were the stuffed figures of animals I knew not then the
names of,--an alligator,--some gigantic bones, which I took for those of
Sampson, but which turned out to be fragments of those of the
Mammoth,--and antlers, which in my terror I believed to be those of the
devil, but afterwards learned to be those of an Elk. Then I saw figures
smaller, but not less horrible,--human and brute abortions, in all their
states of anomalous and deformed construction, not preserved in spirits,
but standing in the ghastly nakedness of their white diminutive bones;
these I conceived to be the attendant imps of some infernal ceremony,
which the grand wizard, who now burst on my sight, was to preside over.

“At the end of the table sat an old man, wrapped in a long robe; his
head was covered with a black velvet cap, with a broad border of furs,
his spectacles were of such a size as almost to hide his face, and he
turned over some scrolls of parchment with an anxious and trembling
hand; then seizing a scull that lay on the table, and grasping it in
fingers hardly less bony, and not less yellow, seemed to apostrophize it
in the most earnest manner. All my personal fears were lost in the
thought of my being the involuntary witness of some infernal orgie. I
was still kneeling at the door, when my long suspended respiration burst
forth in a groan, which reached the figure seated at the table in a
moment. Habitual vigilance supplied all the defects of age on the part
of the listener. It was but the sensation of a moment to feel the door
thrown open, my arm seized by an arm powerful though withered by age,
and myself, as I thought, in the talons of a demon.

“The door was closed and bolted. An awful figure stood over me, (for I
had fallen on the floor), and thundered out, “Who art thou, and why art
thou here?” I knew not what to answer, and gazed with a fixed and
speechless look on the skeletons and the other furniture of this
terrible vault. “Hold,” said the voice, “if thou art indeed exhausted,
and needest refreshment, drink of this cup, and thou shalt be refreshed
as with wine; verily, it shall come into thy bowels as water, and as oil
into thy bones,”--and as he spoke he offered to me a cup with some
liquid in it. I repelled him and his drink, which I had not a doubt was
some magical drug, with horror unutterable; and losing all other fears
in the overwhelming one of becoming a slave of Satan, and a victim of
one of his agents, as I believed this extraordinary figure, I called on
the name of the Saviour and the saints, and, crossing myself at every
sentence, exclaimed, “No, tempter, keep your infernal potions for the
leprous lips of your imps, or swallow them yourself. I have but this
moment escaped from the hands of the Inquisition, and a million times
rather would I return and yield myself their victim, than consent to
become yours,--your tender-mercies are the only cruelties I dread. Even
in the prison of the holy office, where the faggots appeared to be lit
before my eyes, and the chain already fastened round my body to bind it
to the stake, I was sustained by a power that enabled me to embrace
objects so terrible to nature, sooner than escape them at the price of
my salvation. The choice was offered me, and I made my election,--and so
would I do were it to be offered a thousand times, though the last were
at the stake, and the fire already kindling.”

Here the Spaniard paused in some agitation. In the enthusiasm of his
narration, he had in some degree disclosed that secret which he had
declared was incommunicable, except in confessing to a priest. Melmoth,
who, from the narrative of Stanton, had been prepared to suspect
something of this, did not think prudent to press him for a farther
disclosure, and waited in silence till his emotion had subsided, without
remark or question. Monçada at length resumed his narrative.

“While I was speaking, the old man viewed me with a look of calm
surprise, that made me ashamed of my fears, even before I had ceased to
utter them. “What!” said he at length, fixing apparently on some
expressions that struck him, “art thou escaped from the arm that dealeth
its blow in darkness, even the arm of the Inquisition? Art thou that
Nazarene youth who sought refuge in the house of our brother Solomon,
the son of Hilkiah, who is called Fernan Nunez by the idolaters in this
land of his captivity? Verily I trusted thou shouldst this night have
eat of my bread, and drank of my cup, and been unto me as a scribe, for
our brother Solomon testified concerning thee, saying, His pen is even
as the pen of a ready writer.”

“I gazed at him in astonishment. Some vague recollections of Solomon’s
being about to disclose some safe and secret retreat wandered over my
mind; and, while trembling at the singular apartment in which we were
seated, and the employment in which he seemed engaged, I yet felt a hope
hover about my heart, which his knowledge of my situation appeared to
justify. “Sit down,” said he, observing with compassion that I was
sinking alike under the exhaustion of fatigue and the distraction of
terror; “sit down, and eat a morsel of bread, and drink a cup of wine,
and comfort thine heart, for thou seemest to be as one who hath escaped
from the snare of the fowler, and from the dart of the hunter.” I obeyed
him involuntarily. I needed the refreshment he offered, and was about to
partake of it, when an irresistible feeling of repugnance and horror
overcame me; and, as I thrust away the food he offered me, I pointed to
the objects around me as the cause of my reluctance. He looked round for
a moment, as doubting whether objects so familiar to him, could be
repulsive to a stranger, and then shaking his head, “Thou art a fool,”
said he, “but thou art a Nazarene, and I pity thee; verily, those who
had the teaching of thy youth, not only have shut the book of knowledge
to thee, but have forgot to open it for themselves. Were not thy
masters, the Jesuits, masters also of the healing art, and art thou not
acquainted with the sight of its ordinary implements? Eat, I pray thee,
and be satisfied that none of these will hurt thee. Yonder dead bones
cannot weigh out or withhold thy food; nor can they bind thy joints, or
strain them with iron, or rend them with steel, as would the living arms
that were stretched forth to seize thee as their prey. And, as the Lord
of hosts liveth, their prey wouldst thou have been, and a prey unto
their iron and steel, were it not for the shelter of the roof of
Adonijah to-night.”

“I took some of the food he offered me, crossing myself at every
mouthful, and drank the wine, which the feverish thirst of terror and
anxiety made me swallow like water, but not without an internal prayer
that it might not be converted into some deleterious and diabolical
poison. The Jew Adonijah observed me with increasing compassion and
contempt.--“What,” said he, “appals thee? Were I possessed of the powers
the superstition of thy sect ascribes to me, might I not make thee a
banquet for fiends, instead of offering thee food? Might I not bring
from the caverns of the earth the voices of those that “peep and
mutter,” instead of speaking unto thee with the voice of man? Thou art
in my power, yet have I no power or will to hurt thee. And dost thou,
who art escaped from the dungeons of the Inquisition, look as one that
feareth on the things that thou seest around thee, the furniture of the
cell of a secluded leach? Within this apartment I have passed the term
of sixty years, and dost thou shudder to visit it for a moment? These be
the skeletons of bodies, but in the den thou hast escaped from were the
skeletons of perished souls. Here are relics of the wrecks or the
caprices of nature, but thou art come from where the cruelty of man,
permanent and persevering, unrelenting and unmitigated, hath never
failed to leave the proofs of its power in abortive intellects, crippled
frames, distorted creeds, and ossified hearts. Moreover, there are
around thee parchments and charts scrawled as it were with the blood of
man, but, were it even so, could a thousand such volumes cause such
terror to the human eye, as a page of the history of thy prison, written
as it is in blood, drawn, not from the frozen veins of the dead, but
from the bursting hearts of the living. Eat, Nazarene, there is no
poison in thy food,--drink, there is no drug in thy cup. Darest thou
promise thyself that in the prison of the Inquisition, or even in the
cells of the Jesuits? Eat and drink without fear in the vault, even in
the vault of Adonijah the Jew. If thou daredst to have done so in the
dwellings of the Nazarenes, I had never beheld thee here. Hast thou
fed?” he added, and I bowed. “Hast thou drank of the cup I gave thee?”
my torturing thirst returned, and I gave him back the cup. He smiled,
but the smile of age,--the smile of lips over which more than an hundred
years have passed, has an expression more repulsive and hideous than can
be deemed; it is never the smile of pleasure,--it is a _frown of the
mouth_, and I shrunk before its grim wrinkles, as the Jew Adonijah
added, “If thou hast eat and drank, it is time for thee to rest. Come to
thy bed, it may be harder than they have given thee in thy prison, but
behold it shall be safer. Come and rest thee there, it may be that the
adversary and the enemy shall not there find thee out.”

“I followed him through passages so devious and intricate, that,
bewildered as I was with the events of the night, they forced on my
memory the well-known fact, that in Madrid the Jews have subterranean
passages to each other’s habitations, which have hitherto baffled all
the industry of the Inquisition. I slept that night, or rather day, (for
the sun had risen), on a pallet laid on the floor of a room, small,
lofty, and matted half-way up the walls. One narrow and grated window
admitted the light of the sun, that arose after that eventful night; and
amid the sweet sound of bells, and the still sweeter of human life,
awake and in motion around me, I sunk into a slumber that was unbroken
even by a dream, till the day was closing; or, in the language of
Adonijah, “till the shadows of the evening were upon the face of all the
earth.”




CHAPTER XIV.

    Unde iratos deos timent, qui sic propitios merentur?

    SENECA.


“When I awoke, he was standing by my pallet. “Arise,” said he, “eat and
drink, that thy strength may return unto thee.” He pointed to a small
table as he spoke, which was covered with food of the plainest kind, and
dressed with the utmost simplicity. Yet he seemed to think an apology
was necessary for the indulgence of this temperate fare. “I myself,”
said he, “eat not the flesh of any animal, save on the new moons and the
feasts, yet the days of the years of my life have been one hundred and
seven; sixty of which have been passed in the chamber where thou sawest
me. Rarely do I ascend to the upper chamber of this house, save on
occasions like this, or peradventure to pray, with my window open
towards the east, for the turning away wrath from Jacob, and the turning
again the captivity of Zion. Well saith the ethnic leach,

    “Aer exclusus confert ad longevitatem.”

“Such hath been my life, as I tell thee. The light of heaven hath been
hidden from mine eyes, and the voice of man is as the voice of a
stranger in mine ears, save those of some of mine own nation, who weep
for the affliction of Israel; yet the silver cord is not loosed, nor the
golden bowl broken; and though mine eye be waxing dim, my natural force
is not abated.” (As he spoke, my eyes hung in reverence on the hoary
majesty of his patriarchal figure, and I felt as if I beheld an embodied
representation of the old law in all its stern simplicity--the unbending
grandeur, and primeval antiquity.) “Hast thou eaten, and art full?
Arise, then, and follow me.”

“We descended to the vault, where I found the lamp was always burning.
And Adonijah, pointing to the parchments that lay on the table, said,
“This is the matter wherein I need thy help; the collection and
transcription whereof hath been the labour of more than half a life,
prolonged beyond the bounds allotted to mortality; but,” pointing to his
sunk and blood-shot eyes, “those that look out of the windows begin to
be darkened, and I feel that I need help from the quick hand and clear
eye of youth. Wherefore, it being certified unto me by our brother, that
thou wert a youth who couldst handle the pen of a scribe, and, moreover,
wast in need of a city of refuge, and a strong wall of defence, against
the laying-in-wait of thy brethren round about thee, I was willing that
thou shouldst come under my roof, and eat of such things as I set before
thee, and such as thy soul desireth, excepting only the abominable
things forbidden in the law of the prophet; and shouldst, moreover,
receive wages as an hired servant.”

“You will perhaps smile, Sir; but even in my wretched situation, I felt
a slight but painful flush tinge my cheek, at the thought of a
Christian, and a peer of Spain, becoming the amanuensis of a Jew for
hire. Adonijah continued, “Then, when my task is completed, then will I
be gathered to my fathers, trusting surely in the Hope of Israel, that
mine eyes shall “behold the King in his beauty,--they shall see the land
that is very far off.” And peradventure,” he added, in a voice that
grief rendered solemn, mellow, and tremulous, “peradventure there shall
I meet in bliss, those with whom I parted in woe--even thou, Zachariah,
the son of my loins, and thou, Leah, the wife of my bosom;”
apostrophizing two of the silent skeletons that stood near. “And in the
presence of the God of our fathers, the redeemed of Zion shall meet--and
meet as those who are to part no more for ever and ever.” At these
words, he closed his eyes, lifted up his hands, and appeared to be
absorbed in mental prayer. Grief had perhaps subdued my prejudices--it
had certainly softened my heart--and at this moment I half-believed that
a Jew might find entrance and adoption amid the family and fold of the
blessed. This sentiment operated on my human sympathies, and I inquired,
with unfeigned anxiety, after the fate of Solomon the Jew, whose
misfortune in harbouring me had exposed him to the visit of the
Inquisitors. “Be at peace,” said Adonijah, waving his bony and wrinkled
hand, as if dismissing a subject below his present feelings, “our
brother Solomon is in no peril of death; neither shall his goods be
taken for a spoil. If our adversaries are mighty in power, so are we
mighty also to deal with them by our wealth or our wisdom. Thy flight
they never can trace, thy existence on the face of the earth shall also
be unknown to them, so thou wilt hearken to me, and heed my words.”

“I could not speak, but my expression of mute and imploring anxiety
spoke for me. “Thou didst use words,” said Adonijah, “last night,
whereof, though I remember not all the purport, the sound yet maketh
mine ears to tingle; even mine, which have not vibrated to such sounds
for four times the space of thy youthful years. Thou saidst thou wert
beset by a power that tempted thee to renounce the Most High, whom Jew
and Christian alike profess to worship; and that thou didst declare,
that were the fires kindled around thee, thou wouldst spit at the
tempter, and trample on the offer, though thy foot pressed the coal
which the sons of Dominick were lighting beneath its naked sole.”--“I
did,” I cried, “I did--and I would--So help me God in mine extremity.”

“Adonijah paused for a moment, as if considering whether this were a
burst of passion, or a proof of mental energy. He seemed at last
inclined to believe it the latter, though all men of far-advanced age
are apt to distrust any marks of emotion as a demonstration rather of
weakness than of sincerity. “Then,” said he, after a long and solemn
pause, “then thou shalt know the secret that hath been a burthen to the
soul of Adonijah, even as his hopeless solitude is a burthen to the soul
of him who traverseth the desert, none accompanying him with step, or
cheering him with voice. From my youth upward, even until now, have I
laboured, and behold the time of my deliverance is at hand; yea, and
shall be accomplished speedily.

“In the days of my childhood, a rumour reached mine ears, even mine, of
a being sent abroad on the earth to tempt Jew and Nazarene, and even the
disciples of Mohammed, whose name is accursed in the mouth of our
nation, with offers of deliverance at their utmost need and extremity,
so they would do that which my lips dare not utter, even though there be
no ear to receive it but thine. Thou shudderest--well, then, thou art
sincere, at least, in thy faith of errors. I listened to the tale, and
mine ears received it, even as the soul of the thirsty drinketh in
rivers of water, for my mind was full of the vain fantasies of the
Gentile fables, and I longed, in the perverseness of my spirit, to see,
yea, and to consort with, yea, and to deal with, the evil one in his
strength. Like our fathers in the wilderness, I despised angel’s food,
and lusted after forbidden meats, even the meats of the Egyptian
sorcerers. And my presumption was rebuked as thou seest:--childless,
wifeless, friendless, at the last period of an existence prolonged
beyond the bounds of nature, am I now left, and, save thee alone,
without one to record its events. I will not trouble thee now with the
tale of my eventful life, farther than to tell thee, that the skeletons
thou tremblest to behold, were once clothed in flesh far fairer than
thine. They are those of my wife and child, whose history thou must not
now hear--but those of the two others thou must both hear and relate.”
And he pointed to the two other skeletons opposite, in their upright
cases. “On my return to my country, even Spain, if a Jew can be said to
have a country, I set myself down on this seat, and, lighted by this
lamp, I took in my hand the pen of a scribe, and vowed by a vow, that
this lamp should not expire, nor this seat be forsaken, nor this vault
untenanted, until that the record is written in a book, and sealed as
with the king’s signet. But, behold, I was traced by those who are keen
of scent, and quick of pursuit, even the sons of Dominick. And they
seized me, and laid my feet fast in the bonds; but my writings they
could not read, because they were traced in a character unknown to this
idolatrous people. And behold, after a space they set me free, finding
no cause of offence in me; and they bade me depart, and trouble them no
more. Then vowed I a vow unto the God of Israel, who had delivered me
from their thraldom, that none but he who could read these characters
should ever transcribe them. Moreover, I prayed, and said, O Lord God of
Israel! who knowest that we are the sheep of thy fold, and our enemies
as wolves round about us, and as lions who roar for their evening prey,
grant, that a Nazarene escaped from their hands, and fleeing unto us,
even as a bird chased from her nest, may put to shame the weapons of the
mighty, and laugh them to scorn. Grant also, Lord God of Jacob, that he
may be exposed to the snare of the enemy, even as those of whom I have
written, and that he may spit at it with his mouth, and spurn at it with
his feet, and trample on the ensnarer, even as they have trampled; and
then shall my soul, even mine, have peace at the last. Thus I
prayed--and my prayer was heard, for behold, _thou_ art here.”

“As I heard these words, a horrid foreboding, like a night-mare of the
heart, hung heavily on me. I looked alternately at the withering
speaker, and the hopeless task. To bear about that horrible secret
inurned in my heart, was not that enough? but to be compelled to scatter
its ashes abroad, and to rake into the dust of others for the same
purpose of unhallowed exposure, revolted me beyond feeling and
utterance. As my eye fell listlessly on the manuscripts, I saw they
contained only _the Spanish language_ written in _the Greek
characters_--a mode of writing that, I easily conceived, must have been
as unintelligible to the officers of the Inquisition, as the
Hieroglyphics of the Egyptian priests. Their ignorance, sheltered by
their pride, and that still more strongly fortified by the impenetrable
secresy attached to their most minute proceedings, made them hesitate to
entrust to any one the circumstance of their being in possession of
manuscript which they could not decypher. So they returned the papers to
Adonijah, and, in his own language, “Behold, he abode in safety.” But to
me this was a task of horror unspeakable. I felt myself as an added link
to the chain, the end of which, held by an invisible hand, was drawing
me to perdition; and I was now to become the recorder of my own
condemnation.

“As I turned over the leaves with a trembling hand, the towering form of
Adonijah seemed dilated with preternatural emotion. “And what dost thou
tremble at, child of the dust?” he exclaimed, “if thou hast been
tempted, so have they--if thou hast resisted, so have they--if they are
at rest, so shalt thou be. There is not a pang of soul or body thou hast
undergone, or canst undergo, that they have not suffered before thy
birth was dreamt of. Boy, thy hand trembles over pages it is unworthy to
touch, yet still I must employ thee, for I need thee. Miserable link of
necessity, that binds together minds so uncongenial! I would that the
ocean were my ink, and the rock my page, and mine arm, even mine, the
pen that should write thereon letters that should last like those on the
written mountains for ever and ever--even the mount of Sinai, and those
that still bear the record, “Israel hath passed the flood(6).” As he
spoke, I again turned over the manuscripts. “Does thy hand tremble
still?” said Adonijah; “and dost thou still hesitate to record the story
of those whose destiny a link, wondrous, invisible, and indissoluble,
has bound to thine. Behold, there are those near thee, who, though they
have no longer a tongue, speak to thee with that eloquence which is
stronger than all the eloquence of living tongues. Behold, there are
those around thee, whose mute and motionless arms of bone plead to thee
as no arms of flesh ever pleaded. Behold, there are those who, being
speechless, yet speak--who, being dead, are yet alive--who, though in
the abyss of eternity, are yet around thee, and call on thee, as with a
mortal voice. Hear them!--take the pen in thine hand, and write.” I took
the pen in my hand, but could not write a line. Adonijah, in a transport
of ecstasy, snatching a skeleton from its receptacle, placed it before
me. “Tell him thy story thyself, peradventure he will believe thee, and
record it.” And supporting the skeleton with one hand, he pointed with
the other, as bleached and bony as that of the dead, to the manuscript
that lay before me.

  (6) Written mountains, _i. e._ rocks inscribed with characters
  recordative of some remarkable event, are well known to every oriental
  traveller. I think it is in the notes of Dr Coke, on the book of
  Exodus, that I have met with the circumstance alluded to above. A rock
  near the Red Sea is said once to have borne the inscription, “Israel
  hath passed the flood.”

“It was a night of storms in the world above us; and, far below the
surface of the earth as we were, the murmur of the winds, sighing
through the passages, came on my ear like the voices of the
departed,--like the pleadings of the dead. Involuntarily I fixed my eye
on the manuscript I was to copy, and never withdrew till I had finished
its extraordinary contents.




Tale of the Indians.


“There is an island in the Indian sea, not many leagues from the mouth
of the Hoogly, which, from the peculiarity of its situation and internal
circumstances, long remained unknown to Europeans, and unvisited by the
natives of the contiguous islands, except on remarkable occasions. It is
surrounded by shallows that render the approach of any vessel of weight
impracticable, and fortified by rocks that threatened danger to the
slight canoes of the natives, but it was rendered still more formidable
by the terrors with which superstition had invested it. There was a
tradition that the first temple to the black goddess Seeva(7), had been
erected there; and her hideous idol, with its collar of human sculls,
forked tongues darting from its twenty serpent mouths, and seated on a
matted coil of adders, had there first received the bloody homage of the
mutilated limbs and immolated infants of her worshippers.

  (7) Vide Maurice’s Indian Antiquities.

“The temple had been overthrown, and the island half depopulated, by an
earthquake, that agitated all the shores of India. It was rebuilt,
however, by the zeal of the worshippers, who again began to re-visit the
island, when a tufaun of fury unparalleled even in those fierce
latitudes, burst over the devoted spot. The pagoda was burnt to ashes by
the lightning; the inhabitants, their dwellings, and their plantations,
swept away as with the besom of destruction, and not a trace of
humanity, cultivation, or life, remained in the desolate isle. The
devotees consulted their imagination for the cause of these calamities;
and, while seated under the shade of their cocoa-trees they told their
long strings of coloured beads, they ascribed it to the wrath of the
goddess Seeva at the increasing popularity of the worship of Juggernaut.
They asserted that her image had been seen ascending amid the blaze of
lightning that consumed her shrine and blasted her worshippers as they
clung to it for protection, and firmly believed she had withdrawn to
some happier isle, where she might enjoy her feast of flesh, and draught
of blood, unmolested by the worship of a rival deity. So the island
remained desolate, and without inhabitant for years.

“The crews of European vessels, assured by the natives that there was
neither animal, or vegetable, or water, to be found on its surface,
forbore to visit; and the Indian of other isles, as he passed it in his
canoe, threw a glance of melancholy fear at its desolation, and flung
something overboard to propitiate the wrath of Seeva.

“The island, thus left to itself, became vigorously luxuriant, as some
neglected children improve in health and strength, while pampered
darlings die under excessive nurture. Flowers bloomed, and foliage
thickened, without a hand to pluck, a step to trace, or a lip to taste
them, when some fishermen, (who had been driven by a strong current
toward the isle, and worked with oar and sail in vain to avoid its
dreaded shore), after making a thousand prayers to propitiate Seeva,
were compelled to approach within an oar’s length of it; and, on their
return in unexpected safety, reported they had heard sounds so
exquisite, that some other goddess, milder than Seeva, must have fixed
on that spot for her residence. The younger fishermen added to this
account, that they had beheld a female figure of supernatural
loveliness, glide and disappear amid the foliage which now luxuriantly
overshadowed the rocks; and, in the spirit of Indian devotees, they
hesitated not to call this delicious vision an incarnated emanation of
Vishnu, in a lovelier form than ever he had appeared before,--at least
far beyond that which he assumed, when he made one of his avatars in the
figure of a tiger.

“The inhabitants of the islands, as superstitious as they were
imaginative, deified the vision of the isles after their manner. The old
devotees, while invoking her, stuck close to the bloody rites of Seeva
and Haree, and muttered many a horrid vow over their beads, which they
took care to render effectual by striking sharp reeds into their arms,
and tinging every bead with blood as they spoke. The young women rowed
their light canoes as near as they dared to the haunted isle, making
vows to Camdeo(8), and sending their paper vessels, lit with wax, and
filled with flowers, towards its coast, where they hoped their darling
deity was about to fix his residence. The young men also, at least those
who were in love and fond of music, rowed close to the island to solicit
the god Krishnoo(9) to sanctify it by his presence; and not knowing what
to offer to the deity, they sung their wild airs standing high on the
prow of the canoe, and at last threw a figure of wax, with a kind of
lyre in its hand, towards the shore of the desolate isle.

  (8) The Cupid of the Indian mythology.

  (9) The Indian Apollo.

“For many a night these canoes might be seen glancing past each other
over the darkened sea, like _shooting stars of the deep_, with their
lighted paper lanthorns, and their offerings of flowers and fruits, left
by some trembling hand on the sands, or hung by a bolder one in baskets
of cane on the rocks; and still the simple islanders felt joy and
devotion united in this “voluntary humility.” It was observed, however,
that the worshippers departed with very different impressions of the
object of their adoration. The women all clung to their oars in
breathless admiration of the sweet sounds that issued from the isle; and
when that ceased they departed, murmuring over in their huts those
“notes angelical,” to which their own language furnished no appropriate
sounds. The men rested long on their oars, to catch a glimpse of the
form which, by the report of the fishermen, wandered there; and, when
disappointed, they rowed home sadly.

“Gradually the isle lost its bad character for terror; and in spite of
some old devotees, who told their blood-discoloured beads, and talked of
Seeva and Haree, and even held burning splinters of wood to their
scorched hands, and stuck sharp pieces of iron, which they had purchased
or stolen from the crews of European vessels, in the most fleshy and
sensitive parts of their bodies,--and, moreover, talked of suspending
themselves from trees with the head downwards, till they were consumed
by insects, or calcined by the sun, or rendered delirious by their
position,--in spite of all this, which must have been very affecting,
the young people went on their own way,--the girls offering their
wreaths to Camdeo, and the youths invoking Krishnoo, till the devotees,
in despair, vowed to visit this accursed island, which had set every
body mad, and find out how the unknown deity was to be recognised and
propitiated; and whether flowers, and fruits, and love-vows, and the
beatings of young hearts, were to be substituted for the orthodox and
legitimate offering of nails grown into the hands till they appeared
through their backs, and _setons_ of ropes inserted into the sides, on
which the religionist danced his dance of agony, till the ropes or his
patience failed. In a word, they were determined to find out what this
deity was, who demanded no suffering from her worshippers,--and they
fulfilled their resolution in a manner worthy of their purpose.

“One hundred and forty beings, crippled by the austerities of their
religion, unable to manage sail or oar, embarked in a canoe to reach
what they called the accursed isle. The natives, intoxicated with the
belief of their sanctity, stripped themselves naked, to push their boat
through the surf, and then, making their _salams_, implored them to use
oars at least. The devotees, all too intent on their beads, and too well
satisfied of their importance in the eyes of their favourite deities, to
admit a doubt of their safety, set off in triumph,--and the consequence
may be easily conjectured. The boat soon filled and sunk, and the crew
perished without a single sigh of lamentation, except that they had not
feasted the alligators in the sacred waters of the Ganges, or perished
at least under the shadow of the domes of the _holy city_ of Benares, in
either of which cases their salvation must have been unquestionable.

“This circumstance, apparently so untoward, operated favourably on the
popularity of the new worship. The old system lost ground every day.
Hands, instead of being scorched over the fire, were employed only in
gathering flowers. Nails (with which it was the custom of the devotees
to lard their persons) actually fell in price; and a man might sit at
his ease on his hams with as safe a conscience, and as fair a character,
as if fourscore of them occupied the interval between. On the other
hand, fruits were every day scattered on the shores of the favourite
isle; flowers, too, blushed on its rocks, in all the dazzling luxuriance
of colouring with which the Flora of the East delights to array herself.
There was that brilliant and superb lily, which, to this day,
illustrates the comparison between it and Solomon, who, in all his
glory, was not arrayed like one of them. There was the rose unfolding
its “paradise of leaves,” and the scarlet blossom of the bombex, which
an English traveller has voluptuously described as banqueting the eye
with “its mass of vegetable splendour” unparalleled. And the female
votarists at last began to imitate some of “those sounds and sweet airs”
that every breeze seemed to waft to their ears, with increasing strength
of melody, as they floated in their canoes round this isle of
enchantment.

“At length one circumstance occurred that put its sanctity of character,
and that of its inmate, out of all doubt. A young Indian who had in vain
offered to his beloved the mystical bouquet, in which the arrangement of
the flowers is made to express love, rowed his canoe to the island, to
learn his fate from its supposed inhabitant; and as he rowed, composed a
song, which expressed that his mistress despised him, as if he were a
Paria, but that he would love her though he were descended from the head
of Brahma;--that her skin was more polished than the marble steps by
which you descend to the tank of a Rajah, and her eyes brighter than any
whose glances were watched by presumptuous strangers through the rents
of the embroidered purdah(10) of a Nawaub;--that she was loftier in his
eyes than the black pagoda of Juggernaut, and more brilliant than the
trident of the temple of Maha-deva, when it sparkled in the beams of the
moon. And as both these objects were visible to his eyes from the shore,
as he rowed on in the soft and glorious serenity of an Indian night, no
wonder they found a place in his verse. Finally, he promised, that if
she was propitious to his suit, he would build her a hut, raised four
feet above the ground to avoid the serpents;--that her dwelling should
be overshadowed by the boughs of the tamarind; and that while she slept,
he would drive the musquitoes from her with a fan, composed of the
leaves of the first flowers which she accepted as a testimony of his
passion.

  (10) The curtain behind which women are concealed.

“It so happened, that the same night, the young female, whose reserve
had been the result of any thing but indifference, attended by two of
her companions, rowed her canoe to the same spot, with the view of
discovering whether the vows of her lover were sincere. They arrived
about the same time; and though it was now twilight, and the
superstition of these timid beings gave a darker tinge to the shadows
that surrounded them, they ventured to land; and, bearing their baskets
of flowers in trembling hands, advanced to hang them on the ruins of the
pagoda, amid which it was presumed the new goddess had fixed her abode.
They proceeded, not without difficulty, through thickets of flowers that
had sprung spontaneously in the uncultivated soil--not without fear that
a tiger might spring on them at every step, till they recollected that
those animals chose generally the large jungles for their retreat, and
seldom harboured amid flowers. Still less was the alligator to be
dreaded, amid the narrow streams that they could cross without tinging
their ancles with its pure water. The tamarind, the cocoa, and the
palm-tree, shed their blossoms, and exhaled their odours, and waved
their leaves, over the head of the trembling votarist as she approached
the ruin of the pagoda. It had been a massive square building, erected
amid rocks, that, by a caprice of nature not uncommon in the Indian
isles, occupied its centre, and appeared the consequence of some
volcanic explosion. The earthquake that had overthrown it, had mingled
the rocks and ruins together in a shapeless and deformed mass, which
seemed to bear alike the traces of the impotence of art and nature, when
prostrated by the power that has formed and can annihilate both. There
were pillars, wrought with singular characters, heaped amid stones that
bore no impress but that of some fearful and violent action of nature,
that seemed to say, Mortals, write your lines with the chisel, I write
my hieroglyphics in fire. There were the disjointed piles of stones
carved into the form of snakes, on which the hideous idol of Seeva had
once been seated; and close to them the rose was bursting through the
earth which occupied the fissures of the rock, as if nature preached a
milder theology, and deputed her darling flower as her missionary to her
children. The idol itself had fallen, and lay in fragments. The horrid
mouth was still visible, into which human hearts had been formerly
inserted. But now, the beautiful peacocks, with their rain-bow trains
and arched necks, were feeding their young amid the branches of the
tamarind that overhung the blackened fragments. The young Indians
advanced with diminished fear, for there was neither sight or sound to
inspire the fear that attends the approach to the presence of a
spiritual being--all was calm, still, and dark. Yet their feet trod with
involuntary lightness as they advanced to these ruins, which combined
the devastations of nature with those of the human passions, perhaps
more bloody and wild than the former. Near the ruins there had formerly
been a tank, as is usual, near the pagodas, both for the purposes of
refreshment and purification; but the steps were now broken, and the
water was stagnated. The young Indians, however, took up a few drops,
invoked the “goddess of the isle,” and approached the only remaining
arch. The exterior front of this building had been constructed of stone,
but its interior had been hollowed out of the rock; and its recesses
resembled, in some degree, those in the island of Elephanta. There were
monstrous figures carved in stone, some adhering to the rock, others
detached from it, all frowning in their shapeless and gigantic
hideousness, and giving to the eye of superstition the terrible
representation of “_gods of stone_.”

“Two of the young votarists, who were distinguished for their courage,
advanced and performed a kind of wild dance before the ruins of the
ancient gods, as they called them, and invoked (as they might) the new
resident of the isle to be propitious to the vows of their companion,
who advanced to hang her wreath of flowers round the broken remains of
an idol half-defaced and half-hidden among the fragments of stone, but
clustered over with that rich vegetation which seems, in oriental
countries, to announce the eternal triumph of nature amid the ruins of
art. Every year renews the rose, but what year shall see a pyramid
rebuilt? As the young Indian hung her wreath on the shapeless stone, a
voice murmured, “There is a _withered_ flower there.”--“Yes--yes--there
is,” answered the votarist, “and that withered flower is an emblem of my
heart. I have cherished many roses, but suffered one to wither that was
the sweetest to me of all the wreath. Wilt thou revive him for me,
unknown goddess, and my wreath shall no longer be a dishonour to thy
shrine?”--“Wilt _thou_ revive the rose by placing it in the warmth of
thy bosom,” said the young lover, appearing from behind the fragments of
rock and ruin that had sheltered him, and from which he had uttered his
oracular reply, and listened with delight to the emblematical but
intelligible language of his beloved. “Wilt thou revive the rose?” he
asked, in the triumph of love, as he clasped her to his bosom. The young
Indian, yielding at once to love and superstition, seemed half-melting
in his embrace, when, in a moment, she uttered a wild shriek, repelled
him with all her strength, and crouched in an uncouth posture of fear,
while she pointed with one quivering hand to a figure that appeared, at
that moment, in the perspective of that tumultuous and indefinite heap
of stone. The lover, unalarmed by the shriek of his mistress, was
advancing to catch her in his arms, when his eye fell on the object that
had struck hers, and he sunk on his face to the earth, in mute
adoration.

“The form was that of a female, but such as they had never before
beheld, for her skin was perfectly white, (at least in their eyes, who
had never seen any but the dark-red tint of the natives of the Bengalese
islands). Her drapery (as well as they could see) consisted only of
flowers, whose rich colours and fantastic grouping harmonized well with
the peacock’s feathers twined among them, and altogether composed a
feathery fan of wild drapery, which, in truth, beseemed an “island
goddess.” Her long hair, of a colour they had never beheld before, pale
auburn, flowed to her feet, and was fantastically entwined with the
flowers and the feathers that formed her dress. On her head was a
coronal of shells, of hue and lustre unknown except in the Indian
seas--the purple and the green vied with the amethyst, and the emerald.
On her white bare shoulder a loxia was perched, and round her neck was
hung a string of their pearl--like eggs, so pure and pellucid, that the
first sovereign in Europe might have exchanged her richest necklace of
pearls for them. Her arms and feet were perfectly bare, and her step had
a goddess-like rapidity and lightness, that affected the imagination of
the Indians as much as the extraordinary colour of her skin and hair.
The young lovers sunk in awe before this vision as it passed before
their eyes. While they prostrated themselves, a delicious sound trembled
on their ears. The beautiful vision spoke to them, but it was in a
language they did not understand; and this confirming their belief that
it was the language of the gods, they prostrated themselves to her
again. At that moment, the loxia, springing from her shoulder, came
fluttering towards them. “He is going to seek for fire-flies to light
his cell(11),” said the Indians to each other. But the bird, who, with
an intelligence peculiar to his species, understood and adopted the
predilection of the fair being he belonged to, for the fresh flowers in
which he saw her arrayed every day, darted at the withered rose-bud in
the wreath of the young Indian; and, striking his slender beak through
it, laid it at her feet. The omen was interpreted auspiciously by the
lovers, and, bending once more to the earth, they rowed back to their
island, but no longer in separate canoes. The lover steered that of his
mistress, while she sat beside him in silence; and the young people who
accompanied them chaunted verses in praise of the _white_ goddess, and
the island sacred to her and to lovers.

  (11) From the fire-flies being so often found in the nest of the
  loxia, the Indians imagine he illuminates his nest with them. It is
  more likely they are the food of his young.




CHAPTER XV.

    But tell me to what saint, I pray,
      What martyr, or what angel bright,
    Is dedicate this holy day,
      Which brings you here so gaily dight?

    Dost thou not, simple Palmer, know,
      What every child can tell thee here?--
    Nor saint nor angel claims this show,
      But the bright season of the year.

    QUEEN-HOO HALL, BY STRUTT.


“The sole and beautiful inmate of the isle, though disturbed at the
appearance of her worshippers, soon recovered her tranquillity. She
could not be conscious of fear, for nothing of that world in which she
lived had ever borne a hostile appearance to her. The sun and the
shade--the flowers and foliage--the tamarinds and figs that prolonged
her delightful existence--the water that she drank, wondering at the
beautiful being who seemed to drink whenever she did--the peacocks, who
spread out their rich and radiant plumage the moment they beheld
her--and the loxia, who perched on her shoulder and hand as she walked,
and answered her sweet voice with imitative chirpings--all these were
her friends, and she knew none but these.

“The human forms that sometimes approached the island, caused her a
slight emotion; but it was rather that of curiosity than alarm; and
their gestures were so expressive of reverence and mildness, their
offerings of flowers, in which she delighted, so acceptable, and their
visits so silent and peaceful, that she saw them without reluctance, and
only wondered, as they rowed away, how they could move on the water in
safety; and how creatures so dark, and with features so unattractive,
happened to _grow_ amid the beautiful flowers they presented to her as
the productions of their abode. The elements might be supposed to have
impressed her imagination with some terrible ideas; but the periodical
regularity of these phænomena, in the climate she inhabited, divested
them of their terrors to one who had been accustomed to them, as to the
alternation of night and day--who could not remember the fearful
impression of the first, and, above all, who had never heard any terror
of them expressed _by another_,--perhaps the primitive cause of fear in
most minds. Pain she had never felt--of death she had no idea--how,
then, could she become acquainted with fear?

“When a north-wester, as it is termed, visited the island, with all its
terrific accompaniments of midnight darkness, clouds of suffocating
dust, and thunders like the trumpet of doom, she stood amid the leafy
colonnades of the banyan-tree, ignorant of her danger, watching the
cowering wings and drooping heads of the birds, and the ludicrous terror
of the monkies, as they skipt from branch to branch with their young.
When the lightning struck a tree, she gazed as a child would on a
fire-work played off for its amusement; but the next day she wept, when
she saw the leaves would no longer grow on the blasted trunk. When the
rains descended in torrents, the ruins of the pagoda afforded her a
shelter; and she sat listening to the rushing of the mighty waters, and
the murmurs of the troubled deep, till her soul took its colour from the
sombrous and magnificent imagery around her, and she believed herself
precipitated to earth with the deluge--borne downward, like a leaf, by a
cataract--engulphed in the depths of the ocean--rising again to light on
the swell of the enormous billows, as if she were heaved on the back of
a whale--deafened with the roar--giddy with the rush--till terror and
delight embraced in that fearful exercise of imagination. So she lived
like a flower amid sun and storm, blooming in the light, and bending to
the shower, and drawing the elements of her sweet and wild existence
from both. And both seemed to mingle their influences kindly for her, as
if she was a thing that nature loved, even in her angry mood, and gave a
commission to the storm to nurture her, and to the deluge to spare the
ark of her innocence, as it floated over the waters. This existence of
felicity, half physical, half imaginative, but neither intellectual or
impassioned, had continued till the seventeenth year of this beautiful
and mild being, when a circumstance occurred that changed its hue for
ever.

“On the evening of the day after the Indians had departed, Immalee, for
that was the name her votarists had given her, was standing on the
shore, when a being approached her unlike any she had ever beheld. The
colour of his face and hands resembled her own more than those she was
accustomed to see, but his garments, (which were European), from their
square uncouthness, their shapelessness, and their disfiguring
projection about the hips, (it was the fashion of the year 1680), gave
her a mixed sensation of ridicule, disgust, and wonder, which her
beautiful features could express only by a smile--that smile, a _native
of the face_ from which not even surprise could banish it.

“The stranger approached, and the beautiful vision approached also, but
not like an European female with low and graceful bendings, still less
like an Indian girl with her low salams, but like a young fawn, all
animation, timidity, confidence, and cowardice, expressed in almost a
single action. She sprung from the sands--ran to her favourite
tree;--returned again with her guard of peacocks, who expanded their
superb trains with a kind of instinctive motion, as if they felt the
danger that menaced their protectress, and, clapping her hands with
exultation, seemed to invite them to share in the delight she felt in
gazing at the _new flower that had grown in the sand_.

“The stranger advanced, and, to Immalee’s utter astonishment, addressed
her in the language which she herself had retained some words of since
her infancy, and had endeavoured in vain to make her peacocks, parrots,
and loxias, answer her in corresponding sounds. But her language, from
want of practice, had become so limited, that she was delighted to hear
its most unmeaning sounds uttered by human lips; and when he said,
according to the form of the times, “How do you, fair maid?” she
answered, “God made me,” from the words of the Christian Catechism that
had been breathed into her infant lip. “God never made a fairer
creature,” replied the stranger, grasping her hand, and fixing on her
eyes that still burn in the sockets of that arch-deceiver. “Oh yes!”
answered Immalee, “he made many things more beautiful. The rose is
redder than I am--the palm-tree is taller than I am--and the wave is
bluer than I am;--but they all change, and I never change. I have grown
taller and stronger, though the rose fades every six moons; and the rock
splits to let in the bats, when the earth shakes; and the waves fight in
their anger till they turn grey, and far different from the beautiful
colour they have when the moon comes dancing on them, and sending all
the young, broken branches of her light to kiss my feet, as I stand on
the soft sand. I have tried to gather them every night, but they all
broke in my hand the moment I dipt it into water.”--“And have you fared
better with the stars?” said the stranger smiling.--“No,” answered the
innocent being, “the stars are the flowers of heaven, and the rays of
the moon the boughs and branches; but though they are so bright, they
only blossom in the night,--and I love better the flowers that I can
gather, and twine in my hair. When I have been all night wooing a star,
and it has listened and descended, springing downwards like a peacock
from its nest, it has hid itself often afterwards playfully amid the
mangoes and tamarinds where it fell; and though I have searched for it
till the moon looked wan and weary of lighting me, I never could find
it. But where do you come from?--you are not scaly and voiceless like
those who grow in the waters, and show their strange shapes as I sit on
the shore at sun-set;--nor are you red and diminutive like those who
come over the waters to me from other worlds, in houses that can live on
the deep, and walk so swiftly, with their legs plunged in the water.
Where do you come from?--you are not so bright as the stars that live in
the blue sea above me, nor so deformed as those that toss in the darker
sea at my feet. Where did you grow, and how came you here?--there is not
a canoe on the sand; and though the shells bear the fish that live in
them so lightly over the waters, they never would bear me. When I placed
my foot on their scolloped edge of crimson and purple, they sunk into
the sand.”--“Beautiful creature,” said the stranger, “I come from a
world where there are thousands like me.”--“That is impossible,” said
Immalee, “for I live here alone, and other worlds must be like
this.”--“What I tell you is true, however,” said the stranger. Immalee
paused for a moment, as if making the first effort of reflection--an
exertion painful enough to a being whose existence was composed of
felicitous tacts and unreflecting instincts--and then exclaimed, “We
both must have grown in the world of voices, for I know what you say
better than the chirp of the loxia, or the cry of the peacock. That must
be a delightful world where they all speak--what would I give that my
roses grew in the world of answers!”

“At this moment the stranger made certain signals of hunger, which
Immalee understood in a moment, and told him to follow her to where the
tamarind and the fig were shedding their fruit--where the stream was so
clear, you could count the purple shells in its bed--and where she would
scoop for him in the cocoa-shell the cool waters that flowed beneath the
shade of the mango. As they went, she gave him all the information about
herself that she could. She told him that she was the daughter of a
palm-tree, under whose shade she had been first conscious of existence,
but that her poor father had been long withered and dead--that she was
very old, having seen many roses decay on their stalks; and though they
were succeeded by others, she did not love them so well as the first,
which were a great deal larger and brighter--that, in fact, every thing
had grown smaller latterly, for she was now able to reach to the fruit
which formerly she was compelled to wait for till it dropt on the
ground;--but that the water was grown taller, for once she was forced to
drink it on her hands and knees, and now she could scoop it in a
cocoa-shell. Finally, she added, she was much older than the moon, for
she had seen it waste away till it was dimmer than the light of a
fire-fly; and the moon that was lighting them now would decline too, and
its successor be so small, that she would never again give it the name
she had given to the first--Sun of the Night. “But,” said her companion,
“how are you able to speak a language you never learned from your loxias
and peacocks?”--“I will tell you,” said Immalee, with an air of
solemnity, which her beauty and innocence made at once ludicrous and
imposing, and in which she betrayed a slight tendency to that wish to
mystify that distinguishes her delightful sex,--“there came a spirit to
me from the world of voices, and it whispered to me sounds that I never
have forgotten, long, long before I was born.”--“Really?” said the
stranger. “Oh yes!--long before I could gather a fig, or gather the
water in my hand, and that must be before I was born. When I _was_ born,
I was not so high as the rose-bud, at which I tried to catch, now I am
as near the moon as the palm-tree--sometimes I catch her beams sooner
than he does, therefore I must be very old, and very high.” At these
words, the stranger, with an expression indescribable, leaned against a
tree. He viewed that lovely and helpless being, while he refused the
fruits and water she offered him, with a look, that, for the first time,
intimated compassion. The stranger feeling did not dwell long in a
mansion it was unused to. The expression was soon exchanged for that
half-ironical, half-diabolical glance Immalee could not understand. “And
you live here alone,” he said, “and you have lived in this beautiful
place without a companion?”--“Oh no!” said Immalee, “I have a companion
more beautiful than all the flowers in the isle. There is not a
rose-leaf that drops in the river so bright as its cheek. My friend
lives under the water, but its colours are so bright. It kisses me too,
but its lips are very cold; and when I kiss it, it seems to dance, and
its beauty is all broken into a thousand faces, that come smiling at me
like little stars. But, though my friend has a thousand faces, and I
have but one, still there is one thing that troubles me. There is but
one stream where it meets me, and that is where are no shadows from the
trees--and I never can catch it but when the sun is bright. Then when I
catch it in the stream, I kiss it on my knees; but my friend has grown
so tall, that sometimes I wish it were smaller. Its lips spread so much
wider, that I give it a thousand kisses for one that I get.” “Is your
friend male or female,” said the stranger.--“What is that?” answered
Immalee.--“I mean, of what sex is your friend?”

“But to this question he could obtain no satisfactory answer; and it was
not till his return the next day, when he revisited the isle, that he
discovered Immalee’s friend was what he suspected. He found this
innocent and lovely being bending over a stream that reflected her
image, and wooing it with a thousand wild and graceful attitudes of
joyful fondness. The stranger gazed at her for some time, and thoughts
it would be difficult for man to penetrate into, threw their varying
expression over his features for a moment. It was the first of his
intended victims he had ever beheld with compunction. The joy, too, with
which Immalee received him, almost brought back human feelings to a
heart that had long renounced them; and, for a moment, he experienced a
sensation like that of his master when he visited paradise,--pity for
the flowers he resolved to wither for ever. He looked at her as she
fluttered round him with outspread arms and dancing eyes; and sighed,
while she welcomed him in tones of such wild sweetness, as suited a
being who had hitherto conversed with nothing but the melody of birds
and the murmur of waters. With all her ignorance, however, she could not
help testifying her amazement at his arriving at the isle without any
visible means of conveyance. He evaded answering her on this point, but
said, “Immalee, I come from a world wholly unlike that you inhabit, amid
inanimate flowers, and unthinking birds. I come from a world where all,
as I do, think and speak.” Immalee was speechless with wonder and
delight for some time; at length she exclaimed, “Oh, how they must love
each other! even I love my poor birds and flowers, and the trees that
shade, and the waters that sing to me!” The stranger smiled. “In all
that world, perhaps there is not another being beautiful and innocent as
you. It is a world of suffering, guilt, and care.” It was with much
difficulty she was made to comprehend the meaning of these words, but
when she did, she exclaimed, “Oh, that I could live in that world, for I
would make every one happy!”--“But you could not, Immalee,” said the
stranger; “this world is of such extent that it would take your whole
life to traverse it, and, during your progress, you never could be
conversant with more than a small number of sufferers at a time, and the
evils they undergo are in many instances such as you or no human power
could relieve.” At these words, Immalee burst into an agony of tears.
“Weak, but lovely being,” said the stranger, “could your tears heal the
corrosions of disease?--cool the burning throb of a cancered
heart?--wash the pale slime from the clinging lips of famine?--or, more
than all, quench the fire of forbidden passion?” Immalee paused aghast
at this enumeration, and could only faulter out, that wherever she went,
she would bring her flowers and sunshine among the healthy, and they
should all sit under the shade of her own tamarind. That for disease and
death, she had long been accustomed to see flowers wither and die their
beautiful death of nature. “And perhaps,” she added, after a reflective
pause, “as I have often known them to retain their delicious odour even
after they were faded, perhaps _what thinks_ may live too after the form
has faded, and that is a thought of joy.” Of passion, she said she knew
nothing, and could propose no remedy for an evil she was unconscious of.
She had seen flowers fade with the season, but could not imagine why the
flower should destroy itself. “But did you never trace a worm in the
flower?” said the stranger, with the sophistry of corruption. “Yes,”
answered Immalee, “but the worm was not the native of the flower; its
own leaves never could have hurt it.” This led to a discussion, which
Immalee’s impregnable innocence, though combined with ardent curiosity
and quick apprehension, rendered perfectly harmless to her. Her playful
and desultory answers,--her restless eccentricity of imagination,--her
keen and piercing, though ill-poised intellectual weapons,--and, above
all, her instinctive and unfailing _tact_ in matters of right and wrong,
formed altogether an array that discomfited and baffled the tempter more
than if he had been compelled to encounter half the _wranglers_ of the
European academies of that day. In the logic of the schools he was
well-versed, but in this logic of the heart and of nature, he was
“ignorance itself.” It is said, that the “awless lion” crouches before
“a maid in the pride of her purity.” The tempter was departing gloomily,
when he saw tears start from the bright eyes of Immalee, and caught a
wild and dark omen from her innocent grief. “And you weep, Immalee?”
“Yes,” said the beautiful being, “I always weep when I see the sun set
in clouds; and will you, the sun of my heart, set in darkness too? and
will you not rise again? will you not?” and, with the graceful
confidence of pure innocence, she pressed her red delicious lip to his
hand as she spoke. “Will you not? I shall never love my roses and
peacocks if you do not return, for they cannot speak to me as you do,
nor can I give them one thought, but you can give me many. Oh, I would
like to have many thoughts about _the world that suffers_, from which
you came; and I believe you came from it, for, till I saw you, I never
felt a pain that was not pleasure; but now, it is all pain when I think
you will not return.”--“I will return,” said the stranger, “beautiful
Immalee, and will shew you, at my return, a glimpse of that world from
which I come, and in which you will soon be an inmate.”--“But shall I
see you there,” said Immalee, “otherwise how shall I _talk
thoughts_?”--“Oh yes,--oh certainly.”--“But why do you repeat the same
words twice; _your once_ would have been enough.”--“Well then,
yes.”--“Then take this rose from me, and let us inhale its odour
together, as I say to my friend in the fountain, when I bend to kiss
_it_; but my friend withdraws _its_ rose before I have tasted it, and I
leave mine on the water. Will you not take my rose,” said the beautiful
suppliant, bending towards him. “I will,” said the stranger; and he took
a flower from the cluster Immalee held out to him. It was a withered
one. He snatched it, and hid it in his breast. “And will you go without
a canoe across that dark sea?” said Immalee.--“We shall meet again, and
meet in the _world of suffering_,” said the stranger.--“Thank you,--oh,
thank you,” repeated Immalee, as she saw him plunge fearless amid the
surf. The stranger answered only, “We shall meet again.” Twice, as he
parted, he threw a glance at the beautiful and isolated being; a
lingering of humanity trembled round his heart,--but he tore the
withered rose from his bosom, and to the waved arm and angel-smile of
Immalee, he answered, “We shall meet again.”




CHAPTER XVI.

    Più non ho la dolce speranza.

    DIDONE.


“Seven mornings and evenings Immalee paced the sands of her lonely isle,
without seeing the stranger. She had still his promise to console her,
that they should meet in the world of suffering; and this she repeated
to herself as if it was full of hope and consolation. In this interval
she tried to educate herself for her introduction into this world, and
it was beautiful to see her attempting, from vegetable and animal
analogies, to form some image of the incomprehensible destiny of man. In
the shade she watched the withering flower.--“The blood that ran red
through its veins yesterday is purple to-day, and will be black and dry
to-morrow,” she said; “but it feels no pain--it dies patiently,--and the
ranunculus and tulip near it are untouched by grief for their companion,
or their colours would not be so resplendent. But can it be thus in the
world that thinks? Could I see _him_ wither and die, without withering
and dying along with him. Oh no! when that flower fades, I will be the
dew that falls over him!”

“She attempted to enlarge her comprehension, by observing the animal
world. A young loxia had fallen dead from its pendent nest; and Immalee,
looking into the aperture which that intelligent bird forms at the lower
extremity of the nest to secure it from birds of prey, perceived the old
ones with fire-flies in their small beaks, their young one lying dead
before them. At this sight Immalee burst into tears.--“Ah! you cannot
weep,” she said, “what an advantage I have over you! You eat, though
your young one, your own one, is dead; but could I ever drink of the
milk of the cocoa, if _he_ could no longer taste it? I begin to
comprehend what he said--to think, then, is to suffer--and a world of
thought must be a world of pain! But how delicious are these tears!
Formerly I wept for pleasure--but there is a pain sweeter than pleasure,
that I never felt till I beheld _him_. Oh! who would not think, to have
the joy of tears?”

“But Immalee did not occupy this interval solely in reflection; a new
anxiety began to agitate her; and in the intervals of her meditation and
her tears, she searched with avidity for the most glowing and
fantastically wreathed shells to deck her arms and hair with. She
changed her drapery of flowers every day, and never thought them fresh
after the first hour; then she filled her largest shells with the most
limpid water, and her hollow cocoa nuts with the most delicious figs,
interspersed with roses, and arranged them picturesquely on the stone
bench of the ruined pagoda. The time, however, passed over without the
arrival of the stranger, and Immalee, on visiting her fairy banquet the
next day, wept over the withered fruit, but dried her eyes, and hastened
to replace them.

“She was thus employed on the eighth morning, when she saw the stranger
approach; and the wild and innocent delight with which she bounded
towards him, excited in him for a moment a feeling of gloomy and
reluctant compunction, which Immalee’s quick susceptibility traced in
his pausing step and averted eye. She stood trembling in lovely and
pleading diffidence, as if intreating pardon for an unconscious offence,
and asking permission to approach by the very attitude in which she
forbore it, while tears stood in her eyes ready to fall at another
repelling motion. This sight “whetted his almost blunted purpose.” She
must learn to suffer, to qualify her to become my pupil, he thought.
“Immalee, you weep,” he added, approaching her. “Oh yes!” said Immalee,
smiling like a spring morning through her tears; “you are to teach me to
suffer, and I shall soon be very fit for your world--but I had rather
weep for you, than smile on a thousand roses.”--“Immalee,” said the
stranger, repelling the tenderness that melted him in spite of himself,
“Immalee, I come to shew you something of the world of thought you are
so anxious to inhabit, and of which you must soon become an inmate.
Ascend this hill where the palm-trees are clustering, and you shall see
a glimpse of part of it.”--“But I would like to see the whole, and all
at once!” said Immalee, with the natural avidity of thirsty and unfed
intellect, that believes it can swallow all things, and digest all
things. “The whole, and all at once!” said her conductor, turning to
smile at her as she bounded after him, breathless and glowing with newly
excited feeling. “I doubt the part you will see to-night will be more
than enough to satiate even your curiosity.” As he spoke he drew a tube
from his vest, and bid her apply it to her sight. The Indian obeyed him;
but, after gazing a moment, uttered the emphatic exclamation, “I am
there!--or are they here?” and sunk on the earth in a frenzy of delight.
She rose again in a moment, and eagerly seizing the telescope, applied
it in a wrong direction, which disclosed merely the sea to her view, and
exclaimed sadly, “Gone!--gone--all that beautiful world lived and died
in a moment--all that I love die so--my dearest roses live not half so
long as those I neglect--you were absent for seven moons since I first
saw you, and the beautiful world lived only a moment.”

“The stranger again directed the telescope towards the shore of India,
from which they were not far distant, and Immalee again exclaimed in
rapture, “Alive and more beautiful than ever!--all living, thinking
things!--their _very walk thinks_. No mute fishes, and senseless trees,
but wonderful rocks(12), on which they look with pride, as if they were
the works of their own hands. Beautiful rocks! how I love the perfect
straitness of your sides, and the crisped and flower-like knots of your
decorated tops! Oh that flowers grew, and birds fluttered round you, and
then I would prefer you even to the rocks under which I watch the
setting sun! Oh what a world must that be where nothing is natural, and
every thing beautiful!--thought must have done all that. But, how
_little every thing is_!--thought should have made every thing
larger--_thought should be a god_. But,” she added with quick
intelligence and self-accusing diffidence, “perhaps I am wrong.
Sometimes I have thought I could lay my hand on the top of a palm-tree,
but when, after a long, long time, I came close to it, I could not have
reached its lowest leaf were I ten times higher than I am. Perhaps your
beautiful world may grow higher as I approach it.”--“Hold, Immalee,”
said the stranger, taking the telescope from her hands, “to enjoy this
sight you should understand it.”--“Oh yes!” said Immalee, with
submissive anxiety, as the world of sense rapidly lost ground in her
imagination against the new-found world of mind,--“yes--let me
think.”--“Immalee, have you any religion?” said the visitor, as an
indescribable feeling of pain made his pale brow still paler. Immalee,
quick in understanding and sympathising with physical feeling, darted
away at these words, returned in a moment with a banyan leaf, with which
she wiped the drops from his livid forehead; and then seating herself at
his feet, in an attitude of profound but eager attention, repeated,
“_Religion!_ what is that? is it a new thought?”--“It is the
consciousness of a Being superior to all worlds and their inhabitants,
because he is the Maker of all, and will be their judge--of a Being whom
we cannot see, but in whose power and presence we must believe, though
invisible--of one who is every where unseen; always acting, though never
in motion; hearing all things, but never heard.” Immalee interrupted
with an air of distraction--“Hold! too many thoughts will kill me--let
me pause. I have seen the shower that came to refresh the rose-tree beat
it to the earth.” After an effort of solemn recollection, she added,
“The voice of dreams told me something like that before I was born, but
it is so long ago,--sometimes I have had thoughts within me like that
voice. I have thought I loved the things around me too much, and that I
should love things _beyond_ me--flowers that could not fade, and a sun
that never sets. I could have sprung, like a bird into the air, after
such a thought--but there was no one to shew me that path upward.” And
the young enthusiast lifted towards heaven eyes in which trembled the
tears of ecstatic imaginings, and then turned their mute pleadings on
the stranger.

  (12) Intellige “buildings.”

“It is right,” he continued, “not only to have thoughts of this Being,
but to express them by some outward acts. The inhabitants of the world
you are about to see, call this, _worship_,--and they have adopted (a
Satanic smile curled his lip as he spoke) very different modes; so
different, that, in fact, there is but one point in which they all
agree--that of making their religion a torment;--the religion of some
prompting them to torture themselves, and the religion of some prompting
them to torture others. Though, as I observed, they all agree in this
important point, yet unhappily they differ so much about the mode, that
there has been much disturbance about it in the world that thinks.”--“In
the world that _thinks_!” repeated Immalee, “Impossible! Surely they
must know that a difference cannot be acceptable to Him who is
One.”--“And have you then adopted no mode of expressing your thoughts of
this Being, that is, of worshipping him?” said the stranger.--“I smile
when the sun rises in its beauty, and I weep when I see the evening star
rise,” said Immalee.--“And do you recoil at the inconsistencies of
varied modes of worship, and yet you yourself employ smiles and tears in
your address to the Deity?”--“I do,--for they are both the expressions
of joy with me,” said the poor Indian; “the sun is as happy when he
smiles through the rain-clouds, as when he burns in the mid-height of
heaven, in the fierceness of his beauty; and I am happy whether I smile
or I weep.”--“Those whom you are about to see,” said the stranger,
offering her the telescope, “are as remote in their forms of worship as
smiles from tears; but they are not, like you, equally happy in both.”
Immalee applied her eye to the telescope, and exclaimed in rapture at
what she saw. “What do you see?” said the stranger. Immalee described
what she saw with many imperfect expressions, which, perhaps, may be
rendered more intelligible by the explanatory words of the stranger.

“You see,” said he, “the coast of India, the shores of the world near
you.--There is the black pagoda of Juggernaut, that enormous building on
which your eye is first fixed. Beside it stands a Turkish mosque--you
may distinguish it by a figure like that of the half-moon. It is the
will of him who rules that world, that its inhabitants should worship
him by that sign(13). At a small distance you may see a low building
with a trident on its summit--that is the temple of Maha-deva, one of
the ancient goddesses of the country.”--“But the houses are nothing to
me,” said Immalee, “shew me the living things that go there. The houses
are not half so beautiful as the rocks on the shore, draperied all over
with sea-weeds and mosses, and shaded by the distant palm-tree and
cocoa.”--“But those buildings,” said the tempter, “are indicative of the
various modes of thinking of those who frequent them. If it is into
their thoughts you wish to look, you must see them expressed by their
actions. In their dealings with each other, men are generally deceitful,
but in their dealings with their gods, they are tolerably sincere in the
expression of the character they assign them in their imaginations. If
that character be formidable, they express fear; if it be one of
cruelty, they indicate it by the sufferings they inflict on themselves;
if it be gloomy, the image of the god is faithfully reflected in the
visage of the worshipper. Look and judge.”

  (13) Tippoo Saib wished to substitute the Mohamedan for the Indian
  mythology throughout his dominions. This circumstance, though long
  antedated, is therefore imaginable.

“Immalee looked and saw a vast sandy plain, with the dark pagoda of
Juggernaut in the perspective. On this plain lay the bones of a thousand
skeletons, bleaching in the burning and unmoistened air. A thousand
human bodies, hardly more alive, and scarce less emaciated, were
trailing their charred and blackened bodies over the sands, to perish
under the shadow of the temple, hopeless of ever reaching that of its
walls.

“Multitudes of them dropt dead as they crawled. Multitudes still living,
faintly waved their hands, to scare the vultures that hovered nearer and
nearer at every swoop, and scooped the poor remnants of flesh from the
living bones of the screaming victim, and retreated, with an answering
scream of disappointment at the scanty and tasteless morsel they had
torn away.

“Many tried, in their false and fanatic zeal, to double their torments,
by crawling through the sands on their hands and knees; but hands
through the backs of which the nails had grown, and knees worn literally
to the bone, struggled but feebly amid the sands and the skeletons, and
the bodies that were soon to be skeletons, and the vultures that were to
make them so.

“Immalee withheld her breath, as if she inhaled the abominable effluvia
of this mass of putrefaction, which is said to desolate the shores near
the temple of Juggernaut, like a pestilence.

“Close to this fearful scene, came on a pageant, whose splendour made a
brilliant and terrible contrast to the loathsome and withering
desolation of animal and intellectual life, amid which its pomp came
towering, and sparkling, and trembling on. An enormous fabric, more
resembling a moving palace than a triumphal car, supported the inshrined
image of Juggernaut, and was dragged forward by the united strength of a
thousand human bodies, priests, victims, brahmins, faqueers and all. In
spite of this huge force, the impulse was so unequal, that the whole
edifice rocked and tottered from time to time, and this singular union
of instability and splendour, of trembling decadence and terrific glory,
gave a faithful image of the meretricious exterior, and internal
hollowness, of idolatrous religion. As the procession moved on,
sparkling amid desolation, and triumphant amid death, multitudes rushed
forward from time to time, to prostrate themselves under the wheels of
the enormous machine, which crushed them to atoms in a moment, and
passed on;--others “cut themselves with knives and lancets after their
manner,” and not believing themselves worthy to perish beneath the
wheels of the idol’s chariot, sought to propitiate him by dying the
tracks of those wheels with their blood;--their relatives and friends
shouted with delight as they saw the streams of blood dye the car and
its line of progress, and hoped for an interest in these voluntary
sacrifices, with as much energy, and perhaps as much reason, as the
Catholic votarist does in the penance of St Bruno, or the ex-oculation
of St Lucia, or the martyrdom of St Ursula and her eleven thousand
virgins, which, being interpreted, means the martyrdom of a single
female named _Undecimilla_, which the Catholic legends read _Undecim
Mille_.

“The procession went on, amid that mixture of rites that characterizes
idolatry in all countries,--half resplendent, half horrible--appealing
to nature while they rebel against her--mingling flowers with blood, and
casting alternately a screaming infant, or a garland of roses, beneath
the car of the idol.

“Such was the picture that presented to the strained, incredulous eyes
of Immalee, those mingled features of magnificence and horror,--of joy
and suffering,--of crushed flowers and mangled bodies,--of magnificence
calling on torture for its triumph,--and the steam of blood and the
incense of the rose, inhaled at once by the triumphant nostrils of an
incarnate demon, who rode amid the wrecks of nature and the spoils of
the heart! Immalee gazed on in horrid curiosity. She saw, by the aid of
the telescope, a boy seated on the front of the moving temple, who
“perfected the praise” of the loathsome idol, with all the outrageous
lubricities of the Phallic worship. From the slightest consciousness of
the meaning of this phenomenon, her unimaginable purity protected her as
with a shield. It was in vain that the tempter plied her with questions,
and hints of explanation, and offers of illustration. He found her
chill, indifferent, and even incurious. He gnashed his teeth and gnawed
his lip _en parenthese_. But when she saw mothers cast their infants
under the wheels of the car, and then turn to watch the wild and wanton
dance of the Almahs, and appear, by their open lips and clapped hands,
to keep time to the sound of the silver bells that tinkled round their
slight ankles, while their infants were writhing in their dying
agony,--she dropt the telescope in horror, and exclaimed, “The world
that thinks does not feel. I never saw the rose kill the bud!”

“But look again,” said the tempter, “to that square building of stone,
round which a few stragglers are collected, and whose summit is
surmounted by a trident,--that is the temple of Maha-deva, a goddess who
possesses neither the power or the popularity of the great idol
Juggernaut. Mark how her worshippers approach her.” Immalee looked, and
saw women offering flowers, fruits, and perfumes; and some young girls
brought birds in cages, whom they set free; others, after making vows
for the safety of some absent, sent a small and gaudy boat of paper,
illuminated with wax, down the stream of an adjacent river, with
injunctions never to sink till it reached him.

“Immalee smiled with pleasure at the rites of this harmless and elegant
superstition. “This is not the religion of torment,” said she.--“Look
again,” said the stranger. She did, and beheld those very women whose
hands had been employed in liberating birds from their cages,
suspending, on the branches of the trees which shadowed the temple of
Maha-deva, baskets containing their new-born infants, who were left
there to perish with hunger, or be devoured by the birds, while their
mothers danced and sung in honour of the goddess.

“Others were occupied in conveying, apparently with the most zealous and
tender watchfulness, their aged parents to the banks of the river,
where, after assisting them to perform their ablations, with all the
intensity of filial and divine piety, they left them half immersed in
the water, to be devoured by alligators, who did not suffer their
wretched prey to linger in long expectation of their horrible death;
while others were deposited in the jungles near the banks of the river,
where they met with a fate as certain and as horrible, from the tigers
who infested it, and whose yell soon hushed the feeble wail of their
unresisting victims.

“Immalee sunk on the earth at this spectacle, and clasping both hands
over her eyes, remained speechless with grief and horror.

“Look yet again,” said the stranger, “the rites of all religions are not
so bloody.” Once more she looked, and saw a Turkish mosque, towering in
all the splendour that accompanied the first introduction of the
religion of Mahomet among the Hindoos. It reared its gilded domes, and
carved minarets, and crescented pinnacles, rich with all the profusion
which the decorative imagination of Oriental architecture, at once light
and luxuriant, gorgeous and aerial, delights to lavish on its favourite
works.

“A group of stately Turks were approaching the mosque, at the call of
the muezzin. Around the building arose neither tree nor shrub; it
borrowed neither shade nor ornament from nature; it had none of those
soft and graduating shades and hues, which seem to unite the works of
God and the creature for the glory of the former, and calls on the
inventive magnificence of art, and the spontaneous loveliness of nature,
to magnify the Author of both; it stood the independent work and emblem
of vigorous hands and proud minds, such as appeared to belong to those
who now approached it as worshippers. Their finely featured and
thoughtful countenances, their majestic habits, and lofty figures,
formed an imposing contrast to the unintellectual expression, the
crouching posture, and the half naked squalidness of some poor Hindoos,
who, seated on their hams, were eating their mess of rice, as the
stately Turks passed on to their devotions. Immalee viewed them with a
feeling of awe and pleasure, and began to think there might be some good
in the religion professed by these noble-looking beings. But, before
they entered the mosque, they spurned and spit at the unoffending and
terrified Hindoos; they struck them with the flats of their sabres, and,
terming them dogs of idolaters, they cursed them in the name of God and
the prophet. Immalee, revolted and indignant at the sight, though she
could not hear the words that accompanied it, demanded the reason of it.
“Their religion,” said the stranger, “binds them to hate all who do not
worship as they do.”--“Alas!” said Immalee, weeping, “is not that hatred
which their religion teaches, a proof that theirs is the worst? But
why,” she added, her features illuminated with all the wild and
sparkling intelligence of wonder, while flushed with recent fears, “why
do I not see among them some of those lovelier beings, whose habits
differ from theirs, and whom you call women? Why do they not worship
also; or have they a milder religion of their own?”--“_That_ religion,”
replied the stranger, “is not very favourable to those beings, of whom
you are the loveliest; it teaches that men shall have different
companions in the world of souls; nor does it clearly intimate that
women shall ever arrive there. Hence you may see some of these excluded
beings wandering amid those stones that designate the place of their
dead, repeating prayers for the dead whom they dare not hope to join;
and others, who are old and indigent, seated at the doors of the mosque,
reading aloud passages from a book lying on their knees, (which they
call the Koran), with the hope of soliciting alms, not of exciting
devotion.” At these desolating words, Immalee, who had in vain looked to
any of these systems for that hope or solace which her pure spirit and
vivid imagination alike thirsted for, felt a recoiling of the soul
unutterable at religion thus painted to her, and exhibiting only a
frightful picture of blood and cruelty, of the inversion of every
principle of nature, and the disruption of every tie of the heart.

“She flung herself on the ground, and exclaiming, “There is no God, if
there be none but theirs!” then, starting up as if to take a last view,
in the desperate hope that all was an illusion, she discovered a small
obscure building overshaded by palm-trees, and surmounted by a cross;
and struck by the unobtrusive simplicity of its appearance, and the
scanty number and peaceable demeanour of the few who were approaching
it, she exclaimed, that this must be a new religion, and eagerly
demanded its name and rites. The stranger evinced some uneasiness at the
discovery she had made, and testified still more reluctance to answer
the questions which it suggested; but they were pressed with such
restless and coaxing importunity, and the beautiful being who urged them
made such an artless transition from profound and meditative grief to
childish, yet intelligent curiosity, that it was not in man, or more or
less than man, to resist her.

“Her glowing features, as she turned them toward him, with an expression
half impatient, half pleading, were indeed those “(14)of a stilled
infant smiling through its tears.” Perhaps, too, another cause might
have operated on this prophet of curses, and made him utter a blessing
where he meant malediction; but into this we dare not inquire, nor will
it ever be fully known till the day when all secrets must be disclosed.
However it was, he felt himself compelled to tell her it was a new
religion, the religion of Christ, whose rites and worshippers she
beheld. “But what are the rites?” asked Immalee. “Do they murder their
children, or their parents, to prove their love to God? Do they hang
them on baskets to perish, or leave them on the banks of rivers to be
devoured by fierce and hideous animals?”--“The religion they profess
forbids that,” said the stranger, with reluctant truth; “it requires
them to honour their parents, and to cherish their children.”--“But why
do they not spurn from the entrance to their church those who do not
think as they do?”--“Because their religion enjoins them to be mild,
benevolent, and tolerant; and neither to reject or disdain those who
have not attained its purer light.”--“But why is there no splendour or
magnificence in their worship; nothing grand or attractive?”--“Because
they know that God cannot be acceptably worshipped but by pure hearts
and crimeless hands; and though their religion gives every hope to the
penitent guilty, it flatters none with false promises of external
devotion supplying the homage of the heart; or artificial and
picturesque religion standing in the place of that single devotion to
God, before whose throne, though the proudest temples erected to his
honour crumble into dust, the heart burns on the altar still, an
inextinguishable and acceptable victim.”

  (14) I trust the absurdity of this quotation here will be forgiven for
  its beauty. It is borrowed from Miss Baillie, the first dramatic poet
  of the age.

“As he spoke, (perhaps constrained by a higher power), Immalee bowed her
glowing face to the earth, and then raising it with the look of a
new-born angel, exclaimed, “Christ shall be my God, and I will be a
Christian!” Again she bowed in the deep prostration which indicates the
united submission of soul and body, and remained in this attitude of
absorption so long, that, when she rose, she did not perceive the
absence of her companion.--“He fled murmuring, and with him fled the
shades of night.”




CHAPTER XVII.

    “Why, I did say something about getting a licence from the Cadi.”

    BLUE BEARD.


“The visits of the stranger were interrupted for some time, and when he
returned, it seemed as if their purpose was no longer the same. He no
longer attempted to corrupt her principles, or sophisticate her
understanding, or mystify her views of religion. On the latter subject
he was quite silent, seemed to regret he had ever touched on it, and not
all her restless avidity of knowledge, or caressing importunity of
manner, could extract from him another syllable on the subject. He
repayed her amply, however, by the rich, varied, and copious stores of a
mind, furnished with matter apparently beyond the power of human
experience to have collected, confined, as it is, within the limits of
threescore years and ten. But this never struck Immalee; she took “no
note of time;” and the tale of yesterday, or the record of past
centuries, were synchronized in a mind to which facts and dates were
alike unknown; and which was alike unacquainted with the graduating
shades of manner, and the linked progress of events.

“They often sat on the shore of the isle in the evening, where Immalee
always prepared a seat of moss for her visitor, and gazed together on
the blue deep in silence; for Immalee’s newly-awaked intellect and heart
felt that bankruptcy of language, which profound feeling will impress on
the most cultivated intellect, and which, in her case, was increased
alike by her innocence and her ignorance; and her visitor had perhaps
reasons still stronger for his silence. This silence, however, was often
broken. There was not a vessel that sailed in the distance which did not
suggest an eager question from Immalee, and did not draw a slow and
extorted reply from the stranger. His knowledge was immense, various,
and profound, (but this was rather a subject of delight than of
curiosity to his beautiful pupil); and from the Indian canoe, rowed by
naked natives, to the splendid, and clumsy, and ill-managed vessels of
the Rajahs, that floated like huge and gilded fish tumbling in uncouth
and shapeless mirth on the wave, to the gallant and well-manned vessels
of Europe, that came on like the gods of ocean bringing fertility and
knowledge, the discoveries of art, and the blessings of civilization,
wherever their sails were unfurled and their anchors dropt,--he could
tell her all,--describe the destination of every vessel,--the feelings,
characters, and national habits of the many-minded inmates,--and enlarge
her knowledge to a degree which books never could have done; for
colloquial communication is always the most vivid and impressive medium,
and lips have a prescriptive right to be the first intelligencers in
instruction and in love.

“Perhaps this extraordinary being, with regard to whom the laws of
mortality and the feelings of nature seemed to be alike suspended, felt
a kind of sad and wild repose from the destiny that immitigably pursued
him, in the society of Immalee. We know not, and can never tell, what
sensations her innocent and helpless beauty inspired him with, but the
result was, that he ceased to regard her as his victim; and, when seated
beside her listening to her questions, or answering them, seemed to
enjoy the few lucid intervals of his insane and morbid existence. Absent
from her, he returned to the world to torture and to tempt in the
mad-house where the Englishman Stanton was tossing on his straw----”

“Hold!” said Melmoth; “what name have you mentioned?”--“Have patience
with me, Senhor,” said Monçada, who did not like interruption; “have
patience, and you will find we are all beads strung on the same string.
Why should we jar against each other? our union is indissoluble.” He
proceeded with the story of the unhappy Indian, as recorded in the
parchments of Adonijah, which he had been compelled to copy, and of
which he was anxious to impress every line and letter on his listener,
to substantiate his own extraordinary story.

“When absent from her, his purpose was what I have described; but while
present, that purpose seemed suspended; he gazed often on her with eyes
whose wild and fierce lustre was quenched in a dew that he hastily wiped
away, and gazed on her again. While he sat near her on the flowers she
had collected for him,--while he looked on those timid and rosy lips
that waited his signal to speak, like buds that did not dare to blow
till the sun shone on them,--while he heard accents issue from those
lips which he felt it would be as impossible to pervert as it would be
to teach the nightingale blasphemy,--he sunk down beside her, passed his
hand over his livid brow, and, wiping off some cold drops, thought for a
moment he was not the Cain of the moral world, and that the brand was
effaced,--at least for a moment. The habitual and impervious gloom of
his soul soon returned. He felt again the gnawings of the worm that
never dies, and the scorchings of the fire that is never to be quenched.
He turned the fatal light of his dark eyes on the only being who never
shrunk from their expression, for her innocence made her fearless. He
looked intensely at her, while rage, despair, and pity, convulsed his
heart; and as he beheld the confiding and conciliating smile with which
this gentle being met a look that might have withered the heart of the
boldest within him,--a Semele gazing in supplicating love on the
lightnings that were to blast her,--one human drop dimmed their
portentous lustre, as its softened rays fell on her. Turning fiercely
away, he flung his view on the ocean, as if to find, in the sight of
human life, some fuel for the fire that was consuming his vitals. The
ocean, that lay calm and bright before them as a sea of jasper, never
reflected two more different countenances, or sent more opposite
feelings to two hearts. Over Immalee’s, it breathed that deep and
delicious reverie, which those forms of nature that unite tranquillity
and profundity diffuse over souls whose innocence gives them a right to
an unmingled and exclusive enjoyment of nature. None but crimeless and
unimpassioned minds ever truly enjoyed earth, ocean, and heaven. At our
first transgression, nature expels us, as it did our first parents, from
her paradise for ever.

“To the stranger the view was fraught with far different visions. He
viewed it as a tiger views a forest abounding with prey; there might be
the storm and the wreck; or, if the elements were obstinately calm,
there might be the gaudy and gilded pleasure barge, in which a Rajah and
the beautiful women of his haram were inhaling the sea breeze under
canopies of silk and gold, overturned by the unskilfulness of their
rowers, and their plunge, and struggle, and dying agony, amid the smile
and beauty of the calm ocean, produce one of those contrasts in which
his fierce spirit delighted. Or, were even this denied, he could watch
the vessels as they floated by, and, from the skiff to the huge trader,
be sure that every one bore its freight of woe and crime. There came on
the European vessels full of the passions and crimes of another
world,--of its sateless cupidity, remorseless cruelty, its intelligence,
all awake and ministrant in the cause of its evil passions, and its very
refinement operating as a stimulant to more inventive indulgence, and
more systematized vice. He saw them approach to traffic for “gold, and
silver, and the souls of men;”--to grasp, with breathless rapacity, the
gems and precious produce of those luxuriant climates, and deny the
inhabitants the rice that supported their inoffensive existence;--to
discharge the load of their crimes, their lust and their avarice, and
after ravaging the land, and plundering the natives, depart, leaving
behind them famine, despair, and execration; and bearing with them back
to Europe, blasted constitutions, inflamed passions, ulcerated hearts,
and consciences that could not endure the extinction of a light in their
sleeping apartment.

“Such were the objects for which he watched; and one evening, when
solicited by Immalee’s incessant questions about the worlds to which the
vessels were hastening, or to which they were returning, he gave her a
description of the world, after his manner, in a spirit of mingled
derision, malignity, and impatient bitterness at the innocence of her
curiosity. There was a mixture of fiendish acrimony, biting irony, and
fearful truth, in his wild sketch, which was often interrupted by the
cries of astonishment, grief, and terror, from his hearer. “They come,”
said he, pointing to the European vessels, “from a world where the only
study of the inhabitants is how to increase their own sufferings, and
those of others, to the utmost possible degree; and, considering they
have only had 4000 years practice at the task, it must be allowed they
are tolerable proficients.”--“But is it possible?”--“You shall judge. In
aid, doubtless, of this desirable object, they have been all originally
gifted with imperfect constitutions and evil passions; and, not to be
ungrateful, they pass their lives in contriving how to augment the
infirmities of the one, and aggravate the acerbities of the other. They
are not like you, Immalee, a being who breathes amid roses, and subsists
only on the juices of fruits, and the lymph of the pure element. In
order to render their thinking powers more gross, and their spirits more
fiery, they devour animals, and torture from abused vegetables a drink,
that, without quenching thirst, has the power of extinguishing reason,
inflaming passion, and shortening life--the best result of all--for life
under such circumstances owes its only felicity to the shortness of its
duration.”

“Immalee shuddered at the mention of animal food, as the most delicate
European would at the mention of a cannibal feast; and while tears
trembled in her beautiful eyes, she turned them wistfully on her
peacocks with an expression that made the stranger smile. “Some,” said
he, by way of consolation, “have a taste by no means so
sophisticated,--they content themselves at their need with the flesh of
their fellow-creatures; and as human life is always miserable, and
animal life never so, (except from elementary causes), one would imagine
this the most humane and salutary way of at once gratifying the
appetite, and diminishing the mass of human suffering. But as these
people pique themselves on their ingenuity in aggravating the sufferings
of their situation, they leave thousands of human beings yearly to
perish by hunger and grief, and amuse themselves in feeding on animals,
whom, by depriving of existence, they deprive of the only pleasure their
condition has allotted them. When they have thus, by unnatural diet and
outrageous stimulation, happily succeeded in corrupting infirmity into
disease, and exasperating passion into madness, they proceed to exhibit
the proofs of their success, with an expertness and consistency truly
admirable. They do not, like you, Immalee, live in the lovely
independence of nature--lying on the earth, and sleeping with all the
eyes of heaven unveiled to watch you--treading the same grass till your
light step feels a friend in every blade it presses--and conversing with
flowers, till you feel yourself and them children of the united family
of nature, whose mutual language of love you have almost learned to
speak to each other--no, to effect their purpose, their food, which is
of itself poison, must be rendered more fatal by the air they inhale;
and therefore the more civilized crowd all together into a space which
their own respiration, and the exhalation of their bodies, renders
pestilential, and which gives a celerity inconceivable to the
circulation of disease and mortality. Four thousand of them will live
together in a space smaller than the last and lightest colonnade of your
young banyan-tree, in order, doubtless, to increase the effects of fœtid
air, artificial heat, unnatural habits, and impracticable exercise. The
result of these judicious precautions is just what may be guessed. The
most trifling complaint becomes immediately infectious, and, during the
ravages of the pestilence, which this habit generates, ten thousand
lives a-day are the customary sacrifice to the habit of living in
cities.”--“But they die in the arms of those they love,” said Immalee,
whose tears flowed fast at this recital; “and is not that better than
even _life_ in solitude,--as mine was before I beheld you?”

“The stranger was too intent on his description to heed her. “To these
cities they resort nominally for security and protection, but really for
the sole purpose to which their existence is devoted,--that of
aggravating its miseries by every ingenuity of refinement. For example,
those who live in uncontrasted and untantalized misery, can hardly feel
it--suffering becomes their habit, and they feel no more jealousy of
their situation than the bat, who clings in blind and famishing
stupefaction to the cleft of a rock, feels of the situation of the
butterfly, who drinks of the dew, and bathes in the bloom of every
flower. But the people of the _other worlds_ have invented, by means of
living in cities, a new and singular mode of aggravating human
wretchedness--that of contrasting it with the wild and wanton excess of
superfluous and extravagant splendour.”

“Here the stranger had incredible difficulty to make Immalee comprehend
how there could be an unequal division of the means of existence; and
when he had done his utmost to explain it to her, she continued to
repeat, (her white finger on her scarlet lip, and her small foot beating
the moss), in a kind of pouting inquietude, “Why should some have more
than they can eat, and others nothing to eat?”--“This,” continued the
stranger, “is the most exquisite refinement on that art of torture which
those beings are so expert in--to place misery by the side of
opulence--to bid the wretch who dies for want feed on the sound of the
splendid equipages which shake his hovel as they pass, but leave no
relief behind--to bid the industrious, the ingenious, and the
imaginative, starve, while bloated mediocrity pants from excess--to bid
the dying sufferer feel that life might be prolonged by one drop of that
exciting liquor, which, wasted, produces only sickness or madness in
those whose lives it undermines;--to do this is their principal object,
and it is fully attained. The sufferer through whose rags the wind of
winter blows, like arrows lodging in every pore--whose tears freeze
before they fall--whose soul is as dreary as the night under whose cope
his resting-place must be--whose glued and clammy lips are unable to
receive the food which famine, lying like a burning coal at his vitals,
craves--and who, amid the horrors of a houseless winter, might prefer
its desolation to that of the den that abuses the name of home--without
food--without light--where the howlings of the storm are answered by the
fiercer cries of hunger--and he must stumble to his murky and strawless
nook over the bodies of his children, who have sunk on the floor, not
for rest, but despair. Such a being, is he not sufficiently miserable?”

“Immalee’s shudderings were her only answer, (though of many parts of
his description she had a very imperfect idea). “No, he is not enough so
yet,” pursued the stranger, pressing the picture on her; “let his steps,
that know not where they wander, conduct him to the gates of the
affluent and the luxurious--let him feel that plenty and mirth are
removed from him but by the interval of a wall, and yet more distant
than if severed by worlds--let him feel that while _his_ world is
darkness and cold, the eyes of those within are aching with the blaze of
light, and hands relaxed by artificial heat, are soliciting with fans
the refreshment of a breeze--let him feel that every groan he utters is
answered by a song or a laugh--and let him die on the steps of the
mansion, while his last conscious pang is aggravated by the thought,
that the price of the hundredth part of the luxuries that lie untasted
before heedless beauty and sated epicurism, would have protracted his
existence, while it poisons theirs--let him _die of want on the
threshold of a banquet-hall_, and then admire with me the ingenuity that
displays itself in this new combination of misery. The inventive
activity of the people of the world, in the multiplication of calamity,
is inexhaustibly fertile in resources. Not satisfied with diseases and
famine, with sterility of the earth, and tempests of the air, they must
have laws and marriages, and kings and tax-gatherers, and wars and
fetes, and every variety of artificial misery inconceivable to you.”

“Immalee, overpowered by this torrent of words, to her unintelligible
words, in vain asked a connected explanation of them. The demon of his
superhuman misanthropy had now fully possessed him, and not even the
tones of a voice as sweet as the strings of David’s harp, had power to
expel the evil one. So he went on flinging about his fire-brands and
arrows, and then saying, “Am I not in sport? These people(15),” said he,
“have made unto themselves kings, that is, beings whom they voluntarily
invest with the privilege of draining, by taxation, whatever wealth
their vices have left to the rich, and whatever means of subsistence
their want has left to the poor, till their extortion is cursed from the
castle to the cottage--and this to support a few pampered favourites,
who are harnessed by silken reins to the car, which they drag over the
prostrate bodies of the multitude. Sometimes exhausted by the monotony
of perpetual fruition, which has no parallel even in the monotony of
suffering, (for the latter has at least the excitement of hope, which is
for ever denied to the former), they amuse themselves by making war,
that is, collecting the greatest number of human beings that can be
bribed to the task, to cut the throats of a less, equal, or greater
number of beings, bribed in the same manner for the same purpose. These
creatures have not the least cause of enmity to each other--they do not
know, they never beheld each other. Perhaps they might, under other
circumstances, wish each other well, as far as human malignity would
suffer them; but from the moment they are hired for legalized massacre,
hatred is their duty, and murder their delight. The man who would feel
reluctance to destroy the reptile that crawls in his path, will equip
himself with metals fabricated for the purpose of destruction, and smile
to see it stained with the blood of a being, whose existence and
happiness he would have sacrificed his own to promote, under other
circumstances. So strong is this habit of aggravating misery under
artificial circumstances, that it has been known, when in a sea-fight a
vessel has blown up, (here a long explanation was owed to Immalee, which
may be spared the reader), the people of that world have plunged into
the water to save, at the risk of their own lives, the lives of those
with whom they were grappling amid fire and blood a moment before, and
whom, though they would sacrifice to their passions, their pride refused
to sacrifice to the elements.”--“Oh that is beautiful!--that is
glorious!” said Immalee, clasping her white hands; “I could bear all you
describe to see that sight!”

  (15) As, by a mode of criticism equally false and unjust, the worst
  sentiments of my worst characters, (from the ravings of Bertram to the
  blasphemies of Cardonneau), have been represented as _my own_, I must
  here trespass so far on the patience of the reader as to assure him,
  that the sentiments ascribed to the stranger are diametrically
  opposite to mine, and that I have purposely put them into the mouth of
  an agent of the enemy of mankind.

“Her smile of innocent delight, her spontaneous burst of high-toned
feeling, had the usual effect of adding a darker shade to the frown of
the stranger, and a sterner curve to the repulsive contraction of his
upper lip, which was never raised but to express hostility or contempt.

“But what do the kings do?” said Immalee, “while they are making men
kill each other for nothing?”--“You are ignorant, Immalee,” said the
stranger, “very ignorant, or you would not have said it was for
_nothing_. Some of them fight for ten inches of barren sand--some for
the dominion of the salt wave--some for any thing--and some for
nothing--but all for pay and poverty, and occasional excitement, and the
love of action, and the love of change, and the dread of home, and the
consciousness of evil passions, and the hope of death, and the
admiration of the showy dress in which they are to perish. The best of
the jest is, they contrive not only to reconcile themselves to these
cruel and wicked absurdities, but to dignify them with the most imposing
names their perverted language supplies--the names of fame, of glory, of
recording memory, and admiring posterity.

“Thus a wretch whom want, idleness, or intemperance, drives to this
reckless and heart-withering business,--who leaves his wife and children
to the mercy of strangers, or to famish, (terms nearly synonimous), the
moment he has assumed the blushing badge that privileges massacre,
becomes, in the imagination of this intoxicated people, the defender of
his country, entitled to her gratitude and to her praise. The idle
stripling, who hates the cultivation of intellect, and despises the
meanness of occupation, feels, perhaps, a taste for arraying his person
in colours as gaudy as the parrot’s or the peacock’s; and this
effeminate propensity is baptised by the prostituted name of the love of
glory--and this complication of motives borrowed from vanity and from
vice, from the fear of distress, the wantonness of idleness, and the
appetite for mischief, finds one convenient and sheltering appellation
in the single sound--patriotism. And those beings who never knew one
generous impulse, one independent feeling, ignorant of either the
principles or the justice of the cause for which they contend, and
wholly uninterested in the result, except so far as it involves the
concerns of their own vanity, cupidity, and avarice, are, while living,
hailed by the infatuated world as its benefactors, and when dead,
canonized as its martyrs. He died in his country’s cause, is the epitaph
inscribed by the rash hand of indiscriminating eulogy on the grave of
ten thousand, who had ten thousand different motives for their choice
and their fate,--who might have lived to be their country’s enemies if
they had not _happened_ to fall in her defence,--and whose love of their
country, if fairly analysed, was, under its various forms of vanity,
restlessness, the love of tumult, or the love of show--purely love of
themselves. There let them rest--nothing but the wish to disabuse their
idolaters, who prompt the sacrifice, and then applaud the victim they
have made, could have tempted me to dwell thus long on beings as
mischievous in their lives, as they are insignificant in their death.

“Another amusement of these people, so ingenious in multiplying the
sufferings of their destiny, is what they call law. They pretend to find
in this a security for their persons and their properties--with how much
justice, their own felicitous experience must inform them! Of the
security it gives to the latter, judge, Immalee, when I tell you, that
you might spend your life in their courts, without being able to prove
that those roses you have gathered and twined in your hair were your
own--that you might starve for this day’s meal, while proving your right
to a property which must incontestibly be yours, on the condition of
your being able to fast on a few years, and survive to enjoy it--and
that, finally, with the sentiments of all upright men, the opinions of
the judges of the land, and the fullest conviction of your own
conscience in your favour, you cannot obtain the possession of what you
and all feel to be your own, while your antagonist can start an
objection, purchase a fraud, or invent a lie. So pleadings go on, and
years are wasted, and property consumed, and hearts broken,--and law
triumphs. One of its most admirable triumphs is in that ingenuity by
which it contrives to convert a difficulty into an impossibility, and
punish a man for not doing what it has rendered impracticable for him to
do.

“When he is unable to pay his debts, it deprives him of liberty and
credit, to insure that inability still further; and while destitute
alike of the means of subsistence, or the power of satisfying his
creditors, he is enabled, by this righteous arrangement, to console
himself, at least, with the reflection, that he can injure his creditor
as much as he has suffered from him--that certain loss is the reward of
immitigable cruelty--and that, while he famishes in prison, the page in
which his debt is recorded rots away faster than his body; and the angel
of death, with one obliterating sweep of his wing, cancels misery and
debt, and presents, grinning in horrid triumph, the release of debtor
and debt, signed by a hand that makes the judges tremble on their
seats.”--“But they have religion,” said the poor Indian, trembling at
this horrible description; “they have that religion which you shewed
me--its mild and peaceful spirit--its quietness and resignation--no
blood--no cruelty.”--“Yes,--true,” said the stranger, with some
reluctance, “they have religion; for in their zeal for suffering, they
feel the torments of one world not enough, unless aggravated by the
terrors of another. They have such a religion, but what use have they
made of it? Intent on their settled purpose of discovering misery
wherever it could be traced, and inventing it where it could not, they
have found, even in the pure pages of that book, which, they presume to
say, contains their title to peace on earth, and happiness hereafter, a
right to hate, plunder, and murder each other. Here they have been
compelled to exercise an extraordinary share of perverted ingenuity. The
book contains nothing but what is good, and evil must be the minds, and
hard the labour of those evil minds, to extort a tinge from it to colour
their pretensions withal. But mark, in pursuance of their great object,
(the aggravation of general misery), mark how subtilly they have
wrought. They call themselves by various names, to excite passions
suitable to the names they bear. Thus some forbid the perusal of that
book to their disciples, and others assert, that from the exclusive
study of its pages alone, can the hope of salvation be learned or
substantiated. It is singular, however, that with all their ingenuity,
they have never been able to extract a subject of difference from the
_essential_ contents of that book, to which they all appeal--so they
proceed after their manner.

“They never dare to dispute that it contains irresistible
injunctions,----that those who believe in it should live in habits of
peace, benevolence, and harmony,--that they should love each other in
prosperity, and assist each other in adversity. They dare not deny that
the spirit that book inculcates and inspires, is a spirit whose fruits
are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, mildness, and truth. On these
points they never presumed to differ.--They are too plain to be denied,
so they contrive to make matter of difference out of the various habits
they wear; and they cut each other’s throats for the love of God, on the
important subject(16), whether their jackets should be red or white--or
whether their priests should be arrayed in silk ribbons(17), or white
linen(18), or black household garments(19)--or whether they should
immerse their children in water, or sprinkle them with a few drops of
it--or whether they should partake of the memorials of the death of him
they all profess to love, standing or on their knees--or---- But I weary
you with this display of human wickedness and absurdity. One point is
plain, they all agree that the language of the book is, “Love one
another,” while they all translate that language, “Hate one another.”
But as they can find neither materials or excuse from that book, they
search for them in their own minds,--and there they are never at a loss,
for human minds are inexhaustible in malignity and hostility; and when
they borrow the name of that book to sanction them, the deification of
their passions becomes a duty, and their worst impulses are hallowed and
practised as virtues.”--“Are there no parents or children in these
horrible worlds?” said Immalee, turning her tearful eyes on this
traducer of humanity; “none that love each other as I loved the tree
under which I was first conscious of existence, or the flowers that grew
with me?”--“Parents?--children?” said the stranger; “Oh yes! There are
fathers who instruct their sons----” And his voice was lost--he
struggled to recover it.

  (16) The Catholics and Protestants were thus distinguished in the wars
  of the League.

  (17) Catholics.

  (18) Protestants.

  (19) Dissenters.

“After a long pause, he said, “There are some kind parents among those
sophisticated people.”--“And who are they?” said Immalee, whose heart
throbbed spontaneously at the mention of kindliness.--“Those,” said the
stranger, with a withering smile, “who murder their children at the hour
of their birth, or, by medical art, dismiss them before they have seen
the light; and, in so doing, they give the only credible evidence of
parental affection.”

“He ceased, and Immalee remained silent in melancholy meditation on what
she had heard. The acrid and searing irony of his language had made no
impression on one with whom “speech was truth,” and who could have no
idea why a circuitous mode of conveying meaning could be adopted, when
even a direct one was often attended with difficulty to herself. But she
could understand, that he had spoken much of evil and of suffering,
names unknown to her before she beheld him, and she turned on him a
glance that seemed at once to thank and reproach him for her painful
initiation into the mysteries of a new existence. She had, indeed,
tasted of the tree of knowledge, and her eyes were opened, but its fruit
was bitter to her taste, and her looks conveyed a kind of mild and
melancholy gratitude, that would have wrung the heart for giving its
first lesson of pain to the heart of a being so beautiful, so gentle,
and so innocent. The stranger marked this blended expression, and
exulted.

“He had distorted life thus to her imagination, perhaps with the purpose
of terrifying her from a nearer view of it; perhaps in the wild hope of
keeping her for ever in this solitude, where he might sometimes see her,
and catch, from the atmosphere of purity that surrounded her, the only
breeze that floated over the burning desert of his own existence. This
hope was strengthened by the obvious impression his discourse had made
on her. The sparkling intelligence,--the breathless curiosity,--the
vivid gratitude of her former expression,--were all extinguished, and
her down cast and thoughtful eyes were full of tears.

“Has my conversation wearied you, Immalee?” said he.--“It has grieved
me, yet I wish to listen still,” answered the Indian. “I love to hear
the murmur of the stream, though the crocodile may be beneath the
waves.”--“Perhaps you wish to encounter the people of this world, so
full of crime and misfortune.”--“I do, for it is the world you came
from, and when you return to it all will be happy but me.”--“And is it,
then, in my power to confer happiness?” said her companion; “is it for
this purpose I wander among mankind?” A mingled and indefinable
expression of derision, malevolence, and despair, overspread his
features, as he added, “You do me too much honour, in devising for me an
occupation so mild and so congenial to my spirit.”

“Immalee, whose eyes were averted, did not see this expression, and she
replied, “I know not, but you have taught me the joy of grief; before I
saw you I only smiled, but since I saw you, I weep, and my tears are
delicious. Oh! they are far different from those I shed for the setting
sun, or the faded rose! And yet I know not--” And the poor Indian,
oppressed by emotions she could neither understand or express, clasped
her hands on her bosom, as if to hide the secret of its new
palpitations, and, with the instinctive diffidence of her purity,
signified the change of her feelings, by retiring a few steps from her
companion, and casting on the earth eyes which could contain their tears
no longer. The stranger appeared troubled,--an emotion new to himself
agitated him for a moment,--then a smile of self-disdain curled his lip,
as if he reproached himself for the indulgence of human feeling even for
a moment. Again his features relaxed, as he turned to the bending and
averted form of Immalee, and he seemed like one conscious of agony of
soul himself, yet inclined to sport with the agony of another’s. This
union of inward despair and outward levity is not unnatural. Smiles are
the legitimate offspring of happiness, but laughter is often the
misbegotten child of madness, that mocks its parent to her face. With
such an expression he turned towards her, and asked, “But what is your
meaning, Immalee?”--A long pause followed this question, and at length
the Indian answered, “I know not,” with that natural and delicious art
which teaches the sex to disclose their meaning in words that seem to
contradict it. “I know not,” means, “I know too well.” Her companion
understood this, and enjoyed his anticipated triumph. “And why do your
tears flow, Immalee?”--“I know not,” said the poor Indian, and her tears
flowed faster at the question.

“At these words, or rather at these tears, the stranger forgot himself
for a moment. He felt that melancholy triumph which the conqueror is
unable to enjoy; that triumph which announces a victory over the
weakness of others, obtained at the expence of a greater weakness in
ourselves. A human feeling, in spite of him, pervaded his whole soul, as
he said, in accents of involuntary softness, “What would you have me do,
Immalee?” The difficulty of speaking a language that might be at once
intelligible and reserved,--that might convey her wishes without
betraying her heart,--and the unknown nature of her new emotions, made
Immalee faulter long before she could answer, “Stay with me,--return not
to that world of evil and sorrow.--Here the flowers will always bloom,
and the sun be as bright as on the first day I beheld you.--Why will you
go back to the world to think and to be unhappy?” The wild and
discordant laugh of her companion, startled and silenced her. “Poor
girl,” he exclaimed, with that mixture of bitterness and commiseration,
that at once terrifies and humiliates; “and is this the destiny I am to
fulfil?--to listen to the chirping of birds, and watch the opening of
buds? Is this to be my lot?” and with another wild burst of unnatural
laughter, he flung away the hand which Immalee had extended to him as
she had finished her simple appeal.--“Yes, doubtless, I am well fitted
for such a fate, and such a partner. Tell me,” he added, with still
wilder fierceness, “tell me from what line of my features,--from what
accent of my voice,--from what sentiment of my discourse, have you
extracted the foundation of a hope that insults me with the view of
felicity?” Immalee, who might have replied, “I understand a fury in your
words, but not your words,” had yet sufficient aid from her maiden
pride, and female penetration, to discover that she was rejected by the
stranger; and a brief emotion of indignant grief struggled with the
tenderness of her exposed and devoted heart. She paused a moment, and
then checking her tears, said, in her firmest tones, “Go, then, to your
world,--since you wish to be unhappy--go!--Alas! it is not necessary to
go there to be unhappy, for I must be so here. Go,--but take with you
these roses, for they will all wither when you are gone!--take with you
these shells, for I shall no longer love to wear them when you no longer
see them!” And as she spoke, with simple, but emphatic action, she
untwined from her bosom and hair the shells and flowers with which they
were adorned, and threw them at his feet; then turning to throw one
glance of proud and melancholy grief at him, she was retiring. “Stay,
Immalee,--stay, and hear me for a moment,” said the stranger; and he
would, at that moment, have perhaps discovered the ineffable and
forbidden secret of his destiny, but Immalee, in silence, which her look
of profound grief made eloquent, shook sadly her averted head, and
departed.




CHAPTER XVIII.

    Miseram me omnia terrent, et maris sonitus, et scopuli, et solitudo,
    et sanctitudo Apollinis.

    LATIN PLAY.


“Many days elapsed before the stranger revisited the isle. How he was
occupied, or what feelings agitated him in the interval, it would be
beyond human conjecture to discover. Perhaps he sometimes exulted in the
misery he had inflicted,--perhaps he sometimes pitied it. His stormy
mind was like an ocean that had swallowed a thousand wrecks of gallant
ships, and now seemed to dally with the loss of a little slender skiff,
that could hardly make way on its surface in the profoundest calm.
Impelled, however, by malignity, or tenderness, or curiosity, or
weariness of artificial life, so vividly contrasted by the unadulterated
existence of Immalee, into whose pure elements nothing but flowers and
fragrance, the sparkling of the heavens, and the odours of earth, had
transfused their essence--or, possibly, by a motive more powerful than
all,--_his own will_; which, never analysed, and hardly ever confessed
to be the ruling principle of our actions, governs nine-tenths of
them.--He returned to the shore of the haunted isle, the name by which
it was distinguished by those who knew not how to classify the new
goddess who was supposed to inhabit it, and who were as much puzzled by
this new specimen in their theology, as Linnæus himself could have been
by a non-descript in botany. Alas! the varieties in moral botany far
exceed the wildest anomalies of those in the natural. However it was,
the stranger returned to the isle. But he had to traverse many paths,
where human foot but his had never been, and to rend away branches that
seemed to tremble at a human touch, and to cross streams into which no
foot but his had ever been dipped, before he could discover where
Immalee had concealed herself.

“Concealment, however, was not in her thoughts. When he found her, she
was leaning against a rock; the ocean was pouring its eternal murmur of
waters at her feet; she had chosen the most desolate spot she could
find;--there was neither flower or shrub near her;--the calcined rocks,
the offspring of volcano--the restless roar of the sea, whose waves
almost touched her small foot, that seemed by its heedless protrusion at
once to court and neglect danger--these objects were all that surrounded
her. The first time he had beheld her, she was embowered amid flowers
and odours, amid all the glorious luxuries of vegetable and animal
nature; the roses and the peacocks seemed emulous which should expand
their leaves or their plumes, as a shade to that loveliness which seemed
to hover between them, alternately borrowing the fragrance of the one,
and the hues of the other. Now she stood as if deserted even by nature,
whose child she was; the rock was her resting-place, and the ocean
seemed the bed where she purposed to rest; she had no shells on her
bosom, no roses in her hair--her character seemed to have changed with
her feelings; she no longer loved all that is beautiful in nature; she
seemed, by an anticipation of her destiny, to make alliance with all
that is awful and ominous. She had begun to love the rocks and the
ocean, the thunder of the wave, and the sterility of the sand,--awful
objects, the incessant recurrence of whose very sound seems intended to
remind us of grief and of eternity. Their restless monotony of
repetition, corresponds with the beatings of a heart which asks its
destiny from the phenomena of nature, and feels the answer is--“Misery.”

“Those who love may seek the luxuries of the garden, and inhale added
intoxication from its perfumes, which seem the offerings of nature on
that altar which is already erected and burning in the heart of the
worshipper;--but let those who _have_ loved seek the shores of the
ocean, and they shall have their answer too.

“There was a sad and troubled air about her, as she stood so lonely,
that seemed at once to express the conflict of her internal emotions,
and to reflect the gloom and agitation of the physical objects around
her; for nature was preparing for one of those awful convulsions--one of
those abortive throes of desolation, that seems to announce a more
perfect wrath to come; and while it blasts the vegetation, and burns up
the soil of some visited portion, seems to proclaim in the murmur of its
receding thunders, that it will return in that day, when the universe
shall pass away as a scroll, and the elements melt with fervent heat,
and return to fulfil the dreadful promise, which its partial and
initiatory devastation has left incomplete. Is there a peal of thunder
that does not mutter a menace, “For _me_, the dissolution of the world
is reserved, I depart, but I shall return?” Is there a flash of
lightning that does not say, _visibly_, if not audibly, “Sinner, I
cannot now penetrate the recesses of your soul; but how will you
encounter my glare, when the hand of the judge is armed with me, and my
penetrating glance displays you to the view of assembled worlds?”

“The evening was very dark; heavy clouds, rolling on like the forces of
an hostile army, obscured the horizon from east to west. There was a
bright but ghastly blue in the heaven above, like that in the eye of the
dying, where the last forces of life are collected, while its powers are
rapidly forsaking the frame, and feeling their extinguishment must
shortly be. There was not a breath of air to heave the ocean,--the trees
drooped without a whisper to woo their branches or their buds,--the
birds had retired, with that instinct which teaches them to avoid the
fearful encounter of the elements, and nestled with cowering wings and
drooping heads among their favourite trees. There was not a human sound
in the isle; the very rivulet seemed to tremble at its own tinklings,
and its small waves flowed as if a subterranean hand arrested and
impeded their motion. Nature, in these grand and terrific operations,
seems in some degree to assimilate herself to a parent, whose most
fearful denunciations are preceded by an awful silence, or rather to a
judge, whose final sentence is _felt_ with less horror than the pause
that intervenes before it is pronounced.

“Immalee gazed on the awful scene by which she was surrounded, without
any emotion derived from physical causes. To her, light and darkness had
hitherto been the same; she loved the sun for its lustre, and the
lightning for its transitory brilliancy, and the ocean for its sonorous
music, and the tempest for the agitation which it gave to the trees,
under whose bending and welcoming shadow she danced, in time kept by the
murmur of their leaves, that hung low, as if to crown their votarist.
And she loved the night, when all was still, but what she was accustomed
to call the music of a thousand streams, that made the stars rise from
their beds, to sparkle and nod to that wild melody.

“Such she had been. Now, her eye was intently fixed on the declining
light, and the approaching darkness,--that preternatural gloom, that
seems to say to the brightest and most beautiful of the works of God,
“Give place to me, thou shalt shine no more.”

“The darkness increased, and the clouds collected like an army that had
mustered its utmost force, and stood in obdured and collected strength
against the struggling light of heaven. A broad, red, and dusky line of
gloomy light, gathered round the horizon, like an usurper watching the
throne of an abdicated sovereign, and expanding its portentous circle,
sent forth alternately flashes of lightning, pale and red;--the murmur
of the sea increased, and the arcades of the banyan-tree, that had
struck its patriarchal root not five hundred paces from where Immalee
stood, resounded the deep and almost unearthly murmur of the approaching
storm through all its colonnades; the primeval trunk rocked and groaned,
and the everlasting fibres seemed to withdraw their grasp from the
earth, and quiver in air at the sound. Nature, with every voice she
could inspire from earth, or air, or water, announced danger to her
children.

“That was the moment the stranger chose to approach Immalee; of danger
he was insensible, of fear he was unconscious; his miserable destiny had
exempted him from both, but what had it left him? No hope--but that of
plunging others into his own condemnation. No fear--but that his victim
might escape him. Yet with all his diabolical heartlessness, he _did_
feel some relentings of his human nature, as he beheld the young Indian;
her cheek was pale, but her eye was fixed, and her figure, turned from
him, (as if she preferred to encounter the tremendous rage of the
storm), seemed to him to say, “Let me fall into the hands of God, and
not into those of man.”

“This attitude, so unintentionally assumed by Immalee, and so little
expressive of her real feelings, restored all the malignant energies of
the stranger’s feelings; the former evil purposes of his heart, and the
habitual character of his dark and fiendish pursuit, rushed back on him.
Amid this contrasted scene of the convulsive rage of nature, and the
passive helplessness of her unsheltered loveliness, he felt a glow of
excitement, like that which pervaded him, when the fearful powers of his
“charmed life” enabled him to penetrate the cells of a madhouse, or the
dungeons of an Inquisition.

“He saw this pure being surrounded by the terrors of nature, and felt a
wild and terrible conviction, that though the lightning might blast her
in a moment, yet there was a bolt more burning and more fatal, which was
wielded by his own hand, and which, if he could aim it aright, must
transfix her very soul.

“Armed with all his malignity and all his power, he approached Immalee,
armed only with her purity, and standing like the reflected beam of the
last ray of light on whose extinction she was gazing. There was a
contrast in her form and her situation, that might have touched any
feelings but those of the wanderer.

“The light of her figure shining out amid the darkness that enveloped
her,--its undulating softness rendered still softer to the eye by the
rock against which it reclined,--its softness, brightness, and
flexibility, presenting a kind of playful hostility to the tremendous
aspect of nature overcharged with wrath and ruin.

“The stranger approached her unobserved; his steps were unheard amid the
rush of the ocean, and the deep, portentous murmur of the elements; but,
as he advanced, he heard sounds that perhaps operated on his feelings as
the whispers of Eve to her flowers on the organs of the serpent. Both
knew their power, and felt their time. Amid the fast approaching terrors
of a storm, more terrible than any she had ever witnessed, the poor
Indian, unconscious, or perhaps insensible of its dangers, was singing
her wild song of desperation and love to the echoes of the advancing
storm. Some words of this strain of despair and passion reached the ear
of the stranger. They were thus:

“The night is growing dark--but what is that to the darkness that his
absence has cast on my soul? The lightnings are glancing round me--but
what are they to the gleam of his eye when he parted from me in anger?

“I lived but in the light of his presence--why should I not die when
that light is withdrawn? Anger of the clouds, what have I to fear from
you? You may scorch me to dust, as I have seen you scorch the branches
of the eternal trees--but the trunk still remained, and my heart will be
his for ever.

“Roar on, terrible ocean! thy waves, which I cannot count, can never
wash his image from my soul,--thou dashest a thousand waves against a
rock, but the rock is unmoved--and so would be my heart amid the
calamities of the world with which he threatens me,--whose dangers I
never would have known but for him, and whose dangers for him I will
encounter.”

“She paused in her wild song, and then renewed it, regardless alike of
the terrors of the elements, and the possible presence of one whose
subtle and poisonous potency was more fatal than all the elements in
their united wrath.

“When we first met, my bosom was covered with roses--now it is shaded
with the dark leaves of the ocynum. When he saw me first, the living
things all loved me--now I care not whether they love me or not--I have
forgot to love them. When he came to the isle every night, I hoped the
moon would be bright--now I care not whether she rises or sets, whether
she is clouded or bright. Before he came, every thing loved me, and I
had more things to love than I could reckon by the hairs of my head--now
I feel I can love but one, and that one has deserted me. Since I have
seen him all things have changed. The flowers have not the colours they
once had--there is no music in the flow of the waters--the stars do not
smile on me from heaven as they did,--and I myself begin to love the
storm better than the calm.”

“As she ended her melancholy strain, she turned from the spot where the
increasing fury of the storm made it no longer possible for her to
stand, and turning, met the gaze of the stranger fixed on her. A
suffusion, the most rich and vivid, mantled over her from brow to bosom;
she did not utter her usual exclamation of joy at his sight, but, with
averted eyes and faultering step, followed him as he pointed her to seek
shelter amid the ruins of the pagoda. They approached it in silence;
and, amid the convulsions and fury of nature, it was singular to see two
beings walk on together without exchanging a word of apprehension, or
feeling a thought of danger,--the one armed by despair, the other by
innocence. Immalee would rather have sought the shelter of her favourite
banyan-tree, but the stranger tried to make her comprehend, that her
danger would be much greater there than in the spot he pointed out to
her. “Danger!” said the Indian, while a bright and wild smile irradiated
her features; “can there be danger when you are near me?”--“Is there,
then, no danger in my presence?--few have met me without dreading, and
without feeling it too!” and his countenance, as he spoke, grew darker
than the heaven at which he scowled. “Immalee,” he added, in a voice
still deeper and more thrilling, from the unwonted operation of human
emotion in its tones; “Immalee, you cannot be weak enough to believe
that I have power of controuling the elements? If I had,” he continued,
“by the heaven that is frowning at me, the first exertion of my power
should be to collect the most swift and deadly of the lightnings that
are hissing around us, and transfix you where you stand!”--“Me?”
repeated the trembling Indian, her cheek growing paler at his words, and
the voice in which they were uttered, than at the redoubling fury of the
storm, amid whose pauses she scarce heard them.--“Yes--you--you--lovely
as you are, and innocent, and pure, before a fire more deadly consumes
your existence, and drinks your heart-blood--before you are longer
exposed to a danger a thousand times more fatal than those with which
the elements menace you--the danger of my accursed and miserable
presence!”

“Immalee, unconscious of his meaning, but trembling with impassioned
grief at the agitation with which he spoke, approached him to soothe the
emotion of which she knew neither the name or the cause. Through the
fractures of the ruin the red and ragged lightnings disclosed, from time
to time, a glimpse of her figure,--her dishevelled hair,--her pallid and
appealing look,--her locked hands, and the imploring bend of her slight
form, as if she was asking pardon for a crime of which she was
unconscious,--and soliciting an interest in griefs not her own. All
around her wild, unearthly, and terrible,--the floor strewed with
fragments of stone, and mounds of sand,--the vast masses of ruined
architecture, whose formation seemed the work of no human hand, and
whose destruction appeared the sport of demons,--the yawning fissures of
the arched and ponderous roof, through which heaven darkened and blazed
alternately with a gloom that wrapt every thing, or a light more fearful
than that gloom.--All around her gave to her form, when it was momently
visible, a relief so strong and so touching, that it might have
immortalized the hand who had sketched her as the embodied presence of
an angel who had descended to the regions of woe and wrath,--of darkness
and of fire, on a message of reconciliation,--and descended in vain.

“The stranger threw on her, as she bent before him, one of those looks
that, but her own, no mortal eye had yet encountered unappalled. Its
expression seemed only to inspire a higher feeling of devotedness in the
victim. Perhaps an involuntary sentiment of terror mingled itself with
that expression, as this beautiful being sunk on her knees before her
writhing and distracted enemy; and, by the silent supplication of her
attitude, seemed to implore him to have mercy on himself. As the
lightnings flashed around her,--as the earth trembled beneath her white
and slender feet,--as the elements seemed all sworn to the destruction
of every living thing, and marched on from heaven to the accomplishment
of their purpose, with _Væ victis_ written and legible to every eye, in
the broad unfolded banners of that resplendent and sulphurous light that
seemed to display the _day of hell_--the feelings of the devoted Indian
seemed concentrated on the ill-chosen object of their idolatry alone.
Her graduating attitudes beautifully, but painfully, expressed the
submission of a female heart devoted to its object, to his frailties,
his passions, and his very crimes. When subdued by the image of power,
which the mind of man exercises over that of woman, that impulse becomes
irresistibly humiliating. Immalee had at first bowed to conciliate her
beloved, and her spirit had taught her frame that first inclination. In
her next stage of suffering, she had sunk on her knees, and, remaining
at a distance from him, she had trusted to this state of prostration to
produce that effect on his heart which those who love always hope
_compassion_ may produce,--that illegitimate child of love, often more
cherished than its parent. In her last efforts she clung to his
hand--she pressed her pale lips to it, and was about to utter a few
words--her voice failed her, but her fast dropping tears _spoke_ to the
hand which she held,--and its grasp, which for a moment convulsively
returned hers, and then flung it away, answered her.

“The Indian remained prostrate and aghast. “Immalee,” said the stranger,
in a struggling voice, “Do you wish me to tell you the feelings with
which my presence should inspire you?”--“No--no--no!” said the Indian,
applying her white and delicate hands to her ears, and then clasping
them on her bosom; “I feel them too much.”--“Hate me--curse me!” said
the stranger, not heeding her, and stamping till the reverberation of
his steps on the hollow and loosened stones almost contended with the
thunder; “hate me, for I hate you--I hate all things that live--all
things that are dead--I am myself hated and hateful!”--“Not by me,” said
the poor Indian, feeling, through the blindness of her tears, for his
averted hand. “Yes, by you, if you knew whose I am, and whom I serve.”
Immalee aroused her newly-excited energies of heart and intellect to
answer this appeal. “Who you are, I know not--but I am yours.--Whom you
serve, I know not--but him will _I_ serve--I will be yours for ever.
Forsake me if you will, but when I am dead, come back to this isle, and
say to yourself, The roses have bloomed and faded--the streams have
flowed and been dried up--the rocks have been removed from their
places--and the lights of heaven have altered in their courses,--but
there was one who never changed, and she is not here!”

“As she spoke the enthusiasm of passion struggling with grief, she
added, “You have told me you possess the happy art of writing
thought.--Do not write one thought on my grave, for one word traced by
your hand would revive me. Do not weep, for one tear would make me live
again, perhaps to draw a tear from you.”--“Immalee!” said the stranger.
The Indian looked up, and, with a mingled feeling of grief, amazement,
and compunction, beheld him shed tears. The next moment he dashed them
away with the hand of despair; and, grinding his teeth, burst into that
wild shriek of bitter and convulsive laughter that announces the object
of its derision is ourselves.

“Immalee, whose feelings were almost exhausted, trembled in silence at
his feet. “Hear me, wretched girl!” he cried in tones that seemed
alternately tremulous with malignity and compassion, with habitual
hostility and involuntary softness; “hear me! I know the secret
sentiment you struggle with better than the innocent heart of which it
is the inmate knows it. Suppress, banish, destroy it. Crush it as you
would a young reptile before its growth had made it loathsome to the
eye, and poisonous to existence!”--“I never crushed even a reptile in my
life,” answered Immalee, unconscious that this matter-of-fact answer was
equally applicable in another sense. “You love, then,” said the
stranger; “but,” after a long and ominous pause, “do you know whom it is
you love?”--“You!” said the Indian, with that purity of truth that
consecrates the impulse it yields to, and would blush more for the
sophistications of art than the confidence of nature; “you! You have
taught me to think, to feel, and to weep.”--“And you love me for this?”
said her companion, with an expression half irony, half commiseration.
“Think, Immalee, for a moment, how unsuitable, how unworthy, is the
object of the feelings you lavish on him. A being unattractive in his
form, repulsive in his habits, separated from life and humanity by a
gulph impassable; a disinherited child of nature, who goes about to
curse or to tempt his more prosperous brethren; one who----what
withholds me from disclosing all?”

“At this moment a flash of such vivid and terrific brightness as no
human sight could sustain, gleamed through the ruins, pouring through
every fissure instant and intolerable light. Immalee, overcome by terror
and emotion, remained on her knees, her hands closely clasped over her
aching eyes.

“For a few moments that she remained thus, she thought she heard other
sounds near her, and that the stranger was answering a voice that spoke
to him. She heard him say, as the thunder rolled to a distance, “This
hour is mine, not thine--begone, and trouble me not.” When she looked up
again, all trace of human emotion was gone from his expression. The dry
and burning eye of despair that he fixed on her, seemed never to have
owned a tear; the hand with which he grasped her, seemed never to have
felt the flow of blood, or the throb of a pulse; amid the intense and
increasing heat of an atmosphere that appeared on fire, its touch was as
cold as that of the dead.

“Mercy!” cried the trembling Indian, as she in vain endeavoured to read
a human feeling in those eyes of stone, to which her own tearful and
appealing ones were uplifted--“mercy!” And while she uttered the word,
she knew not what she deprecated or dreaded.

“The stranger answered not a word, relaxed not a muscle; it seemed as if
he felt her not with the hands that grasped her,--as if he saw her not
with the eyes that glared fixedly and coldly on her. He bore, or rather
dragged, her to the vast arch that had once been the entrance to the
pagoda, but which, now shattered and ruinous, resembled more the
gulphing yawn of a cavern that harbours the inmates of the desert, than
a work wrought by the hands of man, and devoted to the worship of a
deity. “You have called for mercy,” said her companion, in a voice that
froze her blood even under the burning atmosphere, whose air she could
scarce respire. “You have cried for mercy, and mercy you shall have.
Mercy has not been dealt to me, but I have courted my horrible destiny,
and my reward is just and sure. Look forth, trembler--look forth,--I
command thee!” And he stamped with an air of authority and impatience
that completed the terror of the delicate and impassioned being who
shuddered in his grasp, and felt half-dead at his frown.

“In obedience to his command, she removed the long tresses of her auburn
hair, which had vainly swept, in luxuriant and fruitless redundance, the
rock on which the steps of him she adored had been fixed. With that
mixture of the docility of the child, and the mild submission of woman,
she attempted to comply with his demand, but her eyes, filled with
tears, could not encounter the withering horrors of the scene before
her. She wiped those brilliant eyes with hairs that were every day
bathed in the pure and crystal lymph, and seemed, as she tried to gaze
on the desolation, like some bright and shivering spirit, who, for its
further purification, or perhaps for the enlargement of the knowledge
necessary for its destination, is compelled to witness some evidence of
the Almighty’s wrath, unintelligible in its first operations, but
doubtless salutary in its final results.

“Thus looking and thus feeling, Immalee shudderingly approached the
entrance of that building, which, blending the ruins of nature with
those of art, seemed to announce the power of desolation over both, and
to intimate that the primeval rock, untouched and unmodulated by human
hands, and thrown upwards perhaps by some volcanic eruption, perhaps
deposited there by some meteoric discharge, and the gigantic columns of
stone, whose erection had been the work of two centuries,--were alike
dust beneath the feet of that tremendous conqueror, whose victories
alone are without noise and without resistance, and the progress of
whose triumph is marked by tears instead of blood.

“Immalee, as she gazed around her, felt, for the first time, terror at
the aspect of nature. Formerly, she had considered all its phenomena as
equally splendid or terrific. And her childish, though active
imagination, seemed to consecrate alike the sun-light and the storm, to
the devotion of a heart, on whose pure altar the flowers and the fires
of nature flung their undivided offering.

“But since she had seen the stranger, new emotions had pervaded her
young heart. She learned to weep and to fear; and perhaps she saw, in
the fearful aspect of the heavens, the developement of that mysterious
terror, which always trembles at the bottom of the hearts of those who
dare to love.

“How often does nature thus become an involuntary interpreter between us
and our feelings! Is the murmur of the ocean without a meaning?--Is the
roll of the thunder without a voice?--Is the blasted spot on which the
rage of both has been exhausted without its lesson?--Do not they all
tell us some mysterious secret, which we have in vain searched our
hearts for?--Do we not find in them, an answer to those questions with
which we are for ever importuning the mute oracle of our destiny?--Alas!
how deceitful and inadequate we feel the language of man, after love and
grief have made us acquainted with that of nature!--the only one,
perhaps, capable of a corresponding sign for those emotions, under which
all human expression faints. What a difference between _words without
meaning_, and that _meaning without words_, which the sublime phenomena
of nature, the rocks and the ocean, the moon and the twilight, convey to
those who have “ears to hear.”

“How eloquent of truth is nature in her very silence! How fertile of
reflections amid her profoundest desolations! But the desolation now
presented to the eyes of Immalee, was that which is calculated to cause
terror, not reflection. Earth and heaven, the sea and the dry land,
seemed mingling together, and about to replunge into chaos. The ocean,
deserting its eternal bed, dashed its waves, whose white surf gleamed
through the darkness, far into the shores of the isle. They came on like
the crests of a thousand warriors, plumed and tossing in their pride,
and, like them, perishing in the moment of victory. There was a fearful
inversion of the natural appearance of earth and sea, as if all the
barriers of nature were broken, and all her laws reversed.

“The waves deserting their station, left, from time to time, the sands
as dry as those of the desert; and the trees and shrubs tossed and
heaved in ceaseless agitation, like the waves of a midnight storm. There
was no light, but a livid grey that sickened the eye to behold, except
when the bright red lightning burst out like the eye of a fiend,
glancing over the work of ruin, and closing as it beheld it completed.

“Amid this scene stood two beings, one whose appealing loveliness seemed
to have found favour with the elements even in their wrath, and one
whose fearless and obdurate eye appeared to defy them. “Immalee,” he
cried, “is this a place or an hour to talk of love!--all nature is
appalled--heaven is dark--the animals have hid themselves--and the very
shrubs, as they wave and shrink, seem alive with terror.”--“It is an
hour to implore protection,” said the Indian, clinging to him timidly.
“Look up,” said the stranger, while his own fixed and fearless eye
seemed to return flash for flash to the baffled and insulted elements;
“Look up, and if you cannot resist the impulses of your heart, let me at
least point out a fitter object for them. Love,” he cried, extending his
arm towards the dim and troubled sky, “love the storm in its might of
destruction--seek alliance with those swift and perilous travellers of
the groaning air,--the meteor that rends, and the thunder that shakes
it! Court, for sheltering tenderness, those masses of dense and rolling
cloud,--the baseless mountains of heaven! Woo the kisses of the fiery
lightnings, to quench themselves on your smouldering bosom! Seek all
that is terrible in nature for your companions and your lover!--woo them
to burn and blast you--perish in their fierce embrace, and you will be
happier, far happier, than if you lived in mine! _Lived!_--Oh who can be
mine and live! Hear me, Immalee!” he cried, while he held her hands
locked in his--while his eyes, rivetted on her, sent forth a light of
intolerable lustre--while a new feeling of indefinite enthusiasm seemed
for a moment to thrill his whole frame, and new-modulate the tone of his
nature; “Hear me! If you will be mine, it must be amid a scene like this
for ever--amid fire and darkness--amid hatred and despair--amid----” and
his voice swelling to a demoniac shriek of rage and horror, and his arms
extended, as if to grapple with the fearful objects of some imaginary
struggle, he was rushing from the arch under which they stood, lost in
the picture which his guilt and despair had drawn, and whose images he
was for ever doomed to behold.

“The slender form that had clung to him was, by this sudden movement,
prostrated at his feet; and, with a voice choaked with terror, yet with
that perfect devotedness which never issued but from the heart and lip
of woman, she answered his frightful questions with the simple demand,
“_Will you be there?_”--“Yes!--THERE I must be, and for ever! And _will_
you, and _dare_ you, be with me?” And a kind of wild and terrible energy
nerved his frame, and strengthened his voice, as he spoke and cowered
over pale and prostrate loveliness, that seemed in profound and reckless
humiliation to court its own destruction, as if a dove exposed its
breast, without flight or struggle, to the beak of a vulture. “Well,
then,” said the stranger, while a brief convulsion crossed his pale
visage, “amid thunder I wed thee--bride of perdition! mine shalt thou be
for ever! Come, and let us attest our nuptials before the reeling altar
of nature, with the lightnings of heaven for our bed-lights, and the
curse of nature for our marriage-benediction!” The Indian shrieked in
terror, not at his words, which she did not understand, but at the
expression which accompanied them. “Come,” he repeated, “while the
darkness yet is witness to our ineffable and eternal union.” Immalee,
pale, terrified, but resolute, retreated from him.

“At this moment the storm, which had obscured the heavens and ravaged
the earth, passed away with the rapidity common in those climates, where
the visitation of an hour does its work of destruction unimpeded, and is
instantly succeeded by the smiling lights and brilliant skies of which
mortal curiosity in vain asks the question, Whether they gleam in
triumph or in consolation over the mischief they witness?

“As the stranger spoke, the clouds passed away, carrying their
diminished burden of wrath and terror where sufferings were to be
inflicted, and terrors to be undergone, by the natives of other
climes--and the bright moon burst forth with a glory unknown in European
climes. The heavens were as blue as the waves of the ocean, which they
seemed to reflect; and the stars burst forth with a kind of indignant
and aggravated brilliancy, as if they resented the usurpation of the
storm, and asserted the eternal predominance of nature over the casual
influences of the storms that obscured her. Such, perhaps, will be the
developement of the moral world. We shall be told why we suffered, and
for what; but a bright and blessed lustre shall follow the storm, and
all shall yet be light.

“The young Indian caught from this object an omen alike auspicious to
her imagination and her heart. She burst from him--she rushed into the
light of nature, whose glory seemed like the promise of redemption,
gleaming amid the darkness of the fall. She pointed to the moon, that
sun of the eastern nights, whose broad and brilliant light fell like a
mantle of glory over rock and ruin, over tree and flower.

“Wed me by this light,” cried Immalee, “and I will be yours for ever!”
And her beautiful countenance reflected the full light of the glorious
planet that rode bright through the cloudless heaven--and her white and
naked arms, extended towards it, seemed like two pure attesting pledges
of the union. “Wed me by this light,” she repeated, sinking on her
knees, “and I will be yours for ever!”

“As she spoke, the stranger approached, moved with what feelings no
mortal thought can discover. At that moment a trifling phenomenon
interfered to alter her destiny. A darkened cloud at that moment covered
the moon--it seemed as if the departed storm collected in wrathful haste
the last dark fold of its tremendous drapery, and was about to pass away
for ever.

“The eyes of the stranger flashed on Immalee the brightest rays of
mingled fondness and ferocity. He pointed to the darkness,--“WED ME BY
THIS LIGHT!” he exclaimed, “_and you shall be mine for ever and ever!_”
Immalee, shuddering at the grasp in which he held her, and trying in
vain to watch the expression of his countenance, yet felt enough of her
danger to tear herself from him. “Farewell for ever!” exclaimed the
stranger, as he rushed from her.

“Immalee, exhausted by emotion and terror, had fallen senseless on the
sands that filled the path to the ruined pagoda. He returned--he raised
her in his arms--her long dark hair streamed over them like the drooping
banners of a defeated army--her arms sunk down as if declining the
support they seemed to implore--her cold and colourless cheek rested on
his shoulder.

“Is she dead?” he murmured. “Well, be it so--let her perish--let her be
any thing _but mine_!” He flung his senseless burden on the sands, and
departed--nor did he ever revisit the island.




CHAPTER XIX.

    Que donne le monde aux siens plus souvent,
                                    Echo _Vent_.
    Que dois-je vaincre ici, sans jamais relacher,
                                    Echo _la chair_.
    Qui fit le cause des maux, qui me sont survenus,
                                    Echo _Venus_.
    Que faut dire après d’une telle infidelle,
                                    Echo _Fi d’elle_.

    _MAGDALENIADE, by Father Pierre de St Louis._


“Three years had elapsed since the parting of Immalee and the stranger,
when one evening the attention of some Spanish gentlemen, who were
walking in a public place in Madrid, was arrested by a figure that
passed them, habited in the dress of the country, (only without a
sword), and walking very slowly. They stopt by a kind of simultaneous
movement, and seemed to ask each other, with silent looks, what had been
the cause of the impression this person’s appearance had made on them.
There was nothing remarkable in his figure,--his demeanour was quiet; it
was the singular expression of his countenance which had struck them
with a sensation they could neither define or account for.

“As they paused, the person returned alone, and walking slowly--and they
again encountered that singular expression of the features, (the eyes
particularly), which no human glance could meet unappalled. Accustomed
to look on and converse with all things revolting to nature and to
man,--for ever exploring the mad-house, the jail, or the
Inquisition,--the den of famine, the dungeon of crime, or the death-bed
of despair,--his eyes had acquired a light and a language of their
own--a light that none could gaze on, and a language that few dare
understand.

“As he passed slowly by them, they observed two others whose attention
was apparently fixed on the same singular object, for they stood
pointing after him, and speaking to each other with gestures of strong
and obvious emotion. The curiosity of the groupe for once overcame the
restraint of Spanish reserve, and approaching the two cavaliers, they
inquired if the singular personage who had passed was not the subject of
their conversation, and the cause of the emotion which appeared to
accompany it. The others replied in the affirmative, and hinted at their
knowledge of circumstances in the character and history of that
extraordinary being that might justify even stronger marks of emotion at
his presence. This hint operated still more strongly on their
curiosity--the circle of listeners began to deepen. Some of them, it
appeared, had, or pretended to have, some information relative to this
extraordinary subject. And that kind of desultory conversation
commenced, whose principal ingredients are a plentiful proportion of
ignorance, curiosity, and fear, mingled with some small allowance of
information and truth;--that conversation, vague, unsatisfactory, but
not uninteresting, to which every speaker is welcome to contribute his
share of baseless report,--wild conjecture,--anecdote the more
incredible the better credited,--and conclusion the more falsely drawn
the more likely to carry home conviction.

“The conversation passed very much in language incoherent as this:--“But
why, if he be what he is described, what he is known to be,--why is he
not seized by order of government?--why is he not immured in the
Inquisition?”--“He has been often in the prison of the holy
office--oftener, perhaps, than the holy fathers wished,” said another.
“But it is a well-known fact, that whatever transpired on his
examination, he was liberated almost immediately.” Another added, “That
the stranger had been in almost every prison in Europe, but had always
contrived either to defeat or defy the power in whose grasp he appeared
to be inclosed,--and to be active in his purposes of mischief in the
remotest parts of Europe at the moment he was supposed to be expiating
them in others.” Another demanded, “If it was known to what country he
belonged?” and was answered, “He is said to be a native of Ireland--(a
country that no one knows, and which the natives are particularly
reluctant to dwell in from various causes)--and his name is Melmoth.”
The Spaniard had great difficulty in expressing the _theta_,
unpronounceable by continental lips. “Another, who had an appearance of
more intelligence than the rest, added the extraordinary fact of the
stranger’s being seen in various and distant parts of the earth within a
time in which no power merely human could be supposed to traverse
them--that his marked and fearful habit was every where to seek out the
most wretched, or the most profligate, of the community among which he
flung himself--what was his object in seeking them was unknown.”--“It is
well known,” said a deep-toned voice, falling on the ears of the
startled listeners like the toll of a strong but muffled bell,--“it is
well known both to him and them.”

“It was now twilight, but the eyes of all could distinguish the figure
of the stranger as he passed; and some even averred they could see the
ominous lustre of those eyes which never rose on human destiny but as
planets of woe. The groupe paused for some time to watch the retreat of
the figure that had produced on them the effect of the torpedo. It
departed slowly,--no one offered it molestation.

“I have heard,” said one of the company, “that a delicious music
precedes the approach of this person when his destined victim,--the
being whom he is permitted to tempt or to torture,--is about to appear
or to approach him. I have heard a strange tale of such music being
heard; and--Holy Mary be our guide! did you ever hear such
sounds?”--“Where--what?--” and the astonished listeners took off their
hats, unclasped their mantles, “opened their lips, and drew in their
breath,” in delicious ecstasy at the sounds that floated round them. “No
wonder,” said a young gallant of the party, “no wonder that such sounds
harbinger the approach of a being so heavenly. She deals with the good
spirits; and the blessed saints alone could send such music from above
to welcome her.” As he spoke, all eyes were turned to a figure, which,
though moving among a groupe of brilliant and attractive females,
appeared the only one among them on whom the eye could rest with pure
and undivided light and love. She did not catch observation--observation
caught her, and was proud of its prize.

“At the approach of a large party of females, there was all that anxious
and flattering preparation among the cavaliers,--all that eager
arrangement of capas, and hats, and plumes,--that characterized the
manners of a nation still half-feudal, and always gallant and
chivalrous. These preliminary movements were answered by corresponding
ones on the part of the fair and fatal host approaching. The creaking of
their large fans--the tremulous and purposely-delayed adjustment of
their floating veils, whose partial concealment flattered the
imagination beyond the most full and ostentatious disclosure of the
charms they seemed jealous of--the folds of the mantilla, of whose
graceful falls, and complicated manœuvres, and coquettish undulations,
the Spanish women know how to avail themselves so well--all these
announced an attack, which the cavaliers, according to the modes of
gallantry in that day (1683), were well prepared to meet and parry.

“But, amid the bright host that advanced against them, there was one
whose arms were not artificial, and the effect of whose singular and
simple attractions made a strong contrast to the studied arrangements of
her associates. If her fan moved, it was only to collect air--if she
arranged her veil, it was only to hide her face--if she adjusted her
mantilla, it was but to hide that form, whose exquisite symmetry defied
the voluminous drapery of even that day to conceal it. Men of the
loosest gallantry fell back as she approached, with involuntary awe--the
libertine who looked on her was half-converted--the susceptible beheld
her as one who realized that vision of imagination that must never be
embodied here--and the unfortunate as one whose sight alone was
consolation--the old, as they gazed on her, dreamt of their youth--and
the young for the first time dreamt of love--the only love which
deserves the name--that which purity alone can inspire, and perfect
purity alone can reward.

“As she mingled among the gay groupes that filled the place, one might
observe a certain air that distinguished her from every female
there,--not by pretension to superiority, (of that her unequalled
loveliness must have acquitted her, even to the vainest of the groupe),
but by an untainted, unsophisticated character, diffusing itself over
look and motion, and even thought--turning wildness into grace--giving
an emphasis to a single exclamation, that made polished sentences sound
trifling--for ever trespassing against etiquette with vivid and fearless
enthusiasm, and apologizing the next moment with such timid and graceful
repentance, that one doubted whether the offence or the apology were
most delightful.

“She presented altogether a singular contrast to the measured tones, the
mincing gait, and the organized uniformity of dress, and manner, and
look, and feeling, of the females about her. The harness of art was upon
every limb and feature from their birth, and its trappings concealed or
crippled every movement which nature had designed for graceful. But in
the movement of this young female, there was a bounding elasticity, a
springiness, a luxuriant and conscious vitality, that made every action
the expression of thought; and then, as she shrunk from the disclosure,
made it the more exquisite interpreter of feeling. There was around her
a mingled light of innocence and majesty, never united but in _her_ sex.
Men may long retain, and even confirm, the character of power which
nature has stamped on their frames, but they very soon forfeit their
claim to the expression of innocence.

“Amid the vivid and eccentric graces of a form that seemed like a comet
in the world of beauty, bound by no laws, or by laws that she alone
understood and obeyed, there was a shade of melancholy, that, to a
superficial observer, seemed transitory and assumed, perhaps as a
studied relief to the glowing colours of a picture so brilliant, but
which, to other eyes, announced, that with all the energies of intellect
occupied,--with all the instincts of sense excited,--the heart had as
yet no inmate, and wanted one.

“The groupe who had been conversing about the stranger, felt their
attention irresistibly attracted by this object; and the low murmur of
their fearful whispers was converted into broken exclamations of delight
and wonder, as the fair vision passed them. She had not long done so,
when the stranger was seen slowly returning, seeming, as before, known
to all, but knowing none. As the female party turned, they encountered
him. His emphatic glance selected and centered in one alone. She saw him
too, recognized him, and, uttering a wild shriek, fell on the earth
senseless.

“The tumult occasioned by this accident, which so many witnessed, and
none knew the cause of, for some moments drew off the attention of all
from the stranger--all were occupied either in assisting or inquiring
after the lady who had fainted. She was borne to her carriage by more
assistants than she needed or wished for--and just as she was lifted
into it, the voice of some one near her uttered the word “Immalee!” She
recognized the voice, and turned, with a look of anguish and a feeble
cry, towards the direction from which it proceeded. Those around her had
heard the sound,--but as they did not understand its meaning, or know to
whom it was addressed, they ascribed the lady’s emotion to
indisposition, and hastened to place her in her carriage. It drove away,
but the stranger pursued its course with his eyes--the company
dispersed, he remained alone--twilight faded into darkness--he appeared
not to notice the change--a few still continued lingering at the
extremity of the walk to mark him--they were wholly unmarked by him.

“One who remained the longest said, that he saw him use the action of
one who wipes away a tear hastily. To his eyes the tear of penitence was
denied for ever. Could this have been the tear of passion? If so, how
much woe did it announce to its object!




CHAPTER XX.

    Oh what was love made for, if ’tis not the same
    Through joy and through torment, through glory and shame!
    I know not, I ask not, what guilt’s in thine heart,
    I but know I must love thee, whatever thou art.

    MOORE.


“The next day, the young female who had excited so much interest the
preceding evening, was to quit Madrid, to pass a few weeks at a villa
belonging to her family, at a short distance from the city. That family,
including all the company, consisted of her mother Donna Clara di
Aliaga, the wife of a wealthy merchant, who was monthly expected to
return from the Indies; her brother Don Fernan di Aliaga, and several
servants; for these wealthy citizens, conscious of their opulence and
formerly high descent, piqued themselves upon travelling with no less
ceremony and pompous tardiness than accompanied the progress of a
grandee. So the old square-built, lumbering carriage, moved on like a
hearse; the coachman sat fast asleep on the box; and the six black
horses crawled at a pace like the progress of time when he visits
affliction. Beside the carriage rode Fernan di Aliaga and his servants,
with umbrellas and huge spectacles; and within it were placed Donna
Clara and her daughter. The interior of this arrangement was the
counterpart of its external appearance,--all announced dullness,
formality, and withering monotony.

“Donna Clara was a woman of a cold and grave temper, with all the
solemnity of a Spaniard, and all the austerity of a bigot. Don Fernan
presented that union of fiery passion and saturnic manners not unusual
among Spaniards. His dull and selfish pride was wounded by the
recollection of his family having been in trade; and, looking on the
unrivalled beauty of his sister as a possible means of his obtaining an
alliance with a family of rank, he viewed her with that kind of selfish
partiality as little honourable to him who feels it, as to her who was
its object.

“And it was amid such beings that the vivid and susceptible Immalee, the
daughter of nature, “the gay creature of the elements,” was doomed to
wither away the richly-coloured and exquisitely-scented flower of an
existence so ungenially transplanted. Her singular destiny seemed to
have removed her from a physical wilderness, to place her in a moral
one. And, perhaps, her last state was worse than her first.

“It is certain that the gloomiest prospect presents nothing so chilling
as the aspect of human faces, in which we try in vain to trace one
corresponding expression; and the sterility of nature itself is luxury
compared to the sterility of human hearts, which communicate all the
desolation they feel.

“They had been some time on their way, when Donna Clara, who never spoke
till after a long preface of silence, perhaps to give what she said a
weight it might otherwise have wanted, said, with oracular deliberation,
“Daughter, I hear you fainted in the public walks last night--did you
meet with any thing that surprised or terrified you?”--“No,
Madam.”--“What, then, could be the cause of the emotion you betrayed at
the sight, as I am told--I know nothing--of a personage of extraordinary
demeanour?”--“Oh, I cannot, dare not tell!” said Isidora, dropping her
veil over her burning cheek. Then the irrepressible ingenuousness of her
former nature, rushing over her heart and frame like a flood, she sunk
from the cushion on which she sat at Donna Clara’s feet, exclaiming,
“Oh, mother, I will tell you all!”--“No!” said Donna Clara, repelling
her with a cold feeling of offended pride; “no!--there is no occasion. I
seek no confidence withheld and bestowed in the same breath; nor do I
like these violent emotions--they are unmaidenly. Your duties as a child
are easily understood--they are merely perfect obedience, profound
submission, and unbroken silence, except when you are addressed by me,
your brother, or Father Jose. Surely no duties were ever more easily
performed--rise, then, and cease to weep. If your conscience disturbs
you, accuse yourself to Father Jose, who will, no doubt, inflict a
penance proportioned to the enormity of your offence. I trust only he
will not err on the side of indulgence.” And so saying, Donna Clara, who
had never uttered so long a speech before, reclined back on her cushion,
and began to tell her beads with much devotion, till the arrival of the
carriage at its destination awoke her from a profound and peaceful
sleep.

“It was near noon, and dinner in a cool low apartment near the garden
awaited only the approach of Father Jose, the confessor. He arrived
at length. He was a man of an imposing figure, mounted on a stately
mule. His features, at first view, bore strong traces of thought;
but, on closer examination, those traces seemed rather the result of
physical conformation, than of any intellectual exercise. The channel
was open, but the stream had not been directed there. However, though
defective in education, and somewhat narrow in mind, Father Jose was
a good man, and meant well. He loved power, and he was devoted to
the interests of the Catholic church; but he had frequently doubts,
(which he kept to himself), of the absolute necessity of celibacy,
and he felt (strange effect!) a chill all over him when he heard of
the fires of an _auto da fe_. Dinner was concluded; the fruit and
wine, the latter untasted by the females, were on the table,--the
choicest of them placed before Father Jose,--when Isidora, after a
profound reverence to her mother and the priest, retired, as usual,
to her apartment. Donna Clara turned to the confessor with a look
that demanded to be answered. “It is her hour for siesta,” said the
priest, helping himself to a bunch of grapes. “No, Father, no!” said
Donna Clara sadly; “her maid informs me she does not retire to sleep.
She was, alas! too well accustomed to that burning climate where she
was lost in her infancy, to feel the heat as a Christian should. No,
she retires neither to pray or sleep, after the devout custom of
Spanish women, but, I fear, to”---- “To do what?” said the priest,
with horror in his voice--“To think, I fear,” said Donna Clara; “for
often I observe, on her return, the traces of tears on her face. I
tremble, Father, lest those tears be shed for that heathen land, that
region of Satan, where her youth was past.”--“I’ll give her a penance,”
said Father Jose, “that will save her the trouble of shedding tears
on the score of memory at least--these grapes are delicious.”--“But,
Father,” pursued Donna Clara, with all the weak but restless anxiety of
a superstitious mind, “though you have made me easy on that subject,
I still am wretched. Oh, Father, how she will talk sometimes!--like a
creature self-taught, that needed neither director or confessor but
her own heart.”--“How!” exclaimed Father Jose, “need neither confessor
or director!--she must be beside herself.”--“Oh, Father,” continued
Donna Clara, “she will say things in her mild and unanswerable manner,
that, armed with all my authority, I”---- “How--how is that?” said the
priest, in a tone of severity--“does she deny any of the tenets of the
holy Catholic church?”--“No! no! no!” said the terrified Donna Clara
crossing herself. “How then?”--“Why, she speaks in a manner in which
I never heard you, reverend Father, or any of the reverend brethren,
whom my devotion to the holy church has led me to hear, speak before.
It is in vain I tell her that true religion consists in hearing
mass--in going to confession--in performing penance--in observing
the fasts and vigils--in undergoing mortification and abstinence--in
believing all that the holy church teaches--and hating, detesting,
abhorring, and execrating----” “Enough, daughter--enough,” said Father
Jose; “there can be no doubt of the orthodoxy of your creed?”--“I
trust not, holy Father,” said the anxious Donna Clara. “I were an
infidel to doubt it,” interposed the priest; “I might as well deny
this fruit to be exquisite, or this glass of Malaga to be worthy the
table of his Holiness the Pope, if he feasted all the Cardinals. But
how, daughter, as touching the supposed or apprehended defalcations
in Donna Isidora’s creed?”--“Holy Father, I have already explained my
own religious sentiments.”--“Yes--yes--we have had enough of them; now
for your daughter’s.”--“She will sometimes say,” said Donna Clara,
bursting into tears--“she will say, but never till greatly urged, that
religion ought to be a system whose spirit was universal love. Do you
understand any thing of that, Father?”--“Humph--humph!”--“That it must
be something that bound all who professed it to habits of benevolence,
gentleness, and humility, under every difference of creed and of
form.”--“Humph--humph!”--“Father,” said Donna Clara, a little piqued
at the apparent indifference with which Father Jose listened to her
communications, and resolved to rouse him by some terrific evidence of
the truth of her suspicions, “Father, I have heard her dare to express
a hope that the heretics in the train of the English ambassador might
not be everlastingly”---- “Hush!--I must not hear such sounds, or it
might be my duty to take severer notice of these lapses. However,
daughter,” continued Father Jose, “thus far I will venture for your
consolation. As sure as this fine peach is in my hand--another, if you
please--and as sure as I shall finish this other glass of Malaga”--here
a long pause attested the fulfilment of the pledge--“so sure”--and
Father Jose turned the inverted glass on the table--“Madonna Isidora
has--has the elements of a Christian in her, however improbable it may
seem to you--I swear it to you by the habit I wear;--for the rest, a
little penance--a----I shall consider of it. And now, daughter, when
your son Don Fernan has finished his siesta,--as there is no reason to
suspect him of retiring to _think_,--please to inform him I am ready to
continue the game of chess which we commenced four months ago. I have
pushed my pawn to the last square but one, and the next step gives me
a queen.”--“Has the game continued so long?” said Donna Clara. “Long!”
repeated the priest, “Aye, and may continue much longer--we have never
played more than three hours a-day on an average.”

“He then retired to sleep, and the evening was passed by the priest and
Don Fernan, in profound silence at their chess--by Donna Clara, in
silence equally profound, at her tapestry--and by Isidora at the
casement, which the intolerable heat had compelled them to leave open,
in gazing at the lustre of the moon, and inhaling the odour of the
tube-rose, and watching the expanding leaves of the night-blowing
cereus. The physical luxuries of her former existence seemed renewed by
these objects. The intense blue of the heavens, and the burning planet
that stood in sole glory in their centre, might have vied with all that
lavish and refulgent opulence of light in which nature arrays an Indian
night. Below, too, there were flowers and fragrance; colours, like
veiled beauty, mellowed, not hid; and dews that hung on every leaf,
trembling and sparkling like the tears of spirits, that wept to take
leave of the flowers.

“The breeze, indeed, though redolent of the breath of the orange
blossom, the jasmine, and the rose, had not the rich and balmy odour
that scents the Indian air by night.

    Ενθα νησον μακαρων Αυραι περιπνεουσιν.

“Except this, what was not there that might not renew the delicious
dream of her former existence, and make her believe herself again the
queen of that fairy isle?--One image was wanting--an image whose absence
made that paradise of islands, and all the odorous and flowery luxury of
a moonlight garden in Spain, alike deserts to her. In her heart alone
could she hope to meet that image,--to herself alone did she dare to
repeat his name, and those wild and sweet songs of his country(20) which
he had taught her in his happier moods. And so strange was the contrast
between her former and present existence,--so subdued was she by
constraint and coldness,--so often had she been told that every thing
she did, said, or thought, was wrong,--that she began to yield up the
evidences of her senses, to avoid the perpetual persecutions of teazing
and imperious mediocrity, and considered the appearance of the stranger
as one of those visions that formed the trouble and joy of her dreamy
and illusive existence.

  (20) Ireland.

“I am surprised, sister,” said Fernan, whom Father Jose’s gaining his
queen had put in unusually bad humour--“I am surprised that you never
busy yourself, as young maidens use, at your needle, or in some quaint
niceties of your sex.”--“Or in reading some devout book,” said Donna
Clara, raising her eyes one moment from her tapestry, and then dropping
them again; “there is the legend of that (21)Polish saint, born, like
_her_, in a land of darkness, yet chosen to be a vessel----I have
forgot his name, reverend Father.”--“Check to the king,” said Father
Jose in reply. “You regard nothing but watching a few flowers, or
hanging over your lute, or gazing at the moon,” continued Fernan, vexed
alike at the success of his antagonist and the silence of Isidora. “She
is eminent in alms-deeds and works of charity,” said the good-natured
priest. “I was summoned to a miserable hovel near your villa, Madonna
Clara, to a dying sinner, a beggar rotting on rotten straw!”--“Jesu!”
cried Donna Clara with involuntary horror, “I washed the feet of
thirteen beggars, on my knees in my father’s hall, the week before my
marriage with her honoured father, and I never could abide the sight
of a beggar since.”--“Associations are sometimes indelibly strong,”
said the priest drily;--then he added, “I went as was my duty, but your
daughter was there before me. She had gone uncalled, and was uttering
the sweetest words of consolation from a homily, which a certain poor
priest, who shall be nameless, had lent her from his humble store.”

  (21) I have read the legend of this Polish saint, which is circulated
  in Dublin, and find recorded among the indisputable proofs of his
  vocation, that he infallibly swooned if an indecent expression was
  uttered in his presence--_when in his nurse’s arms!_

“Isidora blushed at this anonymous vanity, while she mildly smiled or
wept at the harassings of Don Fernan, and the heartless austerity of
her mother. “I heard her as I entered the hovel; and, by the habit
I wear, I paused on the threshold with delight. Her first words
were----Check-mate!” he exclaimed, forgetting his homily in his
triumph, and pointing, with appealing eye, and emphatic finger, to the
desperate state of his adversary’s king. “That was a very extraordinary
exclamation!” said the literal Donna Clara, who had never raised her
eyes from her work.--“I did not think my daughter was so fond of chess
as to burst into the house of a dying beggar with such a phrase in her
mouth.”--“It was I said it, Madonna,” said the priest, reverting to his
game, on which he hung with soul and eye intent on his recent victory.
“Holy saints!” said Donna Clara, still more and more perplexed, “I
thought the usual phrase on such occasions was _pax vobiscum_, or”----
Before Father Jose could reply, a shriek from Isidora pierced the ears
of every one. All gathered round her in a moment, reinforced by four
female attendants and two pages, whom the unusual sound had summoned
from the antichamber. Isidora had not fainted; she still stood among
them pale as death, speechless, her eye wandering round the groupe that
encircled her, without seeming to distinguish them. But she retained
that presence of mind which never deserts woman where a secret is
to be guarded, and she neither pointed with finger, or glanced with
eye, towards the casement, where the cause of her alarm had presented
itself. Pressed with a thousand questions, she appeared incapable of
answering them, and, declining assistance, leaned against the casement
for support.

“Donna Clara was now advancing with measured step to proffer a bottle of
curious essences, which she drew from a pocket of a depth beyond
calculation, when one of the female attendants, aware of her favourite
habits, proposed reviving her by the scent of the flowers that clustered
round the frame of the casement; and collecting a handful of roses,
offered them to Isidora. The sight and scent of these beautiful flowers,
revived the former associations of Isidora; and, waving away her
attendant, she exclaimed, “There are no roses like those which
surrounded me when he beheld me first!”--“He!--who, daughter?” said the
alarmed Donna Clara. “Speak, I charge you, sister,” said the irritable
Fernan, “to whom do you allude?”--“She raves,” said the priest, whose
habitual penetration discovered there was a secret,--and whose
professional jealousy decided that no one, not mother or brother, should
share it with him; “she raves--ye are to blame--forbear to hang round
and to question her. Madonna, retire to rest, and the saints watch round
your bed!” Isidora, bending thankfully for this permission, retired to
her apartment; and father Jose for an hour appeared to contend with the
suspicious fears of Donna Clara, and the sullen irritability of Fernan,
merely that he might induce them, in the heat of controversy, to betray
all they knew or dreaded, that he might strengthen his own conjectures,
and establish his own power by the discovery.

    “Scire volunt secreta domus, et inde timeri.”

And this desire is not only natural but necessary, in a being from whose
heart his profession has torn every tie of nature and of passion; and if
it generates malignity, ambition, and the wish for mischief, it is the
system, not the individual, we must blame.

“Madonna,” said the Father, “you are always urging your zeal for the
Catholic church--and you, Senhor, are always reminding me of the honour
of your family--I am anxious for both--and how can the interests of both
be better secured than by Donna Isidora taking the veil?”--“The wish of
my soul!” cried Donna Clara, clasping her hands, and closing her eyes,
as if she witnessed her daughter’s apotheosis. “I will never hear of it,
Father,” said Fernan; “my sister’s beauty and wealth entitle _me_ to
claim alliance with the first families in Spain--their baboon shapes and
copper-coloured visages might be redeemed for a century by such a graft
on the stock, and the blood of which they boast would not be
impoverished by a transfusion of the _aurum potabile_ of ours into
it.”--“You forget, son,” said the priest, “the extraordinary
circumstances attendant on the early part of your sister’s life. There
are many of our Catholic nobility who would rather see the black blood
of the banished Moors, or the proscribed Jews, flow in the veins of
their descendants, than that of one who”---- Here a mysterious whisper
drew from Donna Clara a shudder of distress and consternation, and from
her son an impatient motion of angry incredulity. “I do not credit a
word of it,” said the latter; “you wish that my sister should take the
veil, and therefore you credit and circulate the monstrous
invention.”--“Take heed, son, I conjure you,” said the trembling Donna
Clara. “Take you heed, Madam, that you do not sacrifice your daughter to
an unfounded and incredible fiction.”--“Fiction!” repeated Father
Jose--“Senhor, I forgive your illiberal reflections on me,--but let me
remind you, that the same immunity will not be extended to the insult
you offer to the Catholic faith.”--“Reverend Father,” said the terrified
Fernan, “the Catholic church has not a more devoted and unworthy
professor on earth than myself.”--“I do believe the latter,” said the
priest. “You admit all that the holy church teaches to be irrefragably
true?”--“To be sure I do.”--“Then you must admit that the islands in the
Indian seas are particularly under the influence of the devil?”--“I do,
if the church requires me so to believe.”--“And that he possessed a
peculiar sway over that island where your sister was lost in her
infancy?”--“I do not see how that follows,” said Fernan, making a sudden
stand at this premise of the Sorites. “Not see how that follows!”
repeated Father Jose, crossing himself;

    “Excæcavit oculos eorum ne viderent.

But why waste I my Latin and logic on thee, who art incapable of both?
Mark me, I will use but one unanswerable argument, the which whoso
gainsayeth is a--gainsayer--that’s all. The Inquisition at Goa knows the
truth of what I have asserted, and who will dare deny it now?”--“Not
I!--not I!” exclaimed Donna Clara; “nor, I am sure, will this stubborn
boy. Son, I adjure you, make haste to believe what the reverend Father
has told you.”--“I am believing as fast as I can,” answered Don Fernan,
in the tone of one who is reluctantly swallowing a distasteful mess;
“but my faith will be choaked if you don’t allow it time to swallow. As
for digestion,” he muttered, “let that come when it pleases
God.”--“Daughter,” said the priest, who well knew the _mollia tempora
fandi_, and saw that the sullen and angry Fernan could not well bear
more at present; “daughter, it is enough--we must lead with gentleness
those whose steps find stumbling-blocks in the paths of grace. Pray with
me, daughter, that your son’s eyes may yet be opened to the glory and
felicity of his sister’s vocation to a state where the exhaustless
copiousness of divine benignity places the happy inmates above all those
mean and mundane anxieties, those petty and local wants,
which----Ah!--hem--verily I feel some of those wants myself at this
moment. I am hoarse with speaking; and the intense heat of this night
hath so exhausted my strength, that methinks the wing of a partridge
would be no unseasonable refreshment.”

“At a sign from Donna Clara, a salver with wine appeared, and a
partridge that might have provoked the French prelate to renew his meal
once more, spite of his horror of _toujours perdrix_. “See, daughter,
see how much I am exhausted in this distressing controversy--well may I
say, the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.”--“Then you and the zeal
of the house will soon be _quit_,” muttered Fernan as he retired. And
drawing the folds of his mantle over his shoulder, he threw a glance of
wonder at the happy facility with which the priest discussed the wings
and breast of his favourite bird,--whispering alternately words of
admonition to Donna Clara, and muttering something about the omission of
pimento and lemon.

“Father,” said Don Fernan, stalking back from the door, and fronting
the priest--“Father, I have a favour to ask of you.”--“Glad, were
it in my power to comply with it,” said Father Jose, turning over
the skeleton of the fowl; “but you see here is only the thigh, and
that somewhat bare.”--“It is not of that I speak or think, reverend
Father,” said Fernan, with a smile; “I have but to request, that you
will not renew the subject of my sister’s vocation till the return
of my father.”--“Certainly not, son, certainly not. Ah! you know the
time to ask a favour--you know I never could refuse you at a moment
like this, when my heart is warmed, and softened, and expanded,
by--by--by the evidences of your contrition and humiliation, and all
that your devout mother, and your zealous spiritual friend, could hope
or wish for. In truth, it overcomes me--these tears--I do not often
weep but on occasions like these, and then I weep abundantly, and am
compelled to recruit my lack of moisture thus.”--“Fetch more wine,”
said Donna Clara.--The order was obeyed.--“Good night, Father,” said
Don Fernan.--“The saints watch round you, my son! Oh I am exhausted!--I
sink in this struggle! The night is hot, and requires wine to slake my
thirst--and wine is a provocative, and requires food to take away its
deleterious and damnable qualities--and food, especially partridge,
which is a hot and stimulative nutritive, requires drink again to
absorb or neutralize its exciting qualities. Observe me, Donna Clara--I
speak as to the learned. There is stimulation, and there is absorption;
the causes of which are manifold, and the effects such as----I am not
bound to tell you at present.”--“Reverend Father,” said the admiring
Donna Clara, not guessing, in the least, from what source all this
eloquence flowed, “I trespassed on your time merely to ask a favour
also.”--“Ask and ’tis granted,” said Father Jose, with a protrusion of
his foot as proud as that of Sixtus himself. “It is merely to know,
will not all the inhabitants of those accursed Indian isles be damned
everlastingly?”--“Damned everlastingly, and without doubt,” returned
the priest. “Now my mind is easy,” rejoined the lady, “and I shall
sleep in peace to-night.”

“Sleep, however, did not visit her so soon as she expected, for an hour
after she knocked at Father Jose’s door, repeating, “Damned to all
eternity, Father, did you not say?”--“Be damned to all eternity!” said
the priest, tossing on his feverish bed, and dreaming, in the intervals
of his troubled sleep, of Don Fernan coming to confession with a drawn
sword, and Donna Clara with a bottle of Xeres in her hand, which she
swallowed at a draught, while his parched lips were gaping for a drop in
vain,--and of the Inquisition being established in an island off the
coast of Bengal, and a huge partridge seated with a cap on at the end of
a table covered with black, as chief Inquisitor,--and various and
monstrous chimeras, the abortive births of repletion and indigestion.

“Donna Clara, catching only the last words, returned to her apartment
with light step and gladdened heart, and, full of pious consolation,
renewed her devotions before the image of the virgin in her apartment,
at each side of whose niche two wax tapers were burning, till the cool
morning breeze made it possible for her to retire with some hope of
rest.

“Isidora, in her apartment, was equally sleepless; and she, too, had
prostrated herself before the sacred image, but with different thoughts.
Her feverish and dreamy existence, composed of wild and irreconcileable
contrasts between the forms of the present, and the visions of the
past,--the difference between all that she felt within, and all that she
saw around her,--between the impassioned life of recollection, and the
monotonous one of reality,--was becoming too much for a heart bursting
with undirected sensibilities, and a head giddy from vicissitudes that
would have deeply tried much firmer faculties.

“She remained for some time repeating the usual number of ave’s, to
which she added the litany of the Virgin, without any corresponding
impulses of solace or illumination, till at length, feeling that her
prayers were not the expressions of her heart, and dreading this
heterodoxy of the heart more than the violation of the ritual, she
ventured to address the image of the Virgin in language of her own.

“Mild and beautiful Spirit!” she cried, prostrating herself before the
figure--“you whose lips alone have smiled on me since I reached your
Christian land,--you whose countenance I have sometimes imagined to
belong to those who dwelt in the stars of my own Indian sky,--hear me,
and be not angry with me! Let me lose all feeling of my present
existence, or all memory of the past! Why do my former thoughts return?
They once made me happy, now they are thorns in my heart! Why do they
retain their power since their nature is altered? I cannot be what I
was--Oh, let me then no longer remember it! Let me, if possible, see,
feel, and think as those around me do! Alas! I feel it is much easier to
descend to their level than to raise them to mine. Time, constraint, and
dullness, may do much for me, but what time could ever operate such a
change on them! It would be like looking for the pearls at the bottom of
the stagnant ponds which art has dug in their gardens. No, mother of the
Deity! divine and mysterious woman, no!--they never shall see another
throb of my burning heart. Let it consume in its own fires before a drop
of their cold compassion extinguishes them! Mother divine! are not
burning hearts, then, worthiest of thee?--and does not the love of
nature assimilate itself to the love of God! True, we may love without
religion, but can we be religious without love? Yet, mother divine! dry
up my heart, since there is no longer a channel for its streams to flow
through!--or turn all those streams into the river, narrow and cold,
that holds its course on to eternity! Why should I think or feel, since
life requires only duties that no feeling suggests, and apathy that no
reflection disturbs? Here let me rest!--it is indeed the end of
enjoyment, but it is also the end of suffering; and a thousand tears are
a price too dear for the single smile which is sold for them in the
commerce of life. Alas! it is better to wander in perpetual sterility
than to be tortured with the remembrance of flowers that have withered,
and odours that have died for ever.” Then a gush of uncontroulable
emotion overwhelming her, she again bowed before the Virgin. “Yes, help
me to banish every image from my soul but his--his alone! Let my heart
be like this lonely apartment, consecrated by the presence of one sole
image, and illuminated only by that light which affection kindles before
the object of its adoration, and worships it by for ever!”

“In an agony of enthusiasm she continued to kneel before the image; and
when she rose, the silence of her apartment, and the calm smile of the
celestial figure, seemed at once a contrast and a reproach to this
excess of morbid indulgence. That smile appeared to her like a frown. It
is certain, that in agitation we can feel no solace from features that
express only profound tranquillity. We would rather wish corresponding
agitation, even hostility--any thing but a calm that neutralizes and
absorbs us. It is the answer of the rock to the wave--we collect, foam,
dash, and disperse ourselves against it, and retire broken, shattered,
and murmuring to the echoes of our disappointment.

“From the tranquil and hopeless aspect of the divinity, smiling on the
misery it neither consoles or relieves, and intimating in that smile the
profound and pulseless apathy of inaccessible elevation, coldly hinting
that humanity must cease to be, before it can cease to suffer--from this
the sufferer rushed for consolation to nature, whose ceaseless agitation
seems to correspond with the vicissitudes of human destiny and the
emotions of the human heart--whose alternation of storms and calms,--of
clouds and sun-light,--of terrors and delights--seems to keep a kind of
mysterious measure of ineffable harmony with that instrument whose
chords are doomed alternately to the thrill of agony and rapture, till
the hand of death sweeps over all the strings, and silences them for
ever.--With such a feeling, Isidora leaned against her casement, gasped
for a breath of air, which the burning night did not grant, and thought
how, on such a night in her Indian isle, she could plunge into the
stream shaded by her beloved tamarind, or even venture amid the still
and silvery waves of the ocean, laughing at the broken beams of the
moonlight, as her light form dimpled the waters--snatching with smiling
delight the brilliant, tortuous, and enamelled shells that seemed to woo
her white footsteps as she turned to the shore. Now all was different.
The duties of the bath had been performed, but with a parade of soaps,
perfumes, and, above all, attendants, who, though of her own sex, gave
Isidora an unspeakable degree of disgust at the operation. The sponges
and odours sickened her unsophisticated senses, and the presence of
another human being seemed to close up every pore.

“She had felt no refreshment from the bath, or from her prayers--she
sought it at her casement, but there also in vain. The moon was as
bright as the sun of colder climates, and the heavens were all in a
blaze with her light. She seemed like a gallant vessel ploughing the
bright and trackless ocean alone, while a thousand stars burned in the
wake of her quiet glory, like attendant vessels pursuing their course to
undiscovered worlds, and pointing them out to the mortal eye that
lingered on their course, and loved their light.

“Such was the scene above, but what a contrast to the scene below! The
glorious and unbounded light fell on an inclosure of stiff parterres,
cropped myrtles and orange-trees in tubs, and quadrangular ponds, and
bowers of trellis-work, and nature tortured a thousand ways, and
indignant and repulsive under her tortures every way.

“Isidora looked and wept. Tears had now become her language when
alone--it was a language she dared not utter before her family. Suddenly
she saw one of the moonlight alleys darkened by an approaching figure.
It advanced--it uttered her name--the name she remembered and loved--the
name of Immalee! “Ah!” she exclaimed, leaning from the casement, “is
there then one who recognizes me by that name?”--“It is only by that
name I can address you,” answered the voice of the stranger--“I have not
yet the honour of being acquainted with the name your Christian friends
have given you.”--“They call me Isidora, but do you still call me
Immalee. But how is it,” she added in a trembling voice,--her fears for
his safety overcoming all her sudden and innocent joy at his sight--“how
is it that you are here?--here, where no human being is ever beheld but
the inmates of the mansion--how did you cross the garden wall?--how did
you come from India? Oh! retire for your own safety! I am among those
whom I cannot trust or love. My mother is severe--my brother is violent.
Oh! how did you obtain entrance into the garden?--How is it,” she added
in a broken voice, “that you risk so much to see one whom you have
forgotten so long?”--“Fair Neophyte, beautiful Christian,” answered the
stranger, with a diabolical sneer, “be it known to you that I regard
bolts, and bars, and walls, as much as I did the breakers and rocks of
your Indian isle--that I can go where, and retire when I please, without
leave asked or taken of your brother’s mastiffs, or Toledos, or
spring-guns, and in utter defiance of your mother’s advanced guard of
duennas, armed in spectacles, and flanked with a double ammunition of
rosaries, with beads as large as----” “Hush!--hush!--do not utter such
impious sounds--I am taught to revere those holy things. But is it
you?--and did I indeed see you last night, or was it a thought such as
visits me in dreams, and wraps me again in visions of that beautiful and
blessed isle where first I----Oh that I never had seen you!”--“Lovely
Christian! be reconciled to your horrible destiny. You saw me last
night--I crossed your path twice when you were sparkling among the
brightest and most beautiful of all Madrid. It was me you saw--I
rivetted your eye--I transfixed your slender frame as with a flash of
lightning--you fell fainting and withered under my burning glance. It
was me you saw--me, the disturber of your angelical existence in that
isle of paradise--the hunter of your form and your steps, even amid the
complicated and artificial tracks in which you have been concealed by
the false forms of the existence you have embraced!”--“Embraced!--Oh no!
they seized on me--they dragged me here--they made me a Christian. They
told me all was for my salvation, for my happiness here and
hereafter--and I trust it will, for I have been so miserable ever since,
that I ought to be happy somewhere.”--“Happy,” repeated the stranger
with his withering sneer--“and are you not happy now? The delicacy of
your exquisite frame is no longer exposed to the rage of the
elements--the fine and feminine luxury of your taste is solicited and
indulged by a thousand inventions of art--your bed is of down--your
chamber hung with tapestry. Whether the moon be bright or dark, six wax
tapers burn in your chamber all night. Whether the skies be bright or
cloudy,--whether the earth be clothed with flowers, deformed with
tempests,--the art of the limner has surrounded you with “a new heaven
and a new earth;” and you may bask in suns that never set, while the
heavens are dark to other eyes,--and luxuriate amid landscapes and
flowers, while half your fellow-creatures are perishing amid snows and
tempests!” (Such was the overflowing acrimony of this being, that he
could not speak of the beneficence of nature, or the luxuries of art,
without interweaving something that seemed like a satire on, or a scorn
of both.) “You also have intellectual beings to converse with instead of
the chirpings of loxias, and the chatterings of monkeys.”--“I have not
found the conversation I encounter much more intelligible or
significant,” murmured Isidora, but the stranger did not appear to hear
her. “You are surrounded by every thing that can flatter the senses,
intoxicate the imagination, or expand the heart. All these indulgences
must make you forget the voluptuous but unrefined liberty of your former
existence.”--“The birds in my mother’s cages,” said Isidora, “are for
ever pecking at their gilded bars, and trampling on the clear seeds and
limpid water they are supplied with--would they not rather rest in the
mossy trunk of a doddered oak, and drink of whatever stream they met,
and be at liberty, at all the risk of poorer food and fouler
drink--would they not rather do any thing than break their bills against
gilded wires?”--“Then you do not feel your new existence in this
Christian land so likely to surfeit you with delight as you once
thought? For shame, Immalee--shame on your ingratitude and caprice! Do
you remember when from your Indian isle you caught a glimpse of the
Christian worship, and were entranced at the sight?”--“I remember all
that ever passed in that isle. My life formerly was all
anticipation,--now it is all retrospection. _The life of the happy is
all hopes,--that of the unfortunate all memory._ Yes, I remember
catching a glimpse of that religion so beautiful and pure; and when they
brought me to a Christian land, I thought I should have found them all
Christians.”--“And what did you find them, then, Immalee?”--“Only
Catholics.”--“Are you aware of the danger of the words you utter? Do you
know that in this country to hint a doubt of Catholicism and
Christianity being the same, would consign you to the flames as a
heretic incorrigible? Your mother, so lately known to you as a mother,
would bind your hands when the covered litter came for its victim; and
your father, though he has never yet beheld you, would buy with his last
ducat the faggots that were to consume you to ashes; and all your
relations in their gala robes would shout their hallelujahs to your
dying screams of torture. Do you know that the Christianity of these
countries is diametrically opposite to the Christianity of that world of
which you caught a gleam, and which you may see recorded in the pages of
your Bible, if you are permitted to read it?”

“Isidora wept, and confessed she had not found Christianity what
she had at first believed it; but with her wild and eccentric
ingenuousness, she accused herself the next moment of her
confession,--and she added, “I am so ignorant in this new world,--I
have so much to learn,--my senses so often deceive me,--and my habits
and perceptions so different from what they ought to be--I mean from
what those around me are--that I should not speak or think but as I
am taught. Perhaps, after some years of instruction and suffering, I
may be able to discover that happiness cannot exist in this new world,
and Christianity is not so remote from Catholicism as it appears to
me now.”--“And have you not found yourself happy in this new world
of intelligence and luxury?” said Melmoth, in a tone of involuntary
softness. “I have at times.”--“What times?”--“When the weary day
was over, and my dreams bore me back to that island of enchantment.
Sleep is to me like some bark rowed by visionary pilots, that wafts
me to shores of beauty and blessedness,--and all night long I revel
in my dreams with spirits. Again I live among flowers and odours--a
thousand voices sing to me from the brooks and the breezes--the air
is all alive and eloquent with invisible melodists--I walk amid a
breathing atmosphere, and living and loving inanimation--blossoms that
shed themselves beneath my steps--and streams that tremble to kiss my
feet, and then retire; and then return again, wasting themselves in
fondness before me, and touching me, as my lips press the holy images
they have taught me to worship here!”--“Does no other image ever visit
your dreams, Immalee?”--“I need not tell you,” said Isidora, with
that singular mixture of natural firmness, and partial obscuration of
intellect,--the combined result of her original and native character,
and extraordinary circumstances of her early existence--“I need not
tell you--you know you are with me every night!”--“Me?”--“Yes, you;
you are for ever in that canoe that bears me to the Indian isle--you
gaze on me, but your expression is so changed, that I dare not speak
to you--we fly over the seas in a moment, but you are for ever at the
helm, though you never land--the moment the paradise isle appears, you
disappear; and as we return, the ocean is all dark, and our course is
as dark and swift as the storm that sweeps them--you look at me, but
never speak--Oh yes! you are with me every night!”--“But, Immalee,
these are all dreams--idle dreams. _I_ row you over the Indian seas
from Spain!--this is all a vision of your imagination.”--“Is it a dream
that I see you now?” said Isidora--“is it a dream that I talk with
you?--Tell me, for my senses are bewildered; and it appears to me no
less strange, that you should be here in Spain, than that I should be
in my native island. Alas! in the life that I now lead, dreams have
become realities, and realities seem only like dreams. How is it you
are here, if indeed you are here?--how is it that you have wandered
so far to see me? How many oceans you must have crossed, how many
isles you must have seen, and none like that where I first beheld
you! But is it you indeed I behold? I thought I saw you last night,
but I had rather trust even my dreams than my senses. I believed you
only a visitor of that isle of visions, and a haunter of the visions
that recall it--but are you in truth a living being, and one whom
I may hope to behold in this land of cold realities and Christian
horrors?”--“Beautiful Immalee, or Isidora, or whatever other name
your Indian worshippers, or Christian god-fathers and god-mothers,
have called you by, I pray you listen to me, while I expound a few
mysteries to you.” And Melmoth, as he spoke, flung himself on a bed
of hyacinths and tulips that displayed their glowing flowers, and
sent up their odorous breath right under Isidora’s casement. “Oh you
will destroy my flowers!” cried she, while a reminiscence of her
former picturesque existence, when flowers were the companions alike
of her imagination and her pure heart, awoke her exclamation. “It is
my vocation--I pray you pardon me!” said Melmoth, as he basked on the
crushed flowers, and darted his withering sneer and scowling glance
at Isidora. “I am commissioned to trample on and bruise every flower
in the natural and moral world--hyacinths, hearts, and bagatelles
of that kind, just as they occur. And now, Donna Isidora, with as
long an _et cetera_ as you or your sponsors could wish, and with no
possible offence to the herald, here I am to-night--and where I shall
be to-morrow night, depends on your choice. I would as soon be on the
Indian seas, where your dreams send me rowing every night, or crashing
through the ice near the Poles, or ploughing with my naked corse, (if
corses have feeling), through the billows of that ocean where I must
one day (a day that has neither sun or moon, neither commencement or
termination), plough forever, and reap despair!”--“Hush!--hush!--Oh
forbear such horrid sounds! Are you indeed he whom I saw in the isle?
Are you he, inwoven ever since that moment with my prayers, my hopes,
my heart? Are you that being upon whom hope subsisted, when life itself
was failing? On my passage to this Christian land, I suffered much. I
was so ill you would have pitied me--the clothes they put on me--the
language they made me speak--the religion they made me believe--the
country they brought me to--Oh _you_!--you alone!--the thought--the
image of you, could alone have supported me! I loved, and to love is
to live. Amid the disruption of every natural tie,--amid the loss
of that delicious existence which seems a dream, and which still
fills my dreams, and makes sleep a second existence,--I have thought
of you--have dreamt of you--have loved you!”--“Loved me?--no being
yet loved me but pledged me in tears.”--“And have I not wept?” said
Isidora--“believe these tears--they are not the first I have shed, nor
I fear will be the last, since I owe the first to you.” And she wept as
she spoke. “Well,” said the wanderer, with a bitter and self-satirizing
laugh, “I shall be persuaded at last that I am “a marvellous proper
man.” Well, if it must be so, happy man be his dole! And when shall
the auspicious day, beautiful Immalee, _still_ beautiful Isidora, in
spite of your Christian name, (to which I have a most anti-catholic
objection)--when shall that bright day dawn on your long slumbering
eye-lashes, and waken them with kisses, and beams, and light, and love,
and all the paraphernalia with which folly arrays misery previous to
their union--that glittering and empoisoned drapery that well resembles
what of old Dejanira sent to her husband--when shall the day of bliss
be?” And he laughed with that horrible convulsion that mingles the
expression of levity with that of despair, and leaves the listener no
doubt whether there is more despair in laughter, or more laughter in
despair. “I understand you not,” said the pure and timid Isidora; “and
if you would not terrify me to madness, laugh no more--no more, at
least, in that fearful way!”--“_I cannot weep_,” said Melmoth, fixing
on her his dry and burning eyes, strikingly visible in the moonlight;
“the fountain of tears has been long dried up within me, like that of
every other human blessing.”--“I can weep for both,” said Isidora, “if
that be all.” And her tears flowed fast, as much from memory as from
grief--and when those sources are united, God and the sufferer only
know how fast and bitterly they fall. “Reserve them for our nuptial
hour, my lovely bride,” said Melmoth to himself; “you will have
occasion for them then.”

“There was a custom then, however indelicate and repulsive it may sound
to modern ears, for ladies who were doubtful of the intentions of their
lovers to demand of them the proof of their purity and honour, by
requiring an appeal to their family, and a solemn union under the
sanction of the church. Perhaps there was more genuine spirit of truth
and chastity in this, than in all the ambiguous flirtation that is
carried on with an ill-understood and mysterious dependence on
principles that have never been defined, and fidelity that has never
been removed. When the lady in the Italian tragedy(22) asks her lover,
almost at their first interview, if his intentions are honourable, and
requires, as the proof of their being so, that he shall espouse her
immediately, does she not utter a language more unsophisticated, more
intelligible, more _heartedly_ pure, than all the romantic and
incredible reliance that other females are supposed to place in the
volatility of impulse,--in that wild and extemporaneous feeling,--that
“house on the sands,”--which never has its foundation in the immoveable
depths of the heart. Yielding to this feeling, Isidora, in a voice that
faultered at its own accents, murmured, “If you love me, seek me no more
clandestinely. My mother is good, though she is austere--my brother is
kind, though he is passionate--my father--I have never seen him! I know
not what to say, but if he be _my_ father, he will love you. Meet me in
their presence, and I will no longer feel pain and shame mingled with
the delight of seeing you. Invoke the sanction of the church, and then,
perhaps,”---- “Perhaps!” retorted Melmoth; “You have learned the
European ‘perhaps!’--the art of suspending the meaning of an emphatic
word--of affecting to draw the curtain of the heart at the moment you
drop its folds closer and closer--of bidding us despair at the moment
you intend we should feel hope!”--“Oh no!--no!” answered the innocent
being; “I am _truth_. I am Immalee when I speak to you,--though to all
others in this country, which they call Christian, I am Isidora. When I
loved you first, I had only one heart to consult,--now there are many,
and some who have not hearts like mine. But if you love me, you can bend
to them as I have done--you can love their God, their home, their hopes,
and their country. Even with _you_ I could not be happy, unless you
adored the cross to which your hand first pointed my wandering sight,
and the religion which you reluctantly confessed was the most beautiful
and beneficent on earth.”--“Did I confess that?” echoed Melmoth; “It
must have been _reluctantly_ indeed. Beautiful Immalee! I am a convert
to you;” and he stifled a Satanic laugh as he spoke; “to your new
religion, and your beauty, and your Spanish birth and nomenclature, and
every thing that you would wish. I will incontinently wait on your pious
mother, and angry brother, and all your relatives, testy, proud, and
ridiculous as they may be. I will encounter the starched ruffs, and
rustling manteaus, and whale-boned fardingales of the females, from your
good mother down to the oldest duenna who sits spectacled, and armed
with bobbin, on her inaccessible and untempted sopha; and the twirled
whiskers, plumed hats, and shouldered capas of all your male relatives.
And I will drink chocolate, and strut among them; and when they refer me
to your mustachoed man of law, with his thread-bare cloke of black
velvet over his shoulder, his long quill in his hand, and his soul in
three sheets of wide-spread parchment, I will dower you in the most
ample territory ever settled on a bride.”--“Oh let it be, then, in that
land of music and sunshine where we first met! One spot where I might
set my foot amid its flowers, is worth all the cultivated earth of
Europe!” said Isidora.--“No!--it shall be in a territory with which your
bearded men of law are far better acquainted, and which even your pious
mother and proud family must acknowledge my claim to, when they shall
hear it asserted and explained. Perchance they may be joint-tenants with
_me_ there; and yet (strange to say!) they will never litigate my
exclusive title to possession.”--“I understand nothing of this,” said
Isidora; “but I feel I am transgressing the decorums of a Spanish female
and a Christian, in holding this conference with you any longer. If you
think as you once thought,--if you feel as _I_ must feel for
ever,--there needs not this discussion, which only perplexes and
terrifies. What have I to do with this territory of which you speak?
That _you_ are its possessor, is its only value in my eyes!”--“What have
you to do with it?” repeated Melmoth; “Oh, you know not how much you may
have to do with it and me yet! In other cases, the possession of the
territory is the security for the man,--but here the man is the security
for the everlasting possession of the territory. Mine heirs must inherit
it for ever and ever, if they hold by my tenure. Listen to me, beautiful
Immalee, or Christian, or whatever other name you choose to be called
by! Nature, your first sponsor, baptized you with the dews of Indian
roses--your Christian sponsors, of course, spared not water, salt, or
oil, to wash away the stain of nature from your regenerated frame--and
your last sponsor, if you will submit to the rite, will anoint you with
a new chrism. But of that hereafter. Listen to me while I announce to
you the wealth, the population, the magnificence of that region to which
I will endower you. The rulers of the earth are there--all of them.
There be the heroes, and the sovereigns, and the tyrants. There are
their riches, and pomp, and power--Oh what a glorious accumulation!--and
they have thrones, and crowns, and pedestals, and trophies of fire, that
burn for ever and ever, and the light of their glory blazes eternally.
There are all you read of in story, your Alexanders and Cæsars, your
Ptolemies and Pharaohs. There be the princes of the East, the Nimrods,
the Belshazzars, and the Holoferneses of their day. There are the
princes of the North, the Odins, the Attilas, (named by your church the
scourge of God), the Alarics, and all those nameless and
name-undeserving barbarians, who, under various titles and claims,
ravaged and ruined the earth they came to conquer. There be the
sovereigns of the South, and East, and West, the Mahommedans, the
Caliphs, the Saracens, the Moors, with all their gorgeous pretensions
and ornaments--the crescent, the Koran, and the horse-tail--the trump,
the gong, and the atabal, (or to suit it to your Christianised ear,
lovely Neophyte!) ‘the noise of the captains, and the shoutings.’ There
be also those triple-crowned chieftains of the West, who hide their
shorn heads under a diadem, and for every hair they shave, demand the
life of a sovereign--who, pretending to humility, trample on
power--whose title is, Servant of servants--and whose claim and
recognizance is, Lord of lords. Oh! you will not lack company in that
bright region, for bright it will be!--and what matter whether its light
be borrowed from the gleam of sulphur, or the trembling light of the
moon, by which I see you look so pale?”--“I look pale!” said Isidora
gasping; “I _feel_ pale! I know not the meaning of your words, but I
know it must be horrible. Speak no more of that region, with its pride,
its wickedness, and its splendour! I am willing to follow you to
deserts, to solitudes, which human step never trod but yours, and where
mine shall trace, with sole fidelity, the print of yours. Amid
loneliness I was born; amid loneliness I could die. Let me but, wherever
I live, and whenever I die, be yours!--and for the place, it matters
not, let it be even”---- and she shivered involuntarily as she spoke;
“Let it be even”---- “Even--_where_?” asked Melmoth, while a wild
feeling of triumph in the devotedness of this unfortunate female, and of
horror at the destination which she was unconsciously imprecating on
herself, mingled in the question. “Even where you are to be,” answered
the devoted Isidora, “let me be there! and there I must be happy, as in
the isle of flowers and sun-light, where I first beheld you. Oh! there
are no flowers so balmy and roseate as those that once blew there! There
are no waters so musical, or breezes so fragrant, as those that I
listened to and inhaled, when I thought that they repeated to me the
echo of your steps, or the melody of your voice--that _human music_ the
first I ever heard, and which, when I cease to hear”---- “You will hear
much better!” interrupted Melmoth; “the voices of ten thousand--ten
millions of spirits--beings whose tones are immortal, without cessation,
without pause, without interval!”--“Oh that will be glorious!” said
Isidora, clasping her hands; “the only language I have learned in this
new world worth speaking, is the language of music. I caught some
imperfect sounds from birds in my first world, but in my second world
they taught me music; and the misery they have taught me, hardly makes a
balance against that new and delicious language.”--“But think,” rejoined
Melmoth, “if your taste for music be indeed so exquisite, how it will be
indulged, how it will be enlarged, in hearing those voices accompanied
and re-echoed by the thunders of ten thousand billows of fire, lashing
against rocks which eternal despair has turned into adamant! They talk
of the music of the spheres!--Dream of the music of those living orbs
turning on their axis of fire for ever and ever, and ever singing as
they shine, like your brethren the Christians, who had the honour to
illuminate Nero’s garden in Rome on a rejoicing night.”--“You make me
tremble!”--“Tremble!--a strange effect of fire. Fie! what a coyness is
this! I have promised, on your arrival at your new territory, all that
is mighty and magnificent,--all that is splendid and voluptuous--the
sovereign and the sensualist--the inebriated monarch and the pampered
slave--the bed of roses and the canopy of fire!”--“And is this the home
to which you invite me?”--“It is--it is. Come, and be mine!--myriads of
voices summon you--hear and obey them! Their voices thunder in the
echoes of mine--their fires flash from my eyes, and blaze in my heart.
Hear me, Isidora, my beloved, hear me! I woo you in earnest, and for
ever! Oh how trivial are the ties by which mortal lovers are bound,
compared to those in which you and I shall be bound to eternity! Fear
not the want of a numerous and splendid society. I have enumerated
sovereigns, and pontiffs, and heroes,--and if you should condescend to
remember the trivial amusements of your present sejour, you will have
enough to revive its associations. You love music, and doubtless you
will have most of the musicians who have chromatized since the first
essays of Tubal Cain to Lully, who beat himself to death at one of his
own oratorios, or operas, I don’t know which. They will have a singular
accompaniment--the eternal roar of a sea of fire makes a profound bass
to the chorus of millions of singers in torture!”--“What is the meaning
of this horrible description?” said the trembling Isidora; “your words
are riddles to me. Do you jest with me for the sake of tormenting, or of
laughing at me?”--“Laughing!” repeated her wild visitor; “that is an
exquisite hint--_vive la bagatelle!_ Let us laugh for ever!--we shall
have enough to keep us in countenance. There will be all that ever have
dared to laugh on earth--the singers, the dancers, the gay, the
voluptuous, the brilliant, the beloved--all who have ever dared to
mistake their destiny, so far as to imagine that enjoyment was not a
crime, or that a smile was not an infringement of their duty as
sufferers. All such must expiate their error under circumstances which
will probably compel the most inveterate disciple of Democritus, the
most _inextinguishable laugher_ among them, to allow that _there_, at
least, ‘laughter is madness.’”--“I do not understand you,” said Isidora,
listening to him with that sinking of the heart which is produced by a
combined and painful feeling of ignorance and terror. “Not understand
me?” repeated Melmoth, with that sarcastic frigidity of countenance
which frightfully contrasted the burning intelligence of his eyes, that
seemed like the fires of a volcano bursting out amid masses of snow
heaped up to its very edge; “not understand me!--are you not, then, fond
of music?”--“I am.”--“Of dancing, too, my graceful, beautiful love?”--“I
_was_.”--“What is the meaning of the different emphasis you give to
those answers?”--“I love music--I must love it for ever--it is the
language of recollection. A single strain of it wafts me back to the
dreamy blessedness, the enchanted existence, of my own--own isle. Of
dancing I cannot say so much. I have _learnt_ dancing--but I _felt_
music. I shall never forget the hour when I heard it for the first time,
and imagined it was the language which Christians spoke to each other. I
have heard them speak a different language since.”--“Doubtless their
language is not always melody, particularly when they address each other
on controverted points in religion. Indeed, I can conceive nothing less
a-kin to harmony than the debate of a Dominican and Franciscan on the
respective efficacy of the cowl of the order, to ascertain the salvation
of him who happens to die in it. But have you no other reason for
_being_ fond of music, and for only _having been_ fond of dancing? Nay,
let me have ‘your most exquisite reason.’”

  (22) Alluding possibly to “Romeo and Juliet.”

“It seemed as if this unhappy being was impelled by his ineffable
destiny to deride the misery he inflicted, in proportion to its
bitterness. His sarcastic levity bore a direct and fearful proportion to
his despair. Perhaps this is also the case in circumstances and
characters less atrocious. A mirth which is not gaiety is often the mask
which hides the convulsed and distorted features of agony--and laughter,
which never yet was the expression of rapture, has often been the only
intelligible language of madness and misery. Extacy only
smiles,--despair laughs. It seemed, too, as if no keenness of ironical
insult, no menace of portentous darkness, had power to revolt the
feelings, or alarm the apprehensions, of the devoted being to whom they
were addressed. Her “most exquisite reasons,” demanded in a tone of
ruthless irony, were given in one whose exquisite and tender melody
seemed still to retain the modulation on which its first sounds had been
formed,--that of the song of birds, mingled with the murmur of waters.

“I love music, because when I hear it I think of you. I have ceased to
love dancing, though I was at first intoxicated with it, because, when
dancing, I have sometimes forgot you. When I listen to music, your image
floats on every note,--I hear you in every sound. The most inarticulate
murmurs that I produce on my guitar (for I am very ignorant) are like a
spell of melody that raises a form indescribable--not you, but _my idea
of you_. In your presence, though that seems necessary to my existence,
I have never felt that exquisite delight that I have experienced in that
of your image, when music has called it up from the recesses of my
heart. Music seems to me like the voice of religion summoning to
remember and worship the God of my heart. Dancing appears like a
momentary apostasy, almost a profanation.”--“That, indeed, is a sweet
and subtle reason,” answered Melmoth, “and one that, of course, has but
one failure,--that of not being sufficiently flattering to the hearer.
And so my image floats on the rich and tremulous waves of melody one
moment, like a god of the overflowing billows of music, triumphing in
their swells, and graceful even in their falls,--and the next moment
appears, like the dancing demon of your operas, grinning at you between
the brilliant movement of your fandangoes, and flinging the withering
foam of his black and convulsed lips into the cup where you pledge at
your banquetting. Well--dancing--music--let them go together! It seems
that my image is equally mischievous in both--in one you are tortured by
reminiscence, and in the other by remorse. Suppose that image is
withdrawn from you for ever,--suppose that it were possible to break the
tie that unites us, and whose vision has entered into the soul of
both.”--“You may suppose it,” said Isidora, with maiden pride and tender
grief blended in her voice; “and if you do, believe that I will try to
suppose it too; the effort will not cost much,--nothing but--my life!”

“As Melmoth beheld this blessed and beautiful being, once so refined
amid nature, and now so natural amid refinement, still possessing all
the soft luxuriance of her first angelic nature, amid the artificial
atmosphere where her sweets were uninhaled, and her brilliant tints
doomed to wither unappreciated,--where her pure and sublime devotedness
of heart was doomed to beat like a wave against a rock,--exhaust its
murmurs,--and expire;--As he felt this, and gazed on her, he cursed
himself; and then, with the selfishness of hopeless misery, he felt that
the curse might, by dividing it, be diminished.

“Isidora!” he whispered in the softest tones he could assume,
approaching the casement, at which his pale and beautiful victim stood;
“Isidora! will you then be mine?”--“What shall I say?” said Isidora; “if
love requires the answer, I have said enough; if only vanity, I have
said too much.”--“Vanity! beautiful trifler, you know not what you say;
the accusing angel himself might blot out that article from the
catalogue of my sins. It is one of my prohibited and impossible
offences; it is an earthly feeling, and therefore one which I can
neither participate or enjoy. Certain it is that I feel some share of
human pride at this moment.”--“Pride! at what? Since I have known you, I
have felt no pride but that of supreme devotedness,--that
self-annihilating pride which renders the victim prouder of its wreath,
than the sacrificer of his office.”--“But I feel another pride,”
answered Melmoth, and in a proud tone he spoke it,--“a pride, which,
like that of the storm that visited the ancient cities, whose
destruction you may have read of, while it blasts, withers, and encrusts
paintings, gems, music, and festivity, grasping them in its talons of
annihilation, exclaims, Perish to all the world, perhaps beyond the
period of its existence, but live to me in darkness and in corruption!
Preserve all the exquisite modulation of your forms! all the
indestructible brilliancy of your colouring!--but preserve it for me
alone!--me, the single, pulseless, eyeless, heartless embracer of an
unfertile bride,--the brooder over the dark and unproductive nest of
eternal sterility,--the mountain whose lava of internal fire has
stifled, and indurated, and inclosed for ever, all that was the joy of
earth, the felicity of life, and the hope of futurity!”

“As he spoke, his expression was at once so convulsed and so derisive,
so indicative of malignity and levity, so thrilling to the heart, while
it withered every fibre it touched and wrung, that Isidora, with all her
innocent and helpless devotedness, could not avoid shuddering before
this fearful being, while, in trembling and unappeaseable solicitude,
she demanded, “Will you then be mine? Or what am I to understand from
your terrible words? Alas! _my_ heart has never enveloped itself in
mysteries--never has the light of its truth burst forth amid the
thunderings and burnings in which you have issued the law of my
destiny.”--“Will you then be mine, Isidora?”--“Consult my parents. Wed
me by the rites, and in the face of the church, of which I am an
unworthy member, and I will be yours for ever.”--“_For ever!_” repeated
Melmoth; “well-spoken, _my_ bride. You will then be mine _for
ever_?--will you, Isidora?”--“Yes!--yes!--I have said so. But the sun is
about to rise, I feel the increasing perfume of the orange blossoms, and
the coolness of the morning air. Begone--I have staid too long here--the
domestics may be about, and observe you--begone, I implore you.”--“I
go--but one word--for to me the rising of the sun, and the appearance of
your domestics, and every thing in heaven above, and earth beneath, is
equally unimportant. Let the sun stay below the horizon and wait for me.
_You are mine!_”--“Yes, I am yours; but you must solicit my
family.”--“Oh, doubtless!--solicitation is so congenial to my
habits.”--“And”---- “Well, what?--you hesitate.”--“I hesitate,” said the
ingenuous and timid Isidora, “because”---- “Well?”--“Because,” she
added, bursting into tears, “those with whom you speak will not utter to
God language like mine. They will speak to you of wealth and dower; they
will inquire about that region where you have told me your rich and wide
possessions are held; and should they ask me of them, how shall I
answer?”

“At these words, Melmoth approached as close as possible to the
casement, and uttered a certain word which Isidora did not at first
appear to hear, or understand--trembling she repeated her request. In a
still lower tone the answer was returned. Incredulous, and hoping that
the answer had deceived her, she again repeated her petition. A
withering monosyllable, not to be told, thundered in her ears,--and she
shrieked as she closed the casement. Alas! the casement only shut out
the form of the stranger--not his image.




CHAPTER XXI.

    He saw the eternal fire that keeps,
    In the unfathomable deeps,
    Its power for ever, and made a sign
    To the morning prince divine;
    Who came across the sulphurous flood,
    Obedient to the master-call,
    And in angel-beauty stood,
    High on his star-lit pedestal.


“In this part of the manuscript, which I read in the vault of Adonijah
the Jew,” said Monçada, continuing his narrative, “there were several
pages destroyed, and the contents of many following wholly
obliterated--nor could Adonijah supply the deficiency. From the next
pages that were legible, it appeared that Isidora imprudently continued
to permit her mysterious visitor to frequent the garden at night, and to
converse with him from the casement, though unable to prevail on him to
declare himself to her family, and perhaps conscious that his
declaration would not be too favourably received. Such, at least,
appeared to be the meaning of the next lines I could decypher.

“She had renewed, in these nightly conferences, her former visionary
existence. Her whole day was but a long thought of the hour at which she
expected to see him. In the day-time she was silent, pensive,
abstracted, feeding on thought--with the evening her spirits perceptibly
though softly rose, like those of one who has a secret and
incommunicable store of delight; and her mind became like that flower
that unfolds its leaves, and diffuses its odours, only on the approach
of night.

“The season favoured this fatal delusion. It was that rage of summer
when we begin to respire only towards evening, and the balmy and
brilliant night is our day. The day itself is passed in a languid and
feverish doze. At night alone she existed,--at her moon-lit casement
alone she breathed freely; and never did the moonlight fall on a
lovelier form, or gild a more angelic brow, or gleam on eyes that
returned more pure and congenial rays. The mutual and friendly light
seemed like the correspondence of spirits who glided on the alternate
beams, and, passing from the glow of the planet to the glory of a mortal
eye, felt that to reside in either was heaven. * * * * * * * *

“She lingered at that casement till she imagined that the clipped and
artificially straitened treillage of the garden was the luxuriant and
undulating foliage of the trees of her paradise isle--that the flowers
had the same odour as that of the untrained and spontaneous roses that
once showered their leaves under her naked feet--that the birds sung to
her as they had once done when the vesper-hymn of her pure heart
ascended along with their closing notes, and formed the holiest and most
acceptable anthem that perhaps ever wooed the evening-breeze to waft it
to heaven.

“This delusion would soon cease. The stiff and stern monotony of the
parterre, where even the productions of nature held their place as if
under the constraint of duty, forced the conviction of its unnatural
regularity on her eye and soul, and she turned to heaven for relief. Who
does not, even in the first sweet agony of passion? Then we tell that
tale to heaven which we would not trust to the ear of mortal--and in the
withering hour that must come to all whose love is only mortal, we again
call on that heaven which we have intrusted with our secret, to send us
back one bright messenger of consolation on those thousand rays that its
bright, and cold, and passionless orbs, are for ever pouring on the
earth as if in mockery. We ask, but is the petition heard or answered?
We weep, but do not we feel that those tears are like rain falling on
the sea? _Mare infructuosum._ No matter. Revelation assures us there is
a period coming, when all petitions suited to our state shall be
granted, and when “tears shall be wiped from all eyes.” In revelation,
then, let us trust--in any thing but our own hearts. But Isidora had not
yet learned that theology of the skies, whose text is, “Let us go into
the house of mourning.” To her still the night was day, and her sun was
the “moon walking in its brightness.” When she beheld it, the
recollections of the isle rushed on her heart like a flood; and a figure
soon appeared to recal and to realize them.

“That figure appeared to her every night without disturbance or
interruption; and though her knowledge of the severe restraint and
regularity of the household caused her some surprise at the facility
with which Melmoth apparently defied both, and visited the garden every
night, yet such was the influence of her former dream-like and romantic
existence, that his continued presence, under circumstances so
extraordinary, never drew from her a question with regard to the means
by which he was enabled to surmount difficulties insurmountable to all
others.

“There were, indeed, two extraordinary circumstances attendant on these
meetings. Though seeing each other again in Spain, after an interval of
three years elapsing since they had parted on the shores of an isle in
the Indian sea, neither had ever inquired what circumstances could have
led to a meeting so unexpected and extraordinary. On Isidora’s part this
incurious feeling was easily accounted for. Her former existence had
been one of such a fabulous and fantastic character, that the improbable
had become familiar to her,--and the familiar only, improbable. Wonders
were her natural element; and she felt, perhaps, less surprised at
seeing Melmoth in Spain, than when she first beheld him treading the
sands of her lonely island. With Melmoth the cause was different, though
the effect was the same. His destiny forbid alike curiosity or surprise.
The world could show him no greater marvel than his own existence; and
the facility with which he himself passed from region to region,
mingling with, yet distinct from all his species, like a wearied and
uninterested spectator rambling through the various seats of some vast
theatre, where he knows none of the audience, would have prevented his
feeling astonishment, had he encountered Isidora on the summit of the
Andes.

“During a month, through the course of which she had tacitly permitted
these nightly visits beneath her casement--(at a distance which indeed
might have defied Spanish jealousy itself to devise matter of suspicion
out of,--the balcony of her window being nearly fourteen feet above the
level of the garden, where Melmoth stood)--during this month, Isidora
rapidly, but imperceptibly, graduated through those stages of feeling
which all who love have alike experienced, whether the stream of passion
be smooth or obstructed. In the first, she was full of anxiety to speak
and to listen, to hear and to be heard. She had all the wonders of her
new existence to relate; and perhaps that indefinite and unselfish hope
of magnifying herself in the eyes of him she loved, which induces us in
our first encounter to display all the eloquence, all the powers, all
the attractions we possess, not with the pride of a competitor, but with
the humiliation of a victim. The conquered city displays all its wealth
in hopes of propitiating the conqueror. It decorates him with all its
spoils, and feels prouder to behold him arrayed in them, than when she
wore them in triumph herself. That is the first bright hour of
excitement, of trembling, but hopeful and felicitous anxiety. Then we
think we never can display enough of talent, of imagination, of all that
can interest, of all that can dazzle. We pride ourselves in the homage
we receive from society, from the hope of sacrificing that homage to our
beloved--we feel a pure and almost spiritualized delight in our own
praises, from imagining they render us more worthy of meriting _his_,
from whom we have received the _grace_ of love to deserve them--we
glorify ourselves, that we may be enabled to render back the glory to
him from whom we received it, and for whom we have kept it in trust,
only to tender it back with that rich and accumulated interest of the
heart, of which we would pay the uttermost farthing, if the payment
exacted the last vibration of its fibres,--the last drop of its blood.
No saint who ever viewed a miracle performed by himself with a holy and
self-annihilating abstraction from _seity_, has perhaps felt a purer
sentiment of perfect devotedness, than the female who, in her first
hours of love, offers, at the feet of her worshipped one, the brilliant
wreath of music, painting, and eloquence,--and only hopes, with an
unuttered sigh, that the rose of love will not be unnoticed in the
garland.

“Oh! how delicious it is to such a being (and such was Isidora) to touch
her harp amid crowds, and watch, when the noisy and tasteless bravoes
have ceased, for the heart-drawn sigh of _the one_, to whom alone her
soul, not her fingers, have played,--and whose single sigh is heard, and
heard alone, amid the plaudits of thousands! Yet how delicious to her to
whisper to herself, “I heard his sigh, but he has heard the applause!”

“And when she glides through the dance, and in touching, with easy and
accustomed grace, the hands of many, she feels there is but one hand
whose touch she can recognize; and, waiting for its thrilling and
life-like vibration, moves on like a statue, cold and graceful, till the
Pygmalion-touch warms her into woman, and the marble melts into flesh
under the hands of the resistless moulder. And her movements betray, at
that moment, the unwonted and half-unconscious impulses of that fair
image to which love had given life, and who luxuriated in the vivid and
newly-tried enjoyment of that animation which the passion of her lover
had breathed into her frame. And when the splendid portfolio is
displayed, or the richly-wrought tapestry expanded by outstretched arms,
and cavaliers gaze, and ladies envy, and every eye is busy in
examination, and every tongue loud in praise, just in the inverted
proportion of the ability of the one to scrutinize with accuracy, and
the other to applaud with taste--then to throw round the secret silent
glance, that searches for that eye whose light alone, to her intoxicated
gaze, contains all judgment, all taste, all feeling--for that lip whose
very censure would be dearer than the applause of a world!--To hear,
with soft and submissive tranquillity, censure and remark, praise and
comment, but to turn for ever the appealing look to one who alone can
understand, and whose swiftly-answering glance can alone reward
it!--This--this had been Isidora’s hope. Even in the isle where he first
saw her in the infancy of her intellect, she had felt the consciousness
of superior powers, which were then her solace, not her pride. Her value
for herself rose with her devotion to him. Her passion became her pride;
and the enlarged resources of her mind, (for Christianity under its most
corrupt form enlarges every mind), made her at first believe, that to
behold her admired as she was for her loveliness, her talents, and her
wealth, would compel this proudest and most eccentric of beings to
prostrate himself before her, or at least to acknowledge the power of
those acquirements which she had so painfully been arrived at the
knowledge of, since her involuntary introduction into European society.

“This had been her hope during the earlier period of his visits; but
innocent and flattering to its object as it was, she was disappointed.
To Melmoth “nothing was new under the sun.” Talent was to him a burden.
He knew more than man could tell him, or woman either. Accomplishments
were a bauble--the rattle teazed his ear, and he flung it away. Beauty
was a flower he looked on only to scorn, and touched only to wither.
Wealth and distinction he appreciated as they deserved, but not with the
placid disdain of the philosopher, or the holy abstraction of the saint,
but with that “fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,”
to which he believed their possessors irreversibly devoted, and to the
infliction of which he looked forward with perhaps a feeling like that
of those executioners who, at the command of Mithridates, poured the
melted ore of his golden chains down the throat of the Roman ambassador.

“With such feelings, and others that cannot be told, Melmoth experienced
an indescribable relief from the eternal fire that was already kindled
within him, in the perfect and unsullied freshness of what may be called
the untrodden verdure of Immalee’s heart,--for she was Immalee still to
him. She was the Oasis of his desert--the fountain at which he drank,
and forgot his passage over the burning sands--and the _burning_ sands
to which his passage must conduct him. He sat under the shade of the
gourd, and forgot the worm was working at its root;--perhaps the undying
worm that gnawed, and coiled, and festered in his own heart, might have
made him forget the corrosions of that he himself had sown in hers.

“Isidora, before the second week of their interview, had lowered her
pretensions. She had given up the hope to interest or to dazzle--that
hope which is twin-born with love in the purest female heart. She now
had concentrated all her hopes, and all her heart, no longer in the
ambition _to be_ beloved, but in the sole wish _to_ love. She no longer
alluded to the enlargement of her faculties, the acquisition of new
powers, and the expansion and cultivation of her taste. She ceased to
speak--she sought only to listen--then her wish subsided into that quiet
listening for his form alone, which seemed to transfer the office of
hearing into the eyes, or rather, to identify both. She saw him long
before he appeared,--and heard him though he did not speak. They have
been in each other’s presence for the short hours of a Spanish summer’s
night,--Isidora’s eyes alternately fixed on the sun-like moon, and on
her mysterious lover,--while he, without uttering a word, leaned against
the pillars of her balcony, or the trunk of the giant myrtle-tree, which
cast the shade he loved, even by night, over his portentous
expression,--and they never uttered a word to each other, till the
waving of Isidora’s hand, as the dawn appeared, was the tacit signal for
their parting.

“This is the marked graduation of profound feeling. Language is no
longer necessary to those whose beating hearts converse audibly--whose
eyes, even by moonlight, are more intelligible to each other’s stolen
and shadowed glances, than the broad converse of face to face in the
brightest sunshine--to whom, in the exquisite inversion of earthly
feeling and habit, darkness is light, and silence eloquence.

“At their last interviews, Isidora sometimes spoke,--but it was only to
remind her lover, in a soft and chastened tone, of a promise which it
seems he had at one time made of disclosing himself to her parents, and
demanding her at their hands. Something she murmured also of her
declining health--her exhausted spirits--her breaking heart--the long
delay--the hope deferred--the mysterious meeting; and while she spoke
she wept, but hid her tears from him.

“It is thus, Oh God! we are doomed (and justly doomed when we fix our
hearts on any thing below thee) to feel those hearts repelled like the
dove who hovered over the shoreless ocean, and found not a spot where
her foot might rest,--not a green leaf to bring back in her beak. Oh
that the ark of mercy may open to such souls, and receive them from that
stormy world of deluge and of wrath, with which they are unable to
contend, and where they can find no resting-place!

“Isidora now had arrived at the last stage of that painful pilgrimage
through which she had been led by a stern and reluctant guide.

“In its first, with the innocent and venial art of woman, she had tried
to interest him by the display of her new acquirements, without the
consciousness that they were not new to him. The harmony of civilized
society, of which she was at once weary and proud, was discord to his
ear. He had examined all the strings that formed this curious but
ill-constructed instrument, and found them all false.

“In the second, she was satisfied with merely beholding him. His
presence formed the atmosphere of her existence--in it alone she
breathed. She said to herself, as evening approached, “I shall see
him!”--and the burden of life rolled from her heart as she internally
uttered the words. The constraint, the gloom, the monotony of her
existence, vanished like clouds at the sun, or rather like those clouds
assuming such gorgeous and resplendent colours, that they seemed to have
been painted by the finger of happiness itself. The brilliant hue
diffused itself over every object of her eye and heart. Her mother
appeared no longer a cold and gloomy bigot, and even her brother seemed
kind. There was not a tree in the garden whose foliage was not illumined
as by the light of a setting sun; and the breeze spoke to her in a voice
whose melody was borrowed from her own heart.

“When at length she saw him,--when she said to herself, He is
there,--she felt as if all the felicity of earth was comprised in that
single sensation,--at least she felt that all her own was. She no longer
indulged the wish to attract or to subdue him--absorbed in his
existence, she forgot her own--immersed in the consciousness of her own
felicity, she lost the wish, or rather the pride, of BESTOWING it. In
the impassioned revelry of the heart, she flung the pearl of existence
into the draught in which she pledged her lover, and saw it melt away
without a sigh. But now she was beginning to feel, that for this
intensity of feeling, this profound devotedness, she was entitled at
least to an honourable acknowledgement on the part of her lover; and
that the mysterious delay in which her existence was wasted, might make
that acknowledgement come perhaps too late. She expressed this to him;
but to these appeals, (not the least affecting of which had no language
but that of looks), he replied only by a profound but uneasy silence, or
by a levity whose wild and frightful sallies had something in them still
more alarming.

“At times he appeared even to insult the heart over which he had
triumphed, and to affect to doubt his conquest with the air of one who
is revelling in its certainty, and who mocks the captive by asking “if
it is really in chains?”

“You do not love?” he would say;--“you cannot love _me_ at least. Love,
in your happy Christian country, must be the result of cultivated
taste,--of harmonized habits,--of a felicitous congeniality of
pursuits,--of thought, and hopes, and feelings, that, in the sublime
language of the Jewish poet, (prophet I meant), ‘tell and certify to
each other; and though they have neither speech or language, a voice is
heard among them.’ You cannot love a being repulsive in his
appearance,--eccentric in his habits,--wild and unsearchable in his
feelings,--and inaccessible in the settled purpose of his fearful and
fearless existence. No,” he added in a melancholy and decided tone of
voice, “you cannot love me under the circumstances of your new
existence. Once----but that is past.--You are now a baptized daughter of
the Catholic church,--the member of a civilized community,--the child of
a family that knows not the stranger. What, then, is there between me
and thee, Isidora, or, as your Fra Jose would phrase it, (if he knows so
much Greek), τι εμοι και σοι.”--“I loved you,” answered the Spanish
maiden, speaking in the same pure, firm, and tender voice in which she
had spoken when she first was the sole goddess of her fairy and flowery
isle; “I loved you before I was a Christian. They have changed my
creed--but they never can change my heart. I love you still--I will
be yours for ever! On the shore of the desolate isle,--from the
grated window of my Christian prison,--I utter the same sounds. What
can woman, what can man, in all the boasted superiority of his
character and feeling, (which I have learned only since I became a
Christian, or an European), do more? You but insult me when you appear
to doubt that feeling, which you may wish to have analysed, because you
do not experience or cannot comprehend it. Tell me, then, _what it is to
love?_ I defy all your eloquence, all your sophistry, to answer the
question as truly as I can. If you would wish to know what is love,
inquire not at the tongue of man, but at the heart of woman.”--“What is
love?” said Melmoth; “is that the question?”--“You doubt that I love,”
said Isidora--“tell me, then, what is love?”--“You have imposed on me a
task,” said Melmoth smiling, but not in mirth, “so congenial to my
feelings and habits of thought, that the execution will doubtless be
inimitable. To love, beautiful Isidora, is to live in a world of the
heart’s own creation--all whose forms and colours are as brilliant as
they are deceptive and unreal. To those who love there is neither day or
night, summer or winter, society or solitude. They have but two eras in
their delicious but visionary existence,--and those are thus marked in
the heart’s calendar--_presence_--_absence_. These are the substitutes
for all the distinctions of nature and society. The world to them
contains but one individual,--and that individual is to them the world
as well as its single inmate. The atmosphere of his presence is the only
air they can breathe in,--and the light of his eye the only sun of their
creation, in whose rays they bask and live.”--“Then I love,” said
Isidora internally. “To love,” pursued Melmoth, “is to live in an
existence of perpetual contradictions--to feel that absence is
insupportable, and yet be doomed to experience the presence of the
object as almost equally so--to be full of ten thousand thoughts while
he is absent, the confession of which we dream will render our next
meeting delicious, yet when the hour of meeting arrives, to feel
ourselves, by a timidity alike oppressive and unaccountable, robbed of
the power of expressing one--to be eloquent in his absence, and dumb in
his presence--to watch for the hour of his return as for the dawn of a
new existence, yet when it arrives, to feel all those powers suspended
which we imagined it would restore to energy--_to be the statue that
meets the sun, but without the music his presence should draw from
it_--to watch for the light of his looks, as a traveller in the deserts
looks for the rising of the sun; and when it bursts on our awakened
world, to sink fainting under its overwhelming and intolerable glory,
and almost wish it were night again--this is love!”--“Then I believe I
love,” said Isidora half audibly. “To feel,” added Melmoth with
increasing energy, “that our existence is so absorbed in his, that we
have lost all consciousness but of his presence--all sympathy but of his
enjoyments--all sense of suffering but when he suffers--_to be_ only
because _he is_--and to have no other use of being but to devote it to
him, while our humiliation increases in proportion to our devotedness;
and the lower you bow before your idol, the prostrations seem less and
less worthy of being the expression of your devotion,--till you are only
_his_, when you are not yourself--To feel that to the sacrifice of
yourself, all other sacrifices are inferior; and in it, therefore, all
other sacrifices must be included. That she who loves, must remember no
longer her individual existence, her natural existence--that she must
consider parents, country, nature, society, religion itself--(you
tremble, Immalee--Isidora I would say)--only as grains of incense flung
on the altar of the heart, to burn and exhale their sacrificed odours
there.”--“Then I do love,” said Isidora; and she wept and trembled
indeed at this terrible confession--“for I have forgot the ties they
told me were natural,--the country of which they said I was a native. I
will renounce, if it must be so, parents,--country,--the habits which I
have acquired,--the thoughts which I have learnt,--the religion which
I----Oh no! my God! my Saviour!” she exclaimed, darting from the
casement, and clinging to the crucifix--“No! I will never renounce
you!--I will never renounce you!--you will not forsake me in the hour of
death!--you will not desert me in the moment of trial!--you will not
forsake me at this moment!”

“By the wax-lights that burned in her apartment, Melmoth could see her
prostrate before the sacred image. He could see that devotion of the
heart which made it throb almost visibly in the white and palpitating
bosom--the clasped hands that seemed imploring aid against that
rebellious heart, whose beatings they vainly struggled to repress; and
then, locked and upraised, asked forgiveness from heaven for their
fruitless opposition. He could see the wild but profound devotion with
which she clung to the crucifix,--and he shuddered to behold it. He
never gazed on that symbol,--his eyes were immediately averted;--yet now
he looked long and intently at her as she knelt before it. He seemed to
suspend the diabolical instinct that governed his existence, and to view
her for the pure pleasure of sight. Her prostrate figure,--her rich
robes that floated round her like drapery round an inviolate
shrine,--her locks of light streaming over her naked shoulders,--her
small white hands locked in agony of prayer,--the purity of expression
that seemed to identify the agent with the employment, and made one
believe they saw not a suppliant, but the embodied spirit of
supplication, and feel, that lips like those had never held communion
with aught below heaven.--All this Melmoth beheld; and feeling that in
this he could never participate, he turned away his head in stern and
bitter agony,--and the moon-beam that met his burning eye saw no tear
there.

“Had he looked a moment longer, he might have beheld a change in the
expression of Isidora too flattering to his pride, if not to his heart.
He might have marked all that profound and perilous absorption of the
soul, when it is determined to penetrate the mysteries of love or of
religion, and chuse “whom it will serve”--that _pause_ on the brink of
an abyss, in which all its energies, its passions, and its powers, are
to be immersed--that pause, while the balance is trembling (and we
tremble with it) between God and man.

“In a few moments, Isidora arose from before the cross. There was more
composure, more elevation in her air. There was also that air of
decision which an unreserved appeal to the Searcher of hearts never
fails to communicate even to the weakest of those he has made.

“Melmoth, returning to his station beneath the casement, looked on her
for some time with a mixture of compassion and wonder--feelings that he
hasted to repel, as he eagerly demanded, “What proof are you ready to
give of _that_ love I have described--of that which alone deserves the
name?”--“Every proof,” answered Isidora firmly, “that the most devoted
of the daughters of man can give--my heart and hand,--my resolution to
be yours amid mystery and grief,--to follow you in exile and loneliness
(if it must be) through the world!”

“As she spoke, there was a light in her eye,--a glow on her brow,--an
expansive and irradiated sublimity around her figure,--that made it
appear like the rare and glorious vision of the personified union of
passion and purity,--as if those eternal rivals had agreed to reconcile
their claims, to meet on the confines of their respective dominions, and
had selected the form of Isidora as the temple in which their league
might be hallowed, and their union consummated--and never were the
opposite divinities so deliciously lodged. They forgot their ancient
feuds, and agreed to dwell there for ever.

“There was a grandeur, too, about her slender form, that seemed to
announce that pride of purity,--that confidence in external weakness,
and internal energy,--that conquest without armour,--that victory over
the victor, which makes the latter blush at his triumph, and compels him
to bow to the standard of the besieged fortress at the moment of its
surrender. She stood like a woman devoted, but not humiliated by her
devotion--uniting tenderness with magnanimity--willing to sacrifice
every thing to her lover, but that which must lessen the value of the
sacrifice in his eyes--willing to be the victim, but feeling worthy to
be the priestess.

“Melmoth gazed on her as she stood. One generous, one human feeling,
throbbed in his veins, and thrilled in his heart. He saw her in her
beauty,--her devotedness,--her pure and perfect innocence,--her sole
feeling for one who could not, by the fearful power of his unnatural
existence, feel for mortal being. He turned aside, and did not weep; or
if he did, wiped away his tears, as a fiend might do, with his burning
talons, when he sees a new victim arrive for torture; and, _repenting of
his repentance_, rends away _the blot_ of compunction, and arms himself
for his task of renewed infliction.

“Well, then, Isidora, you will give me no proof of your love? Is that
what I must understand?”--“Demand,” answered the innocent and
high-souled Isidora, “any proof that woman ought to give--more is not in
human power--less would render the proof of no value!”

“Such was the impression that these words made on Melmoth, whose heart,
however, plunged in unutterable crimes, had never been polluted by
sensuality, that he started from the spot where he stood,--gazed on her
for a moment,--and then exclaimed, “Well! you have given me proofs of
love unquestionable! It remains for me to give you a proof of that love
which I have described--of that love which only _you_ could inspire--of
that love which, under happier circumstances, I might---- But no
matter--it is not my business to analyse the feeling, but to give the
proof.” He extended his arm toward the casement at which she
stood.--“Would you then consent to unite your destiny with mine? Would
you indeed be mine amid mystery and sorrow? Would you follow me from
land to sea, and from sea to land,--a restless, homeless, devoted
being,--with the brand on your brow, and the curse on your name? Would
you indeed _be mine_?--my own--my only Immalee?”--“I would--I
will!”--“Then,” answered Melmoth, “on this spot receive the proof of my
eternal gratitude. On this spot I renounce your sight!--I disannul your
engagement!--I fly from you for ever!” And as he spoke, he disappeared.




CHAPTER XXII.

    I’ll not wed Paris,--Romeo is my husband.

    SHAKESPEARE.


“Isidora was so accustomed to the wild exclamations and (to her)
unintelligible allusions of her mysterious lover, that she felt no
unwonted alarm at his singular language, and abrupt departure. There was
nothing in either more menacing or formidable than she had often
witnessed; and she recollected, that after these paroxysms, he often
re-appeared in a mood comparatively tranquil. She felt sustained,
therefore, by this reflection,--and perhaps by that mysterious
conviction impressed on the hearts of those who love profoundly--that
passion must always be united with suffering; and she seemed to hear,
with a kind of melancholy submission to the fatality of love, that her
lot was to suffer from lips that were sure to verify the oracle. The
disappearance, therefore, of Melmoth, gave her less surprise than a
summons from her mother a few hours after, which was delivered in these
words: “Madonna Isidora, your lady-mother desires your presence in the
tapestried chamber--having received intelligence by a certain express,
which she deems fitting you should be acquainted withal.”

“Isidora had been in some degree prepared for extraordinary intelligence
by an extraordinary bustle in this grave and quiet household. She had
heard steps passing, and voices resounding, but

    “She wist not what they were,”

and thought not of what they meant. She imagined that her mother might
have some communication to make about some intricate point of conscience
which Fra Jose had not discussed to her satisfaction, from which she
would make an instant transition to the levity visible in the mode in
which one attendant damsel arranged her hair, and the suspected sound of
a ghitarra under the window of another, and then fly off at a tangent to
inquire how the capons were fed, and why the eggs and Muscadine had not
been duly prepared for Fra Jose’s supper. Then would she fret about the
family clock not chiming synchronically with the bells of the
neighbouring church where she performed her devotions. And finally, she
fretted about every thing, from the fattening of the “pullen,” and the
preparation for the olio, up to the increasing feuds between the
Molinists and Jansenists, which had already visited Spain, and the
deadly dispute between the Dominican and Franciscan orders, relative to
the habit in which it was most effective to salvation for the dying body
of the sinner to be wrapped. So between her kitchen and her
oratory,--her prayers to the saints, and her scoldings to her
servants,--her devotion and her anger,--Donna Clara continued to keep
herself and domestics in a perpetual state of interesting occupation and
gentle excitement.

“Something of this Isidora expected on the summons, and she was,
therefore, surprised to see Donna Clara seated at her writing desk,--a
large and fairly written manuscript of a letter extended before
her,--and to hear words thereafter uttered thus: “Daughter, I have sent
for you, that you might with me partake of the pleasure these lines
should afford both; and that you may do so, I desire you to sit and hear
while they are read to you.”

“Donna Clara, as she uttered these words, was seated in a monstrous
high-backed chair, of which she actually seemed a part, so wooden was
her figure, so moveless her features, so lack-lustre her eyes.

“Isidora curtsied low, and sat on one of the cushions with which the
room was heaped,--while a spectacled duenna, enthroned on another
cushion at the right hand of Donna Clara, read, with sundry pauses and
some difficulty, the following letter, which Donna Clara had just
received from her husband, who had landed, not _at Ossuna_(23), but at a
real sea-port town in Spain, and was now on his way to join his family.

    “DONNA CLARA,

    “It is about a year since I received your letter advising me of the
    recovery of our daughter, whom we believed lost with her nurse on
    her voyage to India when an infant, to which I would sooner have
    replied, were I not otherwise hindered by concerns of business.

    “I would have you understand, that I rejoice not so much that I have
    recovered a daughter, as that heaven hath regained a soul and a
    subject, as it were, _e faucibus Draconis--e profundis
    Barathri_--the which terms Fra Jose will make plain to your weaker
    comprehension.

    “I trust that, through the ministry of that devout servant of God
    and the church, she is now become as complete a Catholic in all
    points necessary, absolute, doubtful, or incomprehensible,--formal,
    essential, venial, and indispensible, as becomes the daughter of an
    old Christian such as I (though unworthy of that honour) boast
    myself to be. Moreover, I expect to find her, as a Spanish maiden
    should be, equipped and accomplished with all the virtues pertaining
    to that character, especially those of discretion and reserve. The
    which qualities, as I have always perceived to reside in you, so I
    hope you have laboured to transfer to her,--a transfer by which the
    receiver is enriched, and the giver not impoverished.

    “Finally, as maidens should be rewarded for their chastity and
    reserve by being joined in wedlock with a worthy husband, so it is
    the duty of a careful father to provide such a one for his daughter,
    that she do not pass her marriageable age, and sit in discontent and
    squalidness at home, as one overlooked of the other sex. My fatherly
    care, therefore, moving me, I shall bring with me one who is to be
    her husband, Don Gregorio Montilla, of whose qualifications I have
    not now leisure to speak, but whom I expect she will receive as
    becomes the dutiful daughter, and you as the obedient wife, of

    FRANCISCO DI ALIAGA.”

  (23) Vide Don Quixote, Vol. II. Smollet’s Translation.

“You have heard your father’s letter, daughter,” said Donna Clara,
placing herself as in act to speak, “and doubtless sit silent in
expectation of hearing from me a rehearsal of the duties pertaining to
the state on which you are so soon to enter, and which, I take it, are
three; that is to say, obedience, silence, and thriftiness. And first of
the first, which, as I conceive, divides itself into thirteen
heads,”---- “Holy saints!” said the duenna under her breath, “how pale
Madonna Isidora grows!”--“First of the first,” continued Donna Clara,
clearing her throat, elevating her spectacles with one hand, and fixing
three demonstrative fingers of the other on a huge clasped volume,
containing the life of St Francis Xavier, that lay on the desk before
her,--“as touching the thirteen heads into which the first divides
itself, the eleven first, I take it, are the most profitable--the two
last I shall leave you to be instructed in by your husband. First,
then,”---- Here she was interrupted by a slight noise, which did not,
however, draw her attention, till she was startled by a scream from the
duenna, who exclaimed, “The Virgin be my protection! Madonna Isidora has
fainted!”

“Donna Clara lowered her spectacles, glanced at the figure of her
daughter, who had fallen from her cushion, and lay breathless on the
floor, and, after a short pause, replied, “She _has_ fainted. Raise
her.--Call for assistance, and apply some cold water, or bear her into
the open air. I fear I have lost the mark in the life of this holy
saint,” muttered Donna Clara when alone; “this comes of this foolish
business of love and marriage. I never loved in my life, thank the
saints!--and as to marriage, that is according to the will of God and of
our parents.”

“The unfortunate Isidora was lifted from the floor, conveyed into the
open air, whose breath had the same effect on her still elementary
existence, that water was said to have on that of the _ombre pez_,
(man-fish), of whom the popular traditions of Barcelona were at that
time, and still have been, rife.

“She recovered; and sending an apology to Donna Clara for her sudden
indisposition, intreated her attendants to leave her, as she wished to
be alone. Alone!--that is a word to which those who love annex but one
idea,--that of being in society with one who is their all. She wished in
this (to her) terrible emergency, to ask counsel of him whose image was
ever present to her, and whose voice she heard with the mind’s ear
distinctly even in absence.

“The crisis was indeed one calculated to try a female heart; and
Isidora’s, with its potency of feeling, opposed to utter destitution of
judgment and of experience,--its native habits of resolution and
self-direction, and its acquired ones of timidity and diffidence almost
to despondency,--became the victim of emotions, whose struggle seemed at
first to threaten her reason.

“Her former independent and instinctive existence revived in her heart
at some moments, and suggested to her resolutions wild and desperate,
but such as the most timid females have been known, under the pressure
of a fearful exigency, to purpose, and even to execute. Then the
constraint of her new habits,--the severity of her factitious
existence,--and the solemn power of her newly-learned but deeply-felt
religion,--made her renounce all thoughts of resistance or opposition,
as offences against heaven.

“Her former feelings, her new duties, beat in terrible conflict against
her heart; and, trembling at the isthmus on which she stood, she felt
it, under the influence of opposing tides, narrowing every moment under
her feet.

“This was a dreadful day to her. She had sufficient time for reflection,
but she had within her the conviction that reflection could be of no
use,--that the circumstances in which she was placed, not her own
thoughts, must decide for her,--and that, situated as she was, mental
power was no match for physical.

“There is not, perhaps, a more painful exercise of the mind than that of
treading, with weary and impatient pace, the entire round of thought,
and arriving at the same conclusion for ever; then setting out again
with increased speed and diminished strength, and again returning to the
very same spot--of sending out all our faculties on a voyage of
discovery, and seeing them all return empty, and watch the wrecks as
they drift helplessly along, and sink before the eye that hailed their
outward expedition with joy and confidence.

“All that day she thought how it was possible to liberate herself from
her situation, while the feeling that liberation was impossible clung to
the bottom of her heart; and this sensation of the energies of the soul
in all their strength, being in vain opposed to imbecillity and
mediocrity, when aided by circumstances, is one productive alike of
melancholy and of irritation. We feel, like prisoners in romance, bound
by threads to which the power of magic has given the force of adamant.

“To those whose minds incline them rather to observe, than to sympathize
with the varieties of human feeling, it would have been interesting to
watch the restless agony of Isidora, contrasted with the cold and serene
satisfaction of her mother, who employed the whole of the day in
composing, with the assistance of Fra Jose, what Juvenal calls “_verbosa
et grandis epistola_,” in answer to that of her husband; and to conceive
how two human beings, apparently of similarly-constructed organs, and
destined apparently to sympathize with each other, could draw from the
same fountain waters sweet and bitter.

“On her plea of continued indisposition, Isidora was excused from
appearing before her mother during the remainder of the day. The night
came on,--the night, which, by concealing the artificial objects and
manners which surrounded her, restored to her, in some degree, the
consciousness of her former existence, and gave her a sense of
independence she never felt by day. The absence of Melmoth increased her
anxiety. She began to apprehend that his departure was intended to be
final, and her heart sunk at the thought.

“To the mere reader of romance, it may seem incredible that a female of
Isidora’s energy and devotedness should feel anxiety or terror in a
situation so common to a heroine. She has only to stand proof against
all the importunities and authority of her family, and announce her
desperate resolution to share the destiny of a mysterious and
unacknowledged lover. All this sounds very plausible and interesting.
Romances have been written and read, whose interest arose from the noble
and impossible defiance of the heroine to all powers human and
superhuman alike. But neither the writers or readers seem ever to have
taken into account the thousand petty external causes that operate on
human agency with a force, if not more powerful, far more effective than
the grand internal motive which makes so grand a figure in romance, and
so rare and trivial a one in common life.

“Isidora would have died for him she loved. At the stake or the scaffold
she would have avowed her passion, and triumphed in perishing as its
victim. The mind can collect itself for one great effort, but it is
exhausted by the eternally-recurring necessity of domestic
conflicts,--victories by which she must lose, and defeats by which she
might gain the praise of perseverance, and feel such gain was loss. The
last single and terrible effort of the Jewish champion, in which he and
his enemies perished together, must have been a luxury compared to his
blind drudgery in his mill.

“Before Isidora lay that painful and perpetual struggle of fettered
strength with persecuting weakness, which, if the truth were told, would
divest half the heroines of romance of the power or wish to contend
against the difficulties that beset them. Her mansion was a prison--she
had no power (and if she possessed the power, would never have exercised
it) of obtaining an unpermitted or unobserved egress from the doors of
the house for one moment. Thus her escape was completely barred; and had
every door in the house been thrown open, she would have felt like a
bird on its first flight from the cage, without a spray that she dared
to rest on. Such was her prospect, even if she could effect her
escape--at home it was worse.

“The stern and cold tone of authority in which her father’s letter was
written, gave her but little hope that in her father she would find a
friend. Then the feeble and yet imperious mediocrity of her mother--the
selfish and arrogant temper of Fernan--the powerful influence and
incessant documentising of Fra Jose, whose good-nature was no match for
his love of authority--the daily domestic persecution--that vinegar that
would wear out any rock--the being compelled to listen day after day to
the same exhausting repetition of exhortation, chiding, reproach, and
menace, or seek refuge in her chamber, to waste the weary hours in
loneliness and tears--this strife maintained by one strong indeed in
purpose, but feeble in power, against so many all sworn to work their
will, and have their way--this perpetual conflict with evils so trivial
in the items, but so heavy in the amount, to those who have the debt to
pay daily and hourly,--was too much for the resolution of Isidora, and
she wept in hopeless despondency, as she felt that already her courage
shrunk from the encounter, and knew not what concessions might be
extorted from her increasing inability of resistance.

“Oh!” she cried, clasping her hands in the extremity of her distress,
“Oh that he were but here to direct, to counsel me!--that he were here
even no longer as my lover, but only as my adviser!”

“It is said that a certain power is always at hand to facilitate the
wishes that the individual forms for his own injury; and so it should
seem in the present instance,--for she had scarce uttered these words,
when the shadow of Melmoth was seen darkening the garden walk,--and the
next moment he was beneath the casement. As she saw him approach, she
uttered a cry of mingled joy and fear, which he hushed by making a
signal of silence with his hand, and then whispered, “I know it all!”

“Isidora was silent. She had nothing but her recent distress to
communicate,--and of that, it appeared, he was already apprized. She
waited, therefore, in mute anxiety for some words of counsel or of
comfort. “I know all!” continued Melmoth; “your father has landed in
Spain--he brings with him your destined husband. The fixed purpose of
your whole family, as obstinate as they are weak, it will be bootless in
you to resist; and this day fortnight will see you the bride of
Montilla.”--“I will first be the bride of the grave,” said Isidora, with
perfect and fearful calmness.

“At these words, Melmoth advanced and gazed on her more closely. Any
thing of intense and terrible resolution,--of feeling or action in
extremity,--made harmony with the powerful but disordered chords of his
soul. He required her to repeat the words--she did so, with quivering
lip, but unfaultering voice. He advanced still nearer to gaze on her as
she spoke. It was a beautiful and fearful sight to see her as she
stood;--her marble face--her moveless features--her eyes in which burned
the fixed and livid light of despair, like a lamp in a sepulchral
vault--the lips that half opened, and remaining unclosed, appeared as if
the speaker was unconscious of the words that had escaped them, or
rather, as if they had burst forth by involuntary and incontroulable
impulse;--so she stood, like a statue, at her casement, the moonlight
giving her white drapery the appearance of stone, and her wrought-up and
determined mind lending the same rigidity to her expression. Melmoth
himself felt confounded--appalled he could not feel. He retreated, and
then returning, demanded, “Is this your resolution, Isidora?--and have
you indeed resolution to”---- “To die!” answered Isidora, with the same
unaltered accent,--the same calm expression,--and seeming, as she spake,
capable of all she expressed; and this union, in the same slight and
tender form, of those eternal competitors, energy and fragility, beauty
and death, made every human pulse in Melmoth’s frame beat with a
throbbing unknown before. “Can you, then,” he said, with averted head,
and in a tone that seemed ashamed of its own softness--“Can you, then,
die for him you will not live for?”--“I have said I will die sooner than
be the bride of Montilla,” answered Isidora. “Of death I know nothing,
nor do I know much of life--but I would rather perish, than be the
perjured wife of the man I cannot love.”--“And why can you not love
him?” said Melmoth, toying with the heart he held in his hand, like a
mischievous boy with a bird, around whose leg he has fastened a
string.--“Because I can love but one. You were the first human being I
ever saw who could teach me language, and who taught me feeling. Your
image is for ever before me, present or absent, sleeping or waking. I
have seen fairer forms,--I have listened to softer voices,--I might have
met gentler hearts,--but the first, the indelible image, is written on
mine, and its characters will never be effaced till that heart is a clod
of the valley. I loved you not for comeliness,--I loved you not for gay
deportment, or fond language, or all that is said to be lovely in the
eye of woman,--I loved you because you were my _first_,--the sole
connecting link between the human world and my heart,--the being who
brought me acquainted with that wondrous instrument that lay unknown and
untouched within and me, whose chords, as long as they vibrate, will
disdain to obey any touch but that of their first mover--because your
image is mixed in my imagination with all the glories of nature--because
your voice, when I heard it first, was something in accordance with the
murmur of the ocean, and the music of the stars. And still its tones
recal the unimaginable blessedness of those scenes where first I heard
it,--and still I listen to it like an exile who hears the music of his
native country in a land that is very far off,--because nature and
passion, memory and hope, alike cling round your image; and amid the
light of my former existence, and the gloom of my present, there is but
one form that retains its reality and its power through light and shade.
I am like one who has traversed many climates, and looks but to one sun
as the light of all, whether bright or obscure. I have loved once--and
for ever!” Then, trembling at the words she uttered, she added, with
that sweet mixture of maiden pride and purity that redeems while it
pledges the hostage of the heart, “The feelings I have entrusted you
with may be abused, but never alienated.”--“And these are your _real_
feelings?” said Melmoth, pausing long, and moving his frame like one
agitated by deep and uneasy thoughts. “Real!” repeated Isidora, with
some transient glow on her cheek--“real! Can I utter any thing but what
is real? Can I so soon forget my existence?” Melmoth looked up once more
as she spoke--“If such is your resolution,--if such be your feelings
indeed,”---- “And they are!--they are!” exclaimed Isidora, her tears
bursting through the slender fingers, which, after extending towards
him, she clasped over her burning eyes. “Then look to the alternative
that awaits you!” said Melmoth slowly, bringing out the words with
difficulty, and, as it appeared, with some feeling for his victim; “a
union with the man you cannot love,--or the perpetual hostility, the
wearying, wasting, almost annihilating persecution of your family! Think
of days that”---- “Oh let me not think!” cried Isidora, wringing her
white and slender hands; “tell me--tell me what may be done to escape
them!”--“Now, in good troth,” answered Melmoth, knitting his brows with
a most cogitative wrinkle, while it was impossible to discover whether
his predominant expression was that of irony or profound and sincere
feeling--“I know not what resource you have unless you wed me.”--“Wed
you!” cried Isidora, retreating from the window--“Wed you!” and she
clasped her hands over her pale forehead;--and at this moment, when the
hope of her heart, the thread on which her existence was suspended, was
within her reach, she trembled to touch it. “Wed you!--but how is that
possible?”--“All things are possible to those who love,” said Melmoth,
with his sardonic smile, which was hid by the shades of the night. “And
you will wed me, then, by the rites of the church of which I am a
member?”--“Aye! or of any other!”--“Oh speak not so wildly!--say not
_aye_ in that horrible voice! Will you wed me as a Christian maiden
should be wed?--Will you love me as a Christian wife should be loved? My
former existence was like a dream,--but now I am awake. If I unite my
destiny to yours,--if I abandon my family, my country, my”---- “If you
do, how will you be the loser?--your family harasses and confines
you--your country would shout to see you at the stake, for you have some
heretical feelings about you, Isidora. And for the rest”---- “God!” said
the poor victim, clasping her hands, and looking upwards, “God, aid me
in this extremity!”--“If I am to wait here only as a witness to your
devotions,” said Melmoth with sullen asperity, “my stay will not be
long.”--“You cannot leave me, then, to struggle with fear and perplexity
alone! How is it possible for me to escape, even if”---- “By whatever
means I possess of entering this place and retiring unobserved,--by the
same you may effect your escape. If you have resolution, the effort will
cost you little,--if love,--nothing. Speak, shall I be here at this hour
to-morrow night, to conduct you to liberty and”---- Safety he would have
added, but his voice faultered. “_To-morrow night_,” said Isidora, after
a long pause, and in accents almost inarticulate. She closed the
casement as she spoke, and Melmoth slowly departed.

END OF THIRD VOLUME.




    Transcriber’s Note:

    The following is a list of corrections made to the original.
    The first line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

 CHILDREN.
 CHILDREN.”

 say to heaven, We have a sun though your’s is set;--the solemn and
 say to heaven, We have a sun though yours is set;--the solemn and

 the last garment on your person, and the last denier in your purse.
 the last garment on your person, and the last denier in your purse.”

 matted coil of adders, had there first recieved the bloody homage of the
 matted coil of adders, had there first received the bloody homage of the

 For many a night these canoes might be seen glancing past each other
 “For many a night these canoes might be seen glancing past each other

 regularity of these phœnomena, in the climate she inhabited, divested
 regularity of these phænomena, in the climate she inhabited, divested

 But to this question he could obtain no satisfactory answer; and it was
 “But to this question he could obtain no satisfactory answer; and it was

 smile at her as she bounded after him, breathles and glowing with newly
 smile at her as she bounded after him, breathless and glowing with newly

 torn away.”
 torn away.

 surmounted by a trident.--that is the temple of Maha-deva, a goddess who
 surmounted by a trident,--that is the temple of Maha-deva, a goddess who

 made such an an artless transition from profound and meditative grief to
 made such an artless transition from profound and meditative grief to

 Her glowing features, as she turned them toward him, with an expression
 “Her glowing features, as she turned them toward him, with an expression

 CHAPTER XIV.
 CHAPTER XVII.

 important subject(16), whether their iackets should be red or white--or
 important subject(16), whether their jackets should be red or white--or

 CHAPTER XVII.
 CHAPTER XVIII.

 than that gloom.--All around her gave to her form, when it it was momently
 than that gloom.--All around her gave to her form, when it was momently

 The waves deserting their station, left, from time to time, the sands
 “The waves deserting their station, left, from time to time, the sands

 pale, terrified, but resolute, retreated from him.”
 pale, terrified, but resolute, retreated from him.

 CHAPTER XVII.
 CHAPTER XIX.

 to welcome her. As he spoke, all eyes were turned to a figure, which,
 to welcome her.” As he spoke, all eyes were turned to a figure, which,

 At the approach of a large party of females, there was all that anxious
 “At the approach of a large party of females, there was all that anxious

 CHAPTER XVIII.
 CHAPTER XX.

 “Excæcavit oculos eorum ne viderent.”
 “Excæcavit oculos eorum ne viderent.

 subsisted, when life itself was failing? On my passsage to this Christian
 subsisted, when life itself was failing? On my passage to this Christian

 first I ever heard, and which, when I cease to hear’---- “You will hear
 first I ever heard, and which, when I cease to hear”---- “You will hear

 CHAPTER XIX.
 CHAPTER XXI.

 CHAPTER XX.
 CHAPTER XXII.

 Molinists and Jausenists, which had already visited Spain, and the
 Molinists and Jansenists, which had already visited Spain, and the





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Melmoth the Wanderer Vol 3 (of 4), by 
Charles Robert Maturin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELMOTH THE WANDERER VOL 3 (OF 4) ***

***** This file should be named 53687-0.txt or 53687-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/6/8/53687/

Produced by David Edwards, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Melmoth the Wanderer Vol. 4 (of 4), by 
Charles Robert Maturin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Melmoth the Wanderer Vol. 4 (of 4)

Author: Charles Robert Maturin

Release Date: December 7, 2016 [EBook #53688]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELMOTH THE WANDERER VOL. 4 (OF 4) ***




Produced by David Edwards, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






    Transcriber’s Notes:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including inconsistencies in spelling, hyphenation, and
    punctuation. Some corrections of spelling and punctuation have been
    made. They are listed at the end of the text.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.




  MELMOTH
  THE
  WANDERER:
  A
  TALE.

  BY THE AUTHOR OF “BERTRAM,” &c.

  IN FOUR VOLUMES.

  VOL. IV.

  EDINBURGH:
  PRINTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY,
  AND HURST, ROBINSON, AND CO. CHEAPSIDE,
  LONDON.

  1820.




MELMOTH.




CHAPTER XXIII.

    If he to thee no answer give,
      I’ll give to thee a sign;
    A secret known to nought that live,
      Save but to me and mine.

    * * * * *

    Gone to be married.------

    SHAKESPEARE.


“The whole of the next day was occupied by Donna Clara, to whom
letter-writing was a rare, troublesome, and momentous task, in reading
over and correcting her answer to her husband’s letter; in which
examination she found so much to correct, interline, alter, modify,
expunge, and new-model, that finally Donna Clara’s epistle very much
resembled the work she was now employed in, namely, that of
_overcasting_ a piece of tapestry wrought by her grandmother,
representing the meeting of king Solomon and the queen of Sheba. The new
work, instead of repairing, made fearful havock among the old; but Donna
Clara went on, like her countryman at Mr Peter’s puppet-show, playing
away (with her needle) in a perfect shower of back-strokes,
fore-strokes, side-thrusts, and counter-thrusts, till not a figure in
the tapestry could know himself again. The faded face of Solomon was
garnished with a florid beard of scarlet silk (which Fra Jose at first
told her she must rip out, as it made Solomon very little better than
Judas) that made him resemble a boiled scallop. The fardingale of the
queen of Sheba was expanded to an enormous hoop, of whose shrunk and
pallid wearer it might be truly said, “_Minima est pars sui_.” The dog
that, in the original tapestry, stood by the spurred and booted heel of
the oriental monarch, (who was clad in Spanish costume), by dint of a
few tufts of black and yellow satin, was converted into a tiger,--a
transformation which his grinning fangs rendered as authentic as heart
could wish. And the parrot perched on the queen’s shoulder, with the
help of a train of green and gold, which the ignorant mistook for her
majesty’s mantle, proved a very passable peacock.”

“As little trace of her original epistle did Donna Clara’s present one
bear, as did her elaborate overcasting to the original and painful
labours of her grandmother. In both, however, Donna Clara (who scorned
to flinch) went over the same ground with dim eye, and patient touch,
and inextinguishable and remorseless assiduity. The letter, such as it
was, was still sufficiently characteristic of the writer. Some passages
of it the reader shall be indulged with,--and we reckon on his gratitude
for not insisting on his perusal of the whole. The authentic copy, from
which we are favoured with the extracts, runs thus. * * * * * * * *

“Your daughter takes to her religion like mother’s milk; and well may
she do so, considering that the trunk of our family was planted in the
genuine soil of the Catholic church, and that every branch of of it must
flourish there or perish. For a Neophyte, (as Fra Jose wills me to word
it), she is as promising a sprout as one should wish to see flourishing
within the pale of the holy church;--and for a heathen, she is so
amenable, submissive, and of such maidenly suavity, that for the
comportment of her person, and the discreet and virtuous ordering of her
mind, I have no Christian mother to envy. Nay, I sometimes take pity on
them, when I see the lightness, the exceeding vain carriage, and the
unadvised eagerness to be wedded, of the best trained maidens of our
country. This our daughter hath nothing of, either in her outward
demeanour, or inward mind. She talks little, _therefore she cannot think
much_; and she dreams not of the light devices of love, and is therefore
well qualified for the marriage proposed unto her. * * * * * * * *

“One thing, dear spouse of my soul, I would have thee to take notice of,
and guard like the apple of thine eye,--our daughter is deranged, but
never, on thy discretion, mention this to Don Montilla, even though he
were the descendant in the right line of the Campeador, or of Gonsalvo
di Cordova. Her derangement will in no wise impede or contravene her
marriage,--for be it known to thee, it breaks out but at times, and at
such times, that the most jealous eye of man could not spy it, unless he
had a foretaught intimation of it. She hath strange fantasies swimming
in her brain, such as, that heretics and heathens shall not be
everlastingly damned--(God and the saints protect us!)--which must
clearly proceed from madness,--but which her Catholic husband, if ever
he comes to the knowledge of them, shall know how to expel, by aid of
the church, and conjugal authority. That thou may’st better know the
truth of what I hereby painfully certify, the saints and Fra Jose (who
will not let me tell a lie, because he in a manner holds my pen) can
witness, that about four days before we left Madrid, as we went to
church, and I was about, while ascending the steps, to dole alms to a
mendicant woman wrapt in a mantle, who held up a naked child for the
receiving of charity, your daughter twitched my sleeve, while she
whispered, ‘Madam, she cannot be mother to that child, for she is
covered, and her child is naked. If she were its mother, she would cover
her child, and not be comfortably wrapt herself.’ True it was, I found
afterwards the wretched woman had hired the child from its more wretched
mother, and my alms had paid the price of its hire for the day; but
still that not a whit disproved our daughter insane, inasmuch as it
showed her ignorant of the fashion and usages of the beggars of the
country, and did in some degree shew a doubt of the merit of alms-deeds,
which thou know’st none but heretics or madmen could deny. Other and
grievous proofs of her insanity doth she give daily; but not willing to
incumber you with ink, (which Fra Jose willeth me to call _atramentum_),
I will add but a few particulars to arouse your dormant faculties, which
may be wrapt in lethargic obliviousness by the anodyne of my somniferous
epistolation.”

“Reverend Father,” said Donna Clara, looking up to Fra Jose, who had
dictated the last line, “Don Francisco will know the last line not to be
mine--he heard it in one of your sermons. Let me add the extraordinary
proof of my daughter’s insanity at the ball.”--“Add or diminish, compose
or confound, what you will, in God’s name!” said Fra Jose, vexed at the
frequent erazures and lituras which disfigured the lines of his
dictation; “for though in style I may somewhat boast of my superiority,
in scratches no hen on the best dunghill in Spain can contend with you!
On, then, in the name of all the saints!--and when it pleases heaven to
send an interpreter to your husband, we may hope to hear from him by the
next post-angel, for surely such a letter was never written on earth.”

“With this encouragement and applause, Donna Clara proceeded to relate
sundry other errors and wanderings of her daughter, which, to a mind so
swathed, crippled, and dwarfed, by the ligatures which the hand of
custom had twined round it since its first hour of consciousness, might
well have appeared like the aberrations of insanity. Among other proofs,
she mentioned that Isidora’s first introduction to a Christian and
Catholic church, was on that night of penitence in passion-week, when,
the lights being extinguished, the _miserere_ is chaunted in profound
darkness, the penitents macerate themselves, and groans are heard on
every side instead of prayers, as if the worship of Moloch was renewed
without its fires;--struck with horror at the sounds she heard, and the
darkness which surrounded her, Isidora demanded what they were
doing.--“Worshipping God,” was the answer.

“At the expiration of Lent, she was introduced to a brilliant assembly,
where the gay fandango was succeeded by the soft notes of the
seguedilla,--and the crackling of the castanets, and the tinkling of the
guitars, marked alternate time to the light and ecstatic step of youth,
and the silvery and love-tuned voice of beauty. Touched with delight at
all she saw and heard,--the smiles that dimpled and sparkled over her
beautiful features reflecting every shade of pleasure they encountered,
like the ripplings of a brook kissed by the moon-beams,--she eagerly
asked, “And are not these worshipping God?”--“Out on it, daughter!”
interposed Donna Clara, who happened to overhear the question; “This is
a vain and sinful pastime,--the invention of the devil to delude the
children of folly,--hateful in the eyes of heaven and its saints,--and
abhorred and renounced by the faithful.”--“Then there are two Gods,”
said Isidora sighing, “the God of smiles and happiness, and the God of
groans and blood. Would I could serve the former!”--“I will take order
you shall serve the latter, heathenish and profane that you are!”
answered Donna Clara, as she hurried her from the assembly, shocked at
the scandal which her words might have given. These and many similar
anecdotes were painfully indited in Donna Clara’s long epistle, which,
after being folded and sealed by Fra Jose, (who swore by the habit he
wore, he had rather study twenty pages of the Polyglot fasting, than
read it over once more), was duly forwarded to Don Francisco.

“The habits and movements of Don Francisco were, like those of his
nation, so deliberate and dilatory, and his aversion to writing letters,
except on mercantile subjects, so well known, that Donna Clara was
actually alarmed at receiving, in the evening of the day in which her
epistle was dispatched, another letter from her husband.

“Its contents must be guessed to be sufficiently singular, when the
result was, that Donna Clara and Fra Jose sat up over them nearly the
whole of the night, in consultation, anxiety, and fear. So intense was
their conference, that it is recorded it was never interrupted even by
the lady telling her beads, or the monk thinking of his supper. All the
artificial habits, the customary indulgences, the factitious existence
of both, were merged in the real genuine fear which pervaded their
minds, and which asserted its power over both in painful and exacting
proportion to their long and hardy rejection of its influence. Their
minds succumbed together, and sought and gave in vain, feeble counsel,
and fruitless consolation. They read over and over again this
extraordinary letter, and at every reading their minds grew darker,--and
their counsels more perplexed,--and their looks more dismal. Ever and
anon they turned their eyes on it, as it lay open before them on Donna
Clara’s ebony writing-desk, and then starting, asked each other by
looks, and sometimes in words, “Did either hear some strange noise in
the house?” The letter, among other matter not important to the reader,
contained the singular passage following. * * * * * *

“In my travel from the place where I landed, to that whence I now
write, I fortuned to be in company with strangers, from whom I heard
things touching me (not as they meant, but as my fear interpreted
them) in a point the most exquisite that can prick and wound the soul
of a Christian father. These I shall discuss unto thee at thy more
leisure. They are full of fearful matter, and such as may perchance
require the aid of some churchman rightly to understand, and fully
to fathom. Nevertheless this I can commend to thy discretion, that
after I had parted from this strange conference, the reports of which
I cannot by letter communicate to thee, I retired to my chamber full
of sad and heavy thoughts, and being seated in my chair, pored over a
tome containing legends of departed spirits, in nowise contradictive
to the doctrine of the holy Catholic church, otherwise I would have
crushed it with the sole of my foot into the fire that burned before
me on the hearth, and spit on its cinders with the spittle of my
mouth. Now, whether it was the company I fortuned to be into, (whose
conversation must never be known but to thee only), or the book I had
been reading, which contained certain extracts from Pliny, Artemidore,
and others, full-filled with tales which I may not now recount, but
which did relate altogether to the revivification of the departed,
appearing in due accordance with our Catholic conceptions of Christian
ghosts in purgatory, with their suitable accoutrements of chains and
flames,--as thus Pliny writeth, “_Apparebat eidolon senex, macie et
senio confectus_,”--or finally, the weariness of my lonely journey, or
other things I know not,--but feeling my mind ill-disposed for deeper
converse with books or my own thoughts, and though oppressed by sleep,
unwilling to retire to rest,--a mood which I and others have often
experienced,--I took out thy letters from the desk in which I duly
reposit them, and read over the description which thou didst send me
of our daughter, upon the first intelligence of her being discovered
in that accursed isle of heathenism,--and I do assure thee, the
description of our daughter hath been written in such characters on the
bosom to which she hath never been clasped, that it would defy the art
of all the limners in Spain to paint it more effectually. So, thinking
on those dark-blue eyes,--and those natural ringlets which will not
obey their new mistress, art,--and that slender undulating shape,--and
thinking it would soon be folded in my arms, and ask the blessing of a
Christian father in Christian tones, I dozed as I sat in my chair; and
my dreams taking part with my waking thoughts, I was a-dreamt that such
a creature, so fair, so fond, so cherubic, sat beside me, and asked
me blessing. As I bowed to give it, I nodded in my chair and awoke.
Awoke I say, for what followed was as palpable to human sight as the
furniture of my apartment, or any other tangible object. There was a
female seated opposite me, clad in a Spanish dress, but her veil flowed
down to her feet. She sat, and seemed to expect that I should bespeak
her first. “Damsel,” I said, “what seekest thou?--or why art thou
here?” The figure never raised its veil, nor motioned with hand or lip.
Mine head was full of what I had heard and read of; and after making
the sign of the cross, and uttering certain prayers, I approached that
figure, and said, “Damsel, what wantest thou?”--“A father,” said the
form, raising its veil, and disclosing the identical features of my
daughter Isidora, as described in thy numerous letters. Thou mayest
well guess my consternation, which I might almost term fear, at the
sight and words of this beautiful but strange and solemn figure. Nor
was my perplexity and trouble diminished but increased, when the
figure, rising and pointing to the door, through which she forthwith
passed with a mysterious grace and incredible alacrity, uttered, _in
transitu_, words like these:--“Save me!--save me!--lose not a moment,
or I am lost!” And I swear to thee, wife, that while that figure sat or
departed, I heard not the rustling of her garments, or the tread of her
foot, or the sound of her respiration--only as she went out, there was
a rushing sound as of a wind passing through the chamber,--and a mist
seemed to hang on every object around me, which dispersed--and I was
conscious of heaving a deep sigh, as if a load had been removed from my
breast. I sat thereafter for an hour pondering on what I had seen, and
not knowing whether to term it a waking dream, or a dreamlike waking. I
am a mortal man, sensible of fear, and liable to error,--but I am also
a Catholic Christian, and have ever been a hearty contemner of your
tales of spectres and visions, excepting always when sanctioned by the
authority of the holy church, and recorded in the lives of her saints
and martyrs. Finding no end or fruit of these my heavy cogitations, I
withdrew myself to bed, where I long lay tossing and sleepless, till
at the approach of morning, just as I was falling into a deep sleep,
I was awoke by a noise like that of a breeze waving my curtains. I
started up, and drawing them, looked around me. There was a glimpse of
day-light appearing through the window-shutters, but not sufficient
to enable me to distinguish the objects in the room, were it not for
the lamp that burned on the hearth, and whose light, though somewhat
dim, was perfectly distinct. By it I discovered, near the door, a
figure which my sight, rendered more acute by my terror, verified as
the identical figure I had before beheld, who, waving its arm with a
melancholy gesture, and uttering in a piteous voice these words, “It is
too late,” disappeared. As, I will own to thee, overcome with horror at
this second visitation, I fell back on my pillow almost bereft of the
use of my faculties, I remember the clock struck three.”

“As Donna Clara and the priest (on their tenth perusal of the letter)
arrived at these words, the clock in the hall below struck three. “That
is a singular coincidence,” said Fra Jose. “Do you think it nothing
more, Father?” said Donna Clara, turning very pale. “I know not,” said
the priest; “many have told credible stories of warnings permitted by
our guardian saints, to be given even by the ministry of inanimate
things. But to what purpose are we warned, when we know not the evil we
are to shun?”--“Hush!--hark!” said Donna Clara, “did you hear no
noise?”--“None,” said Fra Jose listening, not without some appearance of
perturbation--“None,” he added, in a more tranquil and assured voice,
after a pause; “and the noise which I _did_ hear about two hours ago,
was of short continuance, and has not been renewed.”--“What a flickering
light these tapers give!” said Donna Clara, viewing them with eyes
glassy and fixed with fear. “The casements are open,” answered the
priest. “So they have been since we sat here,” returned Donna Clara;
“yet now see what a stream of air comes rushing against them! Holy God!
they flare as if they would go out!”

“The priest, looking up at the tapers, observed the truth of what she
said,--and at the same time perceived the tapestry near the door to be
considerably agitated. “There is a door open in some other direction,”
said he, rising. “You are not going to leave me, Father?” said Donna
Clara, who sat in her chair paralyzed with terror, and unable to follow
him but with her eyes.

“The Father Jose made no answer. He was now in the passage, where a
circumstance which he observed had arrested all his attention,--the door
of Isidora’s apartment was open, and lights were burning in it. He
entered it slowly at first, and gazed around, but its inmate was not
there. He glanced his eye on the bed, but no human form had pressed it
that night--it lay untouched and undisturbed. The casement next caught
his eye, now glancing with the quickness of fear on every object. He
approached it--it was wide open,--the casement that looked towards the
garden. In his horror at this discovery, the good Father could not avoid
uttering a cry that pierced the ears of Donna Clara, who, trembling and
scarce able to make her way to the room, attempted to follow him in
vain, and fell down in the passage. The priest raised and tried to
assist her back to her own apartment. The wretched mother, when at last
placed in her chair, neither fainted or wept; but with white and
speechless lips, and a paralytic motion of her hand, tried to point
towards her daughter’s apartment, as if she wished to be conveyed there.
“It is too late,” said the priest, unconsciously using the ominous words
quoted in the letter of Don Francisco.




CHAPTER XXIV.

    Responde meum argumentum--nomen est nomen--_ergo_, quod tibi est
    nomen--responde argumentum.

    _BEAUMONT and FLETCHER’S Wit at several Weapons._


“That night was the one fixed on for the union of Isidora and Melmoth.
She had retired early to her chamber, and sat at the casement watching
for his approach for hours before she could probably expect it. It might
be supposed that at this terrible crisis of her fate, she felt agitated
by a thousand emotions,--that a soul susceptible like hers felt itself
almost torn in pieces by the struggle,--but it was not so. When a mind
strong by nature, but weakened by fettering circumstances, is driven to
make one strong spring to free itself, it has no leisure to calculate
the weight of its hindrances, or the width of its leap,--it sits with
its chains heaped about it, thinking only of the bound that is to be its
liberation--or----

“During the many hours that Isidora awaited the approach of this
mysterious bridegroom, she felt nothing but the awful sense of that
approach, and of the event that was to follow. So she sat at her
casement, pale but resolute, and trusting in the extraordinary promise
of Melmoth, that by whatever means he was enabled to visit her, by those
she would be enabled to effect her escape, in spite of her well-guarded
mansion, and vigilant household.

“It was near one (the hour at which Fra Jose, who was sitting in
consultation with her mother over that melancholy letter, heard the
noise alluded to in the preceding chapter) when Melmoth appeared in the
garden, and, without uttering a word, threw up a ladder of ropes, which,
in short and sullen whispers, he instructed her to fasten, and assisted
her to descend. They hurried through the garden,--and Isidora, amid all
the novelty of her feelings and situation, could not avoid testifying
her surprise at the facility with which they passed through the
well-secured garden gate.

“They were now in the open country,--a region far wilder to Isidora than
the flowery paths of that untrodden isle, where she had no enemy. Now in
every breeze she heard a menacing voice,--in the echoes of her own light
steps she heard the sound of steps pursuing her.

“The night was very dark,--unlike the midsummer nights in that delicious
climate. A blast sometimes cold, sometimes stifling from heat, indicated
some extraordinary vicissitude in the atmosphere. There is something
very fearful in this kind of wintry feeling in a summer night. The cold,
the darkness, followed by intense heat, and a pale, meteoric lightning,
seemed to unite the mingled evils of the various seasons, and to trace
their sad analogy to life,--whose stormy summer allows youth little to
enjoy, and whose chilling winter leaves age nothing to hope.

“To Isidora, whose sensibilities were still so acutely physical, that
she could feel the state of the elements as if they were the oracles of
nature, which she could interpret at sight,--this dark and troubled
appearance seemed like a fearful omen. More than once she paused,
trembled, and turned on Melmoth a glance of doubt and terror,--which the
darkness of the night, of course, prevented him from observing. Perhaps
there was another cause,--but as they hurried on, Isidora’s strength and
courage began to fail together. She perceived that she was borne on with
a kind of supernatural velocity,--her breath failed,--her feet
faultered,--and she felt like one in a dream.

“Stay!” she exclaimed, gasping from weakness, “stay!--whither am I
going?--where do you bear me?”--“To your nuptials,” answered Melmoth, in
low and almost inarticulate tones;--but whether rendered so by emotion,
or by the speed with which they seemed to fly along, Isidora could not
discover.

“In a few moments, she was forced to declare herself unable to proceed,
and leaned on his arm, gasping and exhausted. “Let me pause,” said she
ominously, “in the name of God!” Melmoth returned no answer. He paused,
however, and supported her with an appearance of anxiety, if not of
tenderness.

“During this interval, she gazed around her, and tried to distinguish
the objects near; but the intense darkness of the night rendered this
almost impossible,--and what she _could_ discover, was not calculated to
dispel her alarm. They seemed to be walking on a narrow and precipitous
path close by a shallow stream, as she could guess, by the hoarse and
rugged sound of its waters, as they fought with every pebble to win
their way. This path was edged on the other side by a few trees, whose
stunted growth, and branches tossing wild and wide to the blast that now
began to whisper mournfully among them, seemed to banish every image of
a summer night from the senses, and almost from the memory. Every thing
around was alike dreary and strange to Isidora, who had never, since her
arrival at the villa, wandered beyond the precincts of the garden,--and
who, even if she had, would probably have found no clue to direct her
where she now was. “This is a fearful night,” said she, half internally.
She then repeated the same words more audibly, perhaps in hope of some
answering and consolatory sounds. Melmoth was silent--and her spirits
subdued by fatigue and emotion, she wept. “Do you already repent the
step you have taken?” said he, laying a strange emphasis on the
word--already. “No, love, no!” replied Isidora, gently wiping away her
tears; “it is impossible for me ever to repent it. But this
loneliness,--this darkness,--this speed,--this silence,--have in them
something almost awful. I feel as if I were traversing some unknown
region. Are these indeed the winds of heaven that sigh around me? Are
these trees of nature’s growth, that nod at me like spectres? How hollow
and dismal is the sound of the blast!--it chills me though the night is
sultry!--and those trees, they cast their shadows over my soul! Oh, is
this like a bridal night?” she exclaimed, as Melmoth, apparently
disturbed at these words, attempted to hurry her on--“Is this like a
bridal? No father, no brother, to support me!--no mother near me!--no
kiss of kindred to greet me!--no congratulating friends!”--and her fears
increasing, she wildly exclaimed, “Where is the priest to bless our
union?--where is the church under whose roof we are to be united?”

“As she spoke, Melmoth, drawing her arm under his, attempted to lead her
gently forward. “There is,” said he, “a ruined monastery near--you may
have observed it from your window.”--“No! I never saw it. Why is it in
ruins?”--“I know not--there were wild stories told. It was said the
Superior, or Prior, or--I know not what--had looked into certain books,
the perusal of which was not altogether sanctioned by the rules of his
order--books of magic they called them. There was much noise about it, I
remember, and some talk of the Inquisition,--but the end of the business
was, the Prior disappeared, some said into the prisons of the
Inquisition, some said into safer custody--(though how that could be, I
cannot well conceive)--and the brethren were drafted into other
communities, and the building became deserted. There were some offers
made for it by the communities of other religious houses, but the evil,
though vague and wild reports, that had gone forth about it, deterred
them, on inquiry, from inhabiting it,--and gradually the building fell
to ruin. It still retains all that can sanctify it in the eyes of the
faithful. There are crucifixes and tomb-stones, and here and there a
cross set up where there has been murder,--for, by a singular
congeniality of taste, a banditti has fixed their seat there now,--and
the traffic of gold for souls, once carried on so profitably by the
former inmates, is exchanged for that of souls for gold, by the
present.”

“At these words, Melmoth felt the slender arm that hung on his
withdrawn,--and he perceived that his victim, between shuddering and
struggling, had _shrunk from his hold_. “But there,” he added, “even
amid those ruins, there dwells a holy hermit,--one who has taken up his
residence near the spot,--he will unite us in his oratory, according to
the rites of your church. He will speak the blessing over us,--and one
of us, at least, shall be blessed.”--“Hold!” said Isidora, repelling,
and standing at what distance from him she could,--her slight figure
expanding to that queen-like dignity with which nature had once invested
her as the fair and sole sovereign of her own island-paradise. “Hold!”
she repeated--“approach me not by another step,--address me not by
another word,--till you tell me when and where I am to be united to
you,--to become your wedded wife! I have borne much of doubt and
terror,--of suspicion and persecution,--but”---- “Hear me, Isidora,”
said Melmoth, terrified at this sudden burst of resolution. “Hear _me_,”
answered the timid but heroic girl, springing, with the elasticity of
her early movements, upon a crag that hung over their stony path, and
clinging to an ash-tree that had burst through its fissures--“Hear me!
Sooner will you rend this tree from its bed of stone, than me from its
trunk! Sooner will I dash this body on the stony bed of the stream that
groans below my feet, than descend into your arms, till you swear to me
they will bear me to honour and safety! For you I have given up all that
my newly-taught duties have told me was holy!--all that my heart long
ago whispered I ought to love! Judge by what I _have_ sacrificed, of
what I _can_ sacrifice--and doubt not that I would be my own victim ten
thousand times sooner than yours!”--“By all that you deem holy!” cried
Melmoth, humbling himself even to kneel before her as she stood,--“my
intentions are as pure as your own soul!--the hermitage is not an
hundred paces off. Come, and do not, by a fantastic and causeless
apprehension, frustrate all the magnanimity and tenderness you have
hitherto shewed, and which have raised you in my eyes not only above
your sex, but above your whole species. Had you not been what you are,
and what no other but you could be, you had never been the bride of
Melmoth. With whom but you did he ever seek to unite his dark and
inscrutable destiny? Isidora,” he added, in tones more potent and
emphatic, perceiving she still hesitated, and clung to the
tree--“Isidora, how weak, how unworthy of you is this! You are in my
power,--absolutely, hopelessly in my power. No human eye can see
_me_--no human arm can aid _you_. You are as helpless as infancy in my
grasp. This dark stream would tell no tales of deeds that stained its
waters,--and the blast that howls round you would never waft your groans
to mortal ear! You are in my power, yet I seek not to abuse it. I offer
you my hand to conduct you to a consecrated building, where we shall be
united according to the fashion of your country--and will you still
persevere in this fanciful and profitless waywardness?”

“As he spoke, Isidora looked round her helplessly--every object was a
confirmation of his arguments--she shuddered and submitted. But as they
walked on in silence, she could not help interrupting it to give
utterance to the thousand anxieties that oppressed her heart.

“But you speak,” said she, in a suppressed and pleading tone,--“you
speak of religion in words that make me tremble--you speak of it as the
fashion of a country,--as a thing of form, of accident, of habit. What
faith do you profess?--what church do you frequent?--what holy rites do
you perform?”--“I venerate all faiths--alike, I hold all religious
rites--pretty much in the same respect,” said Melmoth, while his former
wild and scoffing levity seemed to struggle vainly with a feeling of
involuntary horror. “And do you then, indeed, believe in holy things?”
asked Isidora. “Do you indeed?” she repeated anxiously. “_I believe in a
God_,” answered Melmoth, in a voice that froze her blood; “you have
heard of those who believe and tremble,--such is he who speaks to you!”

“Isidora’s acquaintance with the book from which he quoted, was too
limited to permit her to understand the allusion. She knew, according to
the religious education she had received, more of her breviary than her
Bible; and though she pursued her inquiry in a timid and anxious tone,
she felt no additional terror from words she did not understand.

“But,” she continued, “Christianity is something more than a belief in a
God. Do you also believe in all that the Catholic church declares to be
essential to salvation? Do you believe that”---- And here she added a
name too sacred, and accompanied with terms too awful, to be expressed
in pages so light as these(1). “I believe it all--I know it all,”
answered Melmoth, in a voice of stern and reluctant confession. “Infidel
and scoffer as I may appear to you, there is no martyr of the Christian
church, who in other times blazed for his God, that has borne or
exhibited a more resplendent illustration of his faith, than I shall
bear one day--and for ever. There is a slight difference only between
our testimonies in point of duration. They burned for the truths they
loved for a few moments--not so many perchance. Some were suffocated
before the flames could reach them,--but I am doomed to bear my
attestation to the truth of the gospel, amid fires that shall burn for
ever and ever. See with what a glorious destiny yours, my bride, is
united! You, as a Christian, would doubtless exult to see your husband
at the stake,--and amid the faggots to prove his devotion. How it must
ennoble the sacrifice to think that it is to last to eternity!”

  (1) Here Monçada expressed his surprise at this passage, (as savouring
  more of Christianity than Judaism), considering it occurred in the
  manuscript of a Jew.

“Melmoth uttered these words in ears that heard no longer. Isidora had
fainted; and hanging with one cold hand on his arm still, fell a
helpless, senseless weight on the earth. Melmoth, at this sight, shewed
more feeling than he could have been suspected of. He disentangled her
from the folds of her mantle, sprinkled water from the stream on her
cold cheek, and supported her frame in every direction where a breath of
air was to be caught. Isidora recovered; for her swoon was that of
fatigue more than fear; and, with her recovery, her lover’s short-lived
tenderness seemed to cease. The moment she was able to speak he urged
her to proceed,--and while she feebly attempted to obey him, he assured
her, her strength was perfectly recovered, and that the place they had
to reach was but a few paces distant. Isidora struggled on. Their path
now lay up the ascent of a steep hill,--they left the murmur of the
stream, and the sighing of trees, behind them,--the wind, too, had sunk,
but the night continued intensely dark,--and the absence of all sound
seemed to Isidora to increase the desolateness of the scene. She wished
for something to listen to beside her impeded and painful respiration,
and the audible beatings of her heart. As they descended the hill on the
other side, the murmuring of the waters became once more faintly
audible; and this sound she had longed to hear again, had now, amid the
stillness of the night, a cadence so melancholy, that she almost wished
it hushed again.

“Thus always, to the unhappy, the very fulfilment of their morbid
wishings becomes a source of disappointment, and the change they hoped
for is desirable only as it gives them cause to long for another change.
In the morning they say, Would to God it were evening!--Evening
comes,--and in the evening they say, Would to God it were morning! But
Isidora had no time to analyse her feelings,--a new apprehension struck
her,--and, as she could well guess from the increasing speed of Melmoth,
and head thrown backward impatiently, and often, it had probably reached
him too. A sound they had been for some time watching, (without
communicating their feelings to each other), became every moment more
distinct. It was the sound of a human foot, evidently pursuing them,
from the increasing quickness of its speed, and a certain sharpness of
tread, that irresistibly gave the idea of hot and anxious pursuit.
Melmoth suddenly paused, and Isidora hung trembling on his arm. Neither
of them uttered a word; but Isidora’s eyes, instinctively following the
slight but fearful waving of his arm, saw it directed towards a figure
so obscure, that it at first appeared like a spray moving in the misty
night,--then was lost in darkness as it descended the hill,--and then
appeared in a human form, as far as the darkness of the night would
permit its shape to be distinguishable. It came on--its steps were more
and more audible, and its shape almost distinct.--Then Melmoth suddenly
quitted Isidora, who, shivering with terror, but unable to utter a word
that might implore him to stay, stood alone, her whole frame trembling
almost to dissolution, and her feet feeling as if she were nailed to the
spot where she stood. What passed she knew not. There was a short and
darkened struggle between two figures,--and, in this fearful interval,
she imagined she heard the voice of an ancient domestic, much attached
to her, call on her, first in accents of expostulation and appeal, then
in choaked and breathless cries for help--help--help!--Then she heard a
sound as if a heavy body fell into the water that murmured below.--It
fell heavily--the wave groaned--the dark hill groaned in answer, like
murderers exchanging their stilled and midnight whispers over their work
of blood--and all was silent. Isidora clasped her cold and convulsed
fingers over her eyes, till a whispering voice, the voice of Melmoth,
uttered, “Let us hasten on, my love.”--“Where?” said Isidora, not
knowing the meaning of the words she uttered.--“To the ruined monastery,
my love,--to the hermitage, where the holy man, the man of your faith,
shall unite us.”--“Where are the steps that pursued us?” said Isidora,
suddenly recovering her recollection.--“They will pursue you no
more.”--“But I saw a figure.”--“But you will see it no more.”--“I heard
something fall into that stream--heavily--like a corse.”--“There was a
stone that fell from the precipice of the hill--the waters splashed, and
curled, and whitened round it for a moment, but they have swallowed it
now, and appear to have such a relish for the morsel, that they will not
be apt to resign it.”

“In silent horror she proceeded, till Melmoth, pointing to a dusky and
indefinite mass of what, in the gloom of night, bore, according to the
eye or the fancy, the shape of a rock, a tuft of trees, or a massive and
unlighted building, whispered, “There is the ruin, and near it stands
the hermitage,--one moment more of effort,--of renewed strength and
courage, and we are there.” Urged by these words, and still more by an
undefinable wish to put an end to this shadowy journey,--these
mysterious fears,--even at the risk of finding them worse than verified
at its termination, Isidora exerted all her remaining strength, and,
supported by Melmoth, began to ascend the sloping ground on which the
monastery had once stood. There had been a path, but it was now all
obstructed by stones, and rugged with the knotted and interlaced roots
of the neglected trees that had once formed its shelter and its grace.

“As they approached, in spite of the darkness of the night, the ruin
began to assume a distinct and characteristic appearance, and Isidora’s
heart beat less fearfully, when she could ascertain, from the remains of
the tower and spire, the vast Eastern window, and the crosses still
visible on every ruined pinnacle and pediment, like religion triumphant
amid grief and decay, that this had been a building destined for sacred
purposes. A narrow path, that seemed to wind round the edifice,
conducted them to a front which overlooked an extensive cemetery, at the
extremity of which Melmoth pointed out to her an indistinct object,
which he said was the hermitage, and to which he would hasten to intreat
the hermit, who was also a priest, to unite them. “May I not accompany
you?” said Isidora, glancing round on the graves that were to be her
companions in solitude.--“It is against his vow,” said Melmoth, “to
admit a female into his presence, except when obliged by the course of
his duties.” So saying he hasted away, and Isidora, sinking on a grave
for rest, wrapt her veil around her, as if its folds could exclude even
thought. In a few moments, gasping for air, she withdrew it; but as her
eye encountered only tomb-stones and crosses, and that dark and
sepulchral vegetation that loves to shoot its roots, and trail its
unlovely verdure amid the joints of grave-stones, she closed it again,
and sat shuddering and alone. Suddenly a faint sound, like the murmur of
a breeze, reached her,--she looked up, but the wind had sunk, and the
night was perfectly calm. The same sound recurring, as of a breeze
sweeping past, made her turn her eyes in the direction from which it
came, and, at some distance from her, she thought she beheld a human
figure moving slowly along on the verge of the inclosure of the
burial-ground. Though it did not seem approaching her, (but rather
moving in a slow circuit on the verge of her view), conceiving it must
be Melmoth, she rose in expectation of his advancing to her, and, at
this moment, the figure, turning and half-pausing, seemed to extend its
arm toward her, and wave it once or twice, but whether with a motion or
purpose of warning or repelling her, it was impossible to discover,--it
then renewed its dim and silent progress, and the next moment the ruins
hid it from her view. She had no time to muse on this singular
appearance, for Melmoth was now at her side urging her to proceed. There
was a chapel, he told her, attached to the ruins, but not like them in
decay, where sacred ceremonies were still performed, and where the
priest had promised to join them in a few moments. “He is there before
us,” said Isidora, adverting to the figure she had seen; “I think I saw
him.”--“Saw whom?” said Melmoth, starting, and standing immoveable till
his question was answered.--“I saw a figure,” said Isidora,
trembling--“I thought I saw a figure moving towards the ruin.”--“You are
mistaken,” said Melmoth; but a moment after he added, “We ought to have
been there before him.” And he hurried on with Isidora. Suddenly
slackening his speed, he demanded, in a choaked and indistinct voice, if
she had ever heard any music precede his visits to her,--any sounds in
the air. “Never,” was the answer.--“You are sure?”--“Perfectly sure.”

“At this moment they were ascending the fractured and rugged steps that
led to the entrance of the chapel,--now they passed under the dark and
ivied porch,--now they entered the chapel, which, even in darkness,
appeared to the eyes of Isidora ruinous and deserted. “He has not yet
arrived,” said Melmoth, in a disturbed voice; “Wait there a moment.” And
Isidora, enfeebled by terror beyond the power of resistance, or even
intreaty, saw him depart without an effort to detain him. She felt as if
the effort would be hopeless. Left thus alone, she glanced her eyes
around, and a faint and watery moon-beam breaking at that moment through
the heavy clouds, threw its light on the objects around her. There was a
window, but the stained glass of its compartments, broken and
discoloured, held rare and precarious place between the fluted shafts of
stone. Ivy and moss darkened the fragments of glass, and clung round the
clustered pillars. Beneath were the remains of an altar and crucifix,
but they seemed like the rude work of the first hands that had ever been
employed on such subjects. There was also a marble vessel, that seemed
designed to contain holy water, but it was empty,--and there was a stone
bench, on which Isidora sunk down in weariness, but without hope of
rest. Once or twice she looked up to the window, through which the
moon-beams fell, with that instinctive feeling of her former existence,
that made companions of the elements, and of the beautiful and glorious
family of heaven, under whose burning light she had once imagined the
moon was her parent, and the stars her kindred. She gazed on the window
still, like one who loved the light of nature, and drank health and
truth from its beams, till a figure passing slowly but visibly before
the pillared shafts, disclosed to her view the face of that ancient
servant, whose features she remembered well. He seemed to regard her
with a look, first of intent contemplation,--then of compassion,--the
figure then passed from before the ruined window, and a faint and
wailing cry rung in the ears of Isidora as it disappeared.

“At that moment the moon, that had so faintly lit the chapel, sunk
behind a cloud, and every thing was enveloped in darkness so profound,
that Isidora did not recognize the figure of Melmoth till her hand was
clasped in his, and his voice whispered, “He is here--ready to unite
us.” The long-protracted terrors of this bridal left her not a breath to
utter a word withal, and she leaned on the arm that she felt, not in
confidence, but for support. The place, the hour, the objects, all were
hid in darkness. She heard a faint rustling as of the approach of
another person,--she tried to catch certain words, but she knew not what
they were,--she attempted also to speak, but she knew not what she said.
All was mist and darkness with her,--she knew not what was
muttered,--she felt not that the hand of Melmoth grasped hers,--but she
felt that the hand that united them, and clasped their palms within his
own, was as _cold as that of death_.




CHAPTER XXV.

    Τηλε μ’ ειργουσι ψυχαι, ειδωλα καμοντων.

    HOMER.


“We have now to retrace a short period of our narrative to the night on
which Don Francisco di Aliaga, the father of Isidora, “fortuned,” as he
termed it, to be among the company whose conversation had produced so
extraordinary an effect on him.

“He was journeying homewards, full of the contemplation of his
wealth,--the certainty of having attained complete security against the
evils that harass life,--and being able to set at defiance all external
causes of infelicity. He felt like a man “at ease in his
possessions,”--and he felt also a grave and placid satisfaction at the
thought of meeting a family who looked up to him with profound respect
as the author of their fortunes,--of walking in his own house, amid
bowing domestics and obsequious relatives, with the same slow
authoritative step with which he paced the mart among wealthy merchants,
and saw the wealthiest bow as he approached,--and when he had passed,
point out the man of whose grave salute they were proud, and whisper,
That is Aliaga the rich.--So thinking and feeling, as most prosperous
men do, with an honest pride in their worldly success,--an exaggerated
expectation of the homage of society,--(which they often find frustrated
by its contempt),--and an ultimate reliance on the respect and devotion
of their family whom they have enriched, making them ample amends for
the slights they may be exposed to where their wealth is unknown, and
their newly assumed consequence unappreciated,--or if appreciated, not
valued:--So thinking and feeling, Don Francisco journeyed homeward.

“At a wretched inn where he was compelled to halt, he found the
accommodation so bad, and the heat of the weather so intolerable in the
low, narrow, and unwindowed rooms, that he preferred taking his supper
in the open air, on a stone bench at the door of the inn. We cannot say
that he there imagined himself to be feasted with trout and white bread,
like Don Quixote,--and still less that he fancied he was ministered unto
by damsels of rank;--on the contrary, Don Francisco was digesting a
sorry meal with wretched wine, with a perfect internal consciousness of
the mediocrity of both, when he beheld a person ride by, who paused, and
looked as if he was inclined to stop at the inn. (The interval of this
pause was not long enough to permit Don Francisco to observe
particularly the figure or face of the horseman, or indeed to recognize
him on any future occasion of meeting; nor was there any thing
remarkable in his appearance to invite or arrest observation.) He made a
sign to the host, who approached him with a slow and unwilling
pace,--appeared to answer all his inquiries with sturdy negatives,--and
finally, as the stranger rode on, returned to his station, crossing
himself with every mark of terror and deprecation.

“There was something more in this than the ordinary surliness of a
Spanish innkeeper. Don Francisco’s curiosity was excited, and he asked
the innkeeper, whether the stranger had proposed to pass the night at
the inn, as the weather seemed to threaten a storm? “I know not what he
proposes,” answered the man, “but this I know, that I would not suffer
him to pass an hour under my roof for the revenues of Toledo. If there
be a storm coming on, I care not--those who can raise them are the
fittest to meet them!”

“Don Francisco inquired the cause of these extraordinary expressions of
aversion and terror, but the innkeeper shook his head and remained
silent, with, as it were, the circumspective fear of one who is inclosed
within a sorcerer’s circle, and dreads to pass its verge, lest he become
the prey of the spirits who are waiting beyond it to take advantage of
his transgression.

“At last, at Don Francisco’s repeated instances, he said, “Your worship
must needs be a stranger in this part of Spain not to have heard of
Melmoth the wanderer.”--“I have never heard of the name before,” said
Don Francisco; “and I conjure you, brother, to tell me what you know of
this person, whose character, if I may judge by the manner in which you
speak of him, must have in it something extraordinary.”--“Senhor,”
answered the man, “were I to relate what is told of that person, I
should not be able to close an eye to-night; or if I did, it would be to
dream of things so horrible, that I had rather lie awake for ever. But,
if I am not mistaken, there is in the house one who can gratify your
curiosity--it is a gentleman who is preparing for the press a collection
of facts relative to that person, and who has been, for some time, in
vain soliciting for a license to print them, they being such as the
government, in its wisdom, thinks not fit to be perused by the eyes of
Catholics, or circulated among a Christian community.”

“As the innkeeper spoke, and spoke with an earnestness that at least
made the hearer believe he felt the conviction he tried to impress, the
person of whom he spoke was standing beside Don Francisco. He had
apparently overheard their conversation, and seemed not indisposed to
continue it. He was a man of a grave and composed aspect, and altogether
so remote from any appearance of imposition, or theatrical and
conjuror-like display, that Don Francisco, grave, suspicious, and
deliberate as a Spaniard, and moreover a Spanish merchant, may be, could
not avoid giving him his confidence at sight, though he forbore any
external expression of it.

“Senhor,” said the stranger, “mine host has told you but the truth. The
person whom you saw ride by, is one of those beings after whom human
curiosity pants in vain,--whose life is doomed to be recorded in
incredible legends that moulder in the libraries of the curious, and to
be disbelieved and scorned even by those who exhaust sums on their
collection, and ungratefully depreciate the contents of the volumes on
whose aggregate its value depends. There has been, however, I believe,
no other instance of a person still alive, and apparently exercising all
the functions of a human agent, who has become already the subject of
written memoirs, and the theme of traditional history. Several
circumstances relating to this extraordinary being are even now in the
hands of curious and eager collectors; and I have myself attained to the
knowledge of one or two that are not among the least extraordinary. The
marvellous period of life said to be assigned him, and the facility with
which he has been observed to pass from region to region, (knowing all,
and known to none), have been the principal causes why the adventures in
which he is engaged, should be at once so numerous and so similar.”

“As the stranger ceased to speak, the evening grew dark, and a few large
and heavy drops of rain fell. “This night threatens a storm,” said the
stranger, looking abroad with some degree of anxiety--“we had better
retire within doors; and if you, Senhor, are not otherwise occupied, I
am willing to pass away some hours of this unpleasant night in relating
to you some circumstances relating to the wanderer, which have come
within my certain knowledge.”

“Don Francisco assented to this proposal as much from curiosity, as from
the impatience of solitude, which is never more insupportable than in an
inn, and during stormy weather. Don Montilla, too, had left him on a
visit to his father, who was in a declining state, and was not to join
him again till his arrival in the neighbourhood of Madrid. He therefore
bid his servants shew the way to his apartment, whither he courteously
invited his new acquaintance.

“Imagine them now seated in the wretched upper apartment of a Spanish
inn, whose appearance, though dreary and comfortless, had in it,
nevertheless, something picturesque, and not inappropriate, as the scene
where a wild and wondrous tale was to be related and listened to. There
was no luxury of inventive art to flatter the senses, or enervate the
attention,--to enable the hearer to break the spell that binds him to
the world of horrors, and recover to all the soothing realities and
comforts of ordinary life, like one who starts from a dream of the rack,
and finds himself waking on a bed of down. The walls were bare, and the
roofs were raftered, and the only furniture was a table, beside which
Don Francisco and his companion sat, the one on a huge high-backed
chair, the other on a stool so low, that he seemed seated at the
listener’s foot. A lamp stood on the table, whose light flickering in
the wind, that sighed through many apertures of the jarring door, fell
alternately on lips that quivered as they read, and cheeks that grew
paler as the listener bent to catch the sounds to which fear gave a more
broken and hollow tone, at the close of every page. The rising voice of
the stormy night seemed to make wild and dreary harmony with the tones
of the listener’s feelings. The storm came on, not with sudden violence,
but with sullen and long-suspended wrath--often receding, as it were, to
the verge of the horizon, and then returning and rolling its deepening
and awful peals over the very roof. And as the stranger proceeded in his
narrative, every pause, which emotion or weariness might cause, was
meetly filled by the deep rushing of the rain that fell in
torrents,--the sighs of the wind,--and now and then a faint, distant,
but long-continued peal of thunder. “It sounds,” said the stranger,
raising his eyes from the manuscript, “like the chidings of the spirits,
that their secrets are disclosed!”




CHAPTER XXVI.


    * * * * * *
    ----And the twain were playing dice.

    * * * * * *

    The game is done, I’ve won, I’ve won,
      Quoth she, and whistled thrice.

    COLERIDGE--_Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner_.




The Tale of Guzman’s Family.


“Of what I am about to read to you,” said the stranger, “I have
witnessed part myself, and the remainder is established on a basis as
strong as human evidence can make it.

“In the city of Seville, where I lived many years, I knew a wealthy
merchant, far advanced in years, who was known by the name of Guzman the
rich. He was of obscure birth,--and those who honoured his wealth
sufficiently to borrow from him frequently, never honoured his name so
far as to prefix Don to it, or to add his surname, of which, indeed,
most were ignorant, and among the number, it is said, the wealthy
merchant himself. He was well respected, however; and when Guzman was
seen, as regularly as the bell tolled for vespers, to issue from the
narrow door of his house,--lock it carefully,--view it twice or thrice
with a wistful eye,--then deposit the key in his bosom, and move slowly
to church, feeling for the key in his vest the whole way,--the proudest
heads in Seville were uncovered as he passed,--and the children who were
playing in the streets, desisted from their sports till he had halted by
them.

“Guzman had neither wife or child,--relative or friend. An old female
domestic constituted his whole household, and his personal expences were
calculated on a scale of the most pinching frugality; it was therefore
matter of anxious conjecture to many, how his enormous wealth would be
bestowed after his death. This anxiety gave rise to inquiries about the
possibility of Guzman having relatives, though in remoteness and
obscurity; and the diligence of inquiry, when stimulated at once by
avarice and curiosity, is indefatigable. Thus it was at length
discovered that Guzman had formerly a sister, many years younger than
himself, who, at a very early age, had married a German musician, a
Protestant, and had shortly after quitted Spain. It was remembered, or
reported, that she had made many efforts to soften the heart and open
the hand of her brother, who was even then very wealthy, and to induce
him to be reconciled to their union, and to enable her and her husband
to remain in Spain. Guzman was inflexible. Wealthy, and proud of his
wealth as he was, he might have digested the unpalatable morsel of her
union with a poor man, whom he could have made rich; but he could not
even swallow the intelligence that she had married a Protestant. Ines,
for that was her name, and her husband, went to Germany, partly in
dependence on his musical talents, which were highly appreciated in that
country,--partly in the vague hope of emigrants, that change of place
will be attended with change of circumstances,--and partly, also, from
the feeling, that misfortune is better tolerated any where than in the
presence of those who inflict it. Such was the tale told by the old, who
affected to remember the facts,--and believed by the young, whose
imagination supplied all the defects of memory, and pictured to them an
interesting beauty, with her children hanging about her, embarking, with
a heretic husband, for a distant country, and sadly bidding farewell to
the land and the religion of her fathers.

“Now, while these things were talked of at Seville, Guzman fell sick,
and was given over by the physicians, whom with considerable reluctance
he had suffered to be called in.

“In the progress of his illness, whether nature revisited a heart she
long appeared to have deserted,--or whether he conceived that the hand
of a relative might be a more grateful support to his dying head than
that of a rapacious and mercenary menial,--or whether his resentful
feelings burnt faintly at the expected approach of death, as artificial
fires wax dim at the appearance of morning;--so it was, that Guzman in
his illness bethought himself of his sister and her family,--sent off,
at a considerable expence, an express to that part of Germany where she
resided, to invite her to return and be reconciled to him,--and prayed
devoutly that he might be permitted to survive till he could breathe his
last amid the arms of her and her children. Moreover, there was a report
at this time, in which the hearers probably took more interest than in
any thing that related merely to the life or death of Guzman,--and this
was, that he had rescinded his former will, and sent for a notary, with
whom, in spite of his apparent debility, he remained locked up for some
hours, dictating in a tone which, however clear to the notary, did not
leave one distinct impression of sound on the ears that were strained,
even to an agony of listening, at the double-locked door of his chamber.

“All Guzman’s friends had endeavoured to dissuade him from making this
exertion, which, they assured him, would only hasten his dissolution.
But to their surprise, and doubtless their delight, from the moment his
will was made, Guzman’s health began to amend,--and in less than a week
he began to walk about his chamber, and calculate what time it might
take an express to reach Germany, and how soon he might expect
intelligence from his family.

“Some months had passed away, and the priests took advantage of the
interval to get about Guzman. But after exhausting every effort of
ingenuity,--after plying him powerfully but unavailingly on the side of
conscience, of duty, of fear, and of religion,--they began to understand
their interest, and change their battery. And finding that the settled
purpose of Guzman’s soul was not to be changed, and that he was
determined on recalling his sister and her family to Spain, they
contented themselves with requiring that he should have no communication
with the heretic family, except through them,--and never see his sister
or her children unless they were witnesses to the interview.

“This condition was easily complied with, for Guzman felt no decided
inclination for seeing his sister, whose presence might have reminded
him of feelings alienated, and duties forgot. Besides, he was a man of
fixed habits; and the presence of the most interesting being on earth,
that threatened the slightest interruption or suspension of those
habits, would have been to him insupportable.

“Thus we are all indurated by age and habit,--and feel ultimately, that
the dearest connexions of nature or passion may be sacrificed to those
petty indulgences which the presence or influence of a stranger may
disturb. So Guzman compromised between his conscience and his feelings.
He determined, in spite of all the priests in Seville, to invite his
sister and her family to Spain, and to leave the mass of his immense
fortune to them; (and to that effect he wrote, and wrote repeatedly and
explicitly). But, on the other hand, he promised and swore to his
spiritual counsellors, that he never would see one individual of the
family; and that, though his sister might inherit his fortune, she
never--never should see his face. The priests were satisfied, or
appeared to be so, with this declaration; and Guzman, having propitiated
them with ample offerings to the shrines of various saints, to each of
whom his recovery was exclusively attributed, sat down to calculate the
probable expence of his sister’s return to Spain, and the necessity of
providing for her family, whom he had, as it were, rooted from their
native bed; and therefore felt bound, in all honesty, to make them
flourish in the soil into which he had transplanted them.

“Within the year, his sister, her husband, and four children, returned
to Spain. Her name was Ines, her husband’s was Walberg. He was an
industrious man, and an excellent musician. His talents had obtained for
him the place of _Maestro di Capella_ to the Duke of Saxony; and his
children were educated (according to his means) to supply his place when
vacated by death or accident, or to employ themselves as musical
teachers in the courts of German princes. He and his wife had lived with
the utmost frugality, and looked to their children for the means of
increasing, by the exercise of their talents, that subsistence which it
was their daily labour to provide.

“The eldest son, who was called Everhard, inherited his father’s musical
talents. The daughters, Julia and Ines, were musical also, and very
skilful in embroidery. The youngest child, Maurice, was by turns the
delight and the torment of the family.

“They had struggled on for many years in difficulties too petty to be
made the subject of detail, yet too severe not to be painfully felt by
those whose lot is to encounter them every day, and every hour of the
day,--when the sudden intelligence, brought by an express from Spain, of
their wealthy relative Guzman inviting them to return thither, and
proclaiming them heirs to all his vast riches, burst on them like the
first dawn of his half-year’s summer on the crouching and squalid inmate
of a Lapland hut. All trouble was forgot,--all cares postponed,--their
few debts paid off,--and their preparations made for an instant
departure to Spain.

“So to Spain they went, and journeyed on to the city of Seville, where,
on their arrival, they were waited on by a grave ecclesiastic, who
acquainted them with Guzman’s resolution of never seeing his offending
sister or her family, while at the same time he assured them of his
intention of supporting and supplying them with every comfort, till his
decease put them in possession of his wealth. The family were somewhat
disturbed at this intelligence, and the mother wept at being denied the
sight of her brother, for whom she still cherished the affection of
memory; while the priest, by way of softening the discharge of his
commission, dropt some words of a change of their heretical opinions
being most likely to open a channel of communication between them and
their relative. The silence with which this hint was received spoke more
than many words, and the priest departed.

“This was the first cloud that had intercepted their view of felicity
since the express arrived in Germany, and they sat gloomily enough under
its shadow for the remainder of the evening. Walberg, in the confidence
of expected wealth, had not only brought over his children to Spain, but
had written to his father and mother, who were very old, and wretchedly
poor, to join him in Seville; and by the sale of his house and
furniture, had been enabled to remit them money for the heavy expences
of so long a journey. They were now hourly expected, and the children,
who had a faint but grateful recollection of the blessing bestowed on
their infant heads by quivering lips and withered hands, looked out with
joy for the arrival of the ancient pair. Ines had often said to her
husband, “Would it not be better to let your father and mother remain in
Germany, and remit them money for their support, than put them to the
fatigue of so long a journey at their far advanced age?”--And he had
always answered, “Let them rather die under my roof, than live under
that of strangers.”

“This night he perhaps began to feel the prudence of his wife’s
advice;--she saw it, and with cautious gentleness forbore, for that very
reason, to remind him of it.

“The weather was gloomy and cold that evening,--it was unlike a night in
Spain. Its chill appeared to extend to the party. Ines sat and worked in
silence--the children, collected at the window, communicated in whispers
their hopes and conjectures about the arrival of the aged travellers,
and Walberg, who was restlessly traversing the room, sometimes sighed as
he overheard them.

“The next day was sunny and cloudless. The priest again called on them,
and, after regretting that Guzman’s resolution was inflexible, informed
them, that he was directed to pay them an annual sum for their support,
which he named, and which appeared to them enormous; and to appropriate
another for the education of the children, which seemed to be calculated
on a scale of princely munificence. He put deeds, properly drawn and
attested for this purpose, into their hands, and then withdrew, after
repeating the assurance, that they would be the undoubted heirs of
Guzman’s wealth at his decease, and that, as the interval would be
passed in affluence, it might well be passed without repining. The
priest had scarcely retired, when the aged parents of Walberg arrived,
feeble from joy and fatigue, but not exhausted, and the whole family sat
down to a meal that appeared to them luxurious, in that placid
contemplation of future felicity, which is often more exquisite than its
actual enjoyment.

“I saw them,” said the stranger, interrupting himself,--“I saw them on
the evening of that day of union, and a painter, who wished to embody
the image of domestic felicity in a group of living figures, need have
gone no further than the mansion of Walberg. He and his wife were seated
at the head of the table, smiling on their children, and seeing them
smile in return, without the intervention of one anxious thought,--one
present harassing of petty difficulty, or heavy presage of future
mischance,--_one fear of the morrow_, or aching remembrance of the past.
Their children formed indeed a groupe on which the eye of painter or of
parent, the gaze of taste or of affection, might have hung with equal
delight. Everhard their eldest son, now sixteen, possessed too much
beauty for his sex, and his delicate and brilliant complexion, his
slender and exquisitely moulded form, and the modulation of his tender
and tremulous voice, inspired that mingled interest, with which we
watch, in youth, over the strife of present debility with the promise of
future strength, and infused into his parent’s hearts that fond anxiety
with which we mark the progress of a mild but cloudy morning in spring,
rejoicing in the mild and balmy glories of its dawn, but fearing lest
clouds may overshade them before noon. The daughters, Ines and Julia,
had all the loveliness of their colder climate--the luxuriant ringlets
of golden hair, the large bright blue eyes, the snow-like whiteness of
their bosoms, and slender arms, and the rose-leaf tint and peachiness of
their delicate cheeks, made them, as they attended their parents with
graceful and fond officiousness, resemble two young Hebes ministering
cups, which their touch alone was enough to turn into nectar.

“The spirits of these young persons had been early depressed by the
difficulties in which their parents were involved; and even in childhood
they had acquired the timid tread, the whispered tone, the anxious and
inquiring look, that the constant sense of domestic distress painfully
teaches even to children, and which it is the most exquisite pain to a
parent to witness. But now there was nothing to restrain their young
hearts,--that stranger, a _smile_, fled back rejoicing to the lovely
home of their lips,--and the timidity of their former habits only lent a
grateful shade to the brilliant exuberance of youthful happiness. Just
opposite this picture, whose hues were so bright, and whose shades were
so tender, were seated the figures of the aged grandfather and
grandmother. The contrast was very strong; there was no connecting link,
no graduated medium,--you passed at once from the first and fairest
flowers of spring, to the withered and rootless barrenness of winter.

“These very aged persons, however, had something in their looks to
soothe the eye, and Teniers or Wouverman would perhaps have valued their
figures and costume far beyond those of their young and lovely
grandchildren. They were stiffly and quaintly habited in their German
garb--the old man in his doublet and cap, and the old woman in her ruff,
stomacher, and head-gear resembling a skull-cap, with long depending
pinners, through which a few white, but very long hairs, appeared on her
wrinkled cheeks; but on the countenances of both there was a gleam of
joy, like the cold smile of a setting sun on a wintry landscape. They
did not distinctly hear the kind importunities of their son and
daughter, to partake more amply of the most plentiful meal they had ever
witnessed in their frugal lives,--but they bowed and smiled with that
thankfulness which is at once wounding and grateful to the hearts of
affectionate children. They smiled also at the beauty of Everhard and
their elder grandchildren,--at the wild pranks of Maurice, who was as
wild in the hour of trouble as in the hour of prosperity;--and finally,
they smiled at all that was said, though they did not hear half of it,
and at all they saw, though they could enjoy very little--and that
_smile of age_, that placid submission to the pleasures of the young,
mingled with undoubted anticipations of a more pure and perfect
felicity, gave an almost heavenly expression to features, that would
otherwise have borne only the withering look of debility and decay.

“Some circumstances occurred during this family feast, which were
sufficiently characteristic of the partakers. Walberg (himself a very
temperate man) pressed his father repeatedly to take more wine than he
was accustomed to,--the old man gently declined it. The son still
pressed it heartfully, and the old man complied with a wish to gratify
his son, not himself.

“The younger children, too, caressed their grandmother with the
boisterous fondness of children. Their mother reproached them.--“Nay,
let be,” said the gentle old woman. “They trouble you, mother,” said the
wife of Walberg.--“They cannot trouble me long,” said the grandmother,
with an emphatic smile. “Father,” said Walberg, “is not Everhard grown
very tall?”--“The last time I saw him,” said the grandfather, “I stooped
to kiss him; now I think he must stoop to kiss me.” And, at the word,
Everhard darted like an arrow into the trembling arms that were opened
to receive him, and his red and hairless lips were pressed to the snowy
beard of his grandfather. “Cling there, my child,” said the exulting
father.--“God grant your kiss may never be applied to lips less
pure.”--“They never shall, my father!” said the susceptible boy,
blushing at his own emotions--“I never wish to press any lips but those
that will bless me like those of my grandfather.”---- “And do you wish,”
said the old man jocularly, “that the blessing should _always_ issue
from lips as rough and hoary as mine?” Everhard stood blushing behind
the old man’s chair at this question, and Walberg, who heard the clock
strike the hour at which he had been always accustomed, in prosperity or
adversity, to summon his family to prayer, made a signal which his
children well understood, and which was communicated in whispers to
their aged relatives.--“Thank God,” said the aged grandmother to the
young whisperer, and as she spoke, she sunk on her knees. Her
grandchildren assisted her. “Thank God,” echoed the old man, bending his
stiffened knees, and doffing his cap--“Thank God for this ‘shadow of a
great rock in a weary land!’”--and he knelt, while Walberg, after
reading a chapter or two from a German Bible which he held in his hands,
pronounced an extempore prayer, imploring God to fill their hearts with
gratitude for the temporal blessings they enjoyed, and to enable them
“so to pass through things temporal, that they might not finally lose
the things eternal.” At the close of the prayer, the family rose and
saluted each other with that affection which has not its root in earth,
and whose blossoms, however diminutive and colourless to the eye of man
in this wretched soil, shall yet bear glorious fruit in the garden of
God. It was a lovely sight to behold the young people assisting their
aged relatives to arise from their knees,--and it was a lovelier
hearing, to listen to the happy good-nights exchanged among the parting
family. The wife of Walberg was most assiduous in preparing the comforts
of her husband’s parents, and Walberg yielded to her with that proud
gratitude, that feels more exaltation in a benefit conferred by those we
love, than if we conferred it ourselves. He loved his parents, but he
was proud of his wife loving them because they were his. To the repeated
offers of his children to assist or attend their ancient relatives, he
answered, “No, dear children, your mother will do better,--your mother
always does best.” As he spoke, his children, according to a custom now
forgot, kneeled before him to ask his blessing. His hand, tremulous with
affection, rested first on the curling locks of the darling Everhard,
whose head towered proudly above those of his kneeling sisters, and of
Maurice, who, with the irrepressible and venial levity of joyous
childhood, laughed as he knelt. “God bless you!” said Walberg--“God
bless you all,--and may he make you as good as your mother, and as happy
as--your father is this night;” and as he spoke, the happy father turned
aside and wept.




CHAPTER XXVII.

    ------Quæque ipsa miserrima vidi,
    Et quorum pars magna fui.

    VIRGIL.


“The wife of Walberg, who was naturally of a cool sedate temper, and to
whom misfortune had taught an anxious and jealous prevoyance, was not so
intoxicated with the present prosperity of the family, as its young, or
even its aged members. Her mind was full of thoughts which she would not
communicate to her husband, and sometimes did not wish to acknowledge to
herself; but to the priest, who visited them frequently with renewed
marks of Guzman’s bounty, she spoke explicitly. She said, that however
grateful for her brother’s kindness, for the enjoyment of present
competence, and the hope of future wealth, she wished that her children
might be permitted to acquire the means of independent subsistence for
themselves, and that the money destined by Guzman’s liberality for their
ornamental education, might be applied to the purpose of ensuring them
the power of supporting themselves, and assisting their parents. She
alluded slightly to the possible future change in her brother’s
favourable feelings towards her, and dwelt much on the circumstance of
her children being strangers in the country, wholly unacquainted with
its language, and averse from its religion; and she mildly but strongly
stated the difficulties to which a heretic family of strangers might be
exposed in a Catholic country, and implored the priest to employ his
mediation and influence with her brother, that her children might be
enabled, through his bounty, to acquire the means of independent
subsistence, as if----and she paused. The good and friendly priest (for
he was truly both) listened to her with attention; and after satisfying
his conscience, by adjuring her to renounce her heretical opinions, as
the only means of obtaining a reconciliation with God and her brother,
and receiving a calm, but firm negative, proceeded to give her his best
LAY advice, which was to comply with her brother’s wishes in every
thing, to educate her children in the manner which he prescribed, and to
the full extent of the means which he so amply furnished. He added, _en
confiance_, that Guzman, though, during his long life, he had never been
suspected of any passion but that of accumulating money, was now
possessed with a spirit much harder to expel, and was resolved that the
heirs of his wealth should be, in point of all that might embellish
polished society, on a level with the descendants of the first nobility
of Spain. Finally, he counselled submission to her brother’s wishes in
all things,--and the wife of Walberg complied with tears, which she
tried to conceal from the priest, and had completely effaced the traces
of before she again met her husband.

“In the mean time, the plan of Guzman was rapidly realized. A handsome
house was taken for Walberg,--his sons and daughters were splendidly
arrayed, and sumptuously lodged; and, though education was, and still
is, on a very low level in Spain, they were taught all that was then
supposed to qualify them as companions for the descendants of Hidalgoes.
Any attempt, or even allusion to their being prepared for the ordinary
occupations of life, was strictly forbidden by the orders of Guzman. The
father triumphed in this,--the mother regretted it, but she kept her
regret to herself, and consoled herself with thinking, that the
ornamental education her children were receiving might ultimately be
turned to account; for the wife of Walberg was a woman whom the
experience of misfortune had taught to look to the future with an
anxious eye, and that eye, with ominous accuracy, had seldom failed to
detect a speck of evil in the brightest beam of sun-shine that had ever
trembled on her chequered existence.

“The injunctions of Guzman were obeyed,--the family lived in luxury. The
young people plunged into their new life of enjoyment with an avidity
proportioned to their youthful sensibility of pleasure, and to a taste
for refinement and elegant pursuits, which their former obscurity had
repressed, but never extinguished. The proud and happy father exulted in
the personal beauty, and improving talents of his children. The anxious
mother sighed sometimes, but took care the sigh should never reach her
husband’s ear. The aged grandfather and grandmother, whose infirmities
had been much increased by their journey to Spain, and possibly still
more by that strong emotion which is a habit to youth, but a convulsion
to age, sat in their ample chairs comfortably idle, dozing away life in
intervals of unuttered though conscious satisfaction, and calm but
venerable apathy;--they slept much, but when they awoke, they smiled at
their grandchildren, and at each other.

“The wife of Walberg, during this interval, which seemed one of
undisturbed felicity to all but her, sometimes suggested a gentle
caution,--a doubtful and anxious hint,--a possibility of future
disappointment, but this was soon smiled away by the rosy, and laughing,
and kissful lips of her children, till the mother at last began to smile
at her apprehensions herself. At times, however, she led them anxiously
in the direction of their uncle’s house. She walked up and down the
street before his door with her children, and sometimes lifted up her
veil, as if to try whether her eye could pierce through walls as hard as
the miser’s heart, or windows barred like his coffers,--then glancing on
her children’s costly dress, while her eye darted far into futurity, she
sighed and returned slowly home. This state of suspence was soon to be
terminated.

“The priest, Guzman’s confessor, visited them often; first in quality of
almoner or agent of his bounty, which was amply and punctually bestowed
through his hands; and secondly, in quality of a professed chess-player,
at which game he had met, even in Spain, no antagonist like Walberg. He
also felt an interest in the family and their fortunes, which, though
his orthodoxy disowned, his heart could not forbear to acknowledge,--so
the good priest compromised matters by playing chess with the father,
and praying for the conversion of his family on his return to Guzman’s
house. It was while engaged in the former exercise, that a message
arrived to summon him on the instant home,--the priest left his queen
_en prise_, and hurried into the passage to speak with the messenger.
The family of Walberg, with agitation unspeakable, half rose to follow
him. They paused at the door, and then retreated with a mixed feeling of
anxiety for the intelligence, and shame at the attitude in which they
might be discovered. As they retreated, however, they could not help
hearing the words of the messenger,--“He is at his last gasp,--he has
sent for you,--you must not lose a moment.” As the messenger spoke, the
priest and he departed.

“The family returned to their apartment, and for some hours sat in
profound silence, interrupted only by the ticking of the clock, which
was distinctly and solely heard, and which seemed too loud to their
quickened ears, amid that deep stillness on which it broke
incessantly,--or by the echoes of Walberg’s hurried step, as he started
from his chair and traversed the apartment. At this sound they turned,
as if expecting a messenger, then, glancing at the silent figure of
Walberg, sunk on their seats again. The family sat up all that long
night of unuttered, and indeed unutterable emotion. The lights burnt
low, and were at length extinguished, but no one noticed them;--the pale
light of the dawn broke feebly into the room, but no one observed it was
morning. “God!--how long he lingers!” exclaimed Walberg involuntarily;
and these words, though uttered under his breath, made all the listeners
start, as at the first sounds of a human voice, which they had not heard
for many hours.

“At this moment a knock was heard at the door,--a step trod slowly along
the passage that led to the room,--the door opened, and the priest
appeared. He advanced into the room without speaking, or being spoken
to. And the contrast of strong emotion and unbroken silence,--this
conflict of speech that strangled thought in the utterance, and of
thought that in vain asked aid of speech,--the agony and the
muteness,--formed a terrible momentary association. It was but
momentary,--the priest, as he stood, uttered the words--“All is over!”
Walberg clasped his hands over his forehead, and in ecstatic agony
exclaimed,--“Thank God!” and wildly catching at the object nearest him,
as if imagining it one of his children, he clasped and hugged it to his
breast. His wife wept for a moment at the thought of her brother’s
death, but roused herself for her children’s sake to hear all that was
to be told. The Priest could tell no more but that Guzman was
dead,--seals had been put on every chest, drawer, and coffer in the
house,--not a cabinet had escaped the diligence of the persons
employed,--and the will was to be read the following day.

“For the following day the family remained in that intensity of
expectation that precluded all thought. The servants prepared the usual
meal, but it remained untasted. The family pressed each other to partake
of it; but as the importunity was not enforced by the inviter setting
any example of the lesson he tried to teach, the meal remained untasted.
About noon a grave person, in the habit of a notary, was announced, and
summoned Walberg to be present at the opening of Guzman’s will. As
Walberg prepared to obey the summons, one of his children officiously
offered him his hat, another his cloke, both of which he had forgot in
the trepidation of his anxiety; and these instances of reminiscence and
attention in his children, contrasted with his own abstraction,
completely overcame him, and he sunk down on a seat to recover himself.
“You had better not go, my love,” said his wife mildly. “I believe I
shall--I _must_ take your advice,” said Walberg, relapsing on the seat
from which he had half risen. The notary, with a formal bow, was
retiring. “I _will_ go!” said Walberg, swearing a German oath, whose
guttural sound made the notary start,--“I _will_ go!” and as he spoke he
fell on the floor, exhausted by fatigue and want of refreshment, and
emotion indescribable but to a father. The notary retired, and a few
hours more were exhausted in torturing conjecture, expressed on the
mother’s part only by clasped hands and smothered sighs,--on the
father’s by profound silence, averted countenance, and hands that seemed
to feel for those of his children, and then shrink from the touch,--and
on the children’s by rapidly varying auguries of hope and of
disappointment. The aged pair sat motionless among their family;--they
knew not what was going on, but they knew if it was good they must
partake of it,--and in the perception or expectation of the approach of
evil, their faculties had latterly become very obtuse.

“The day was far advanced,--it was noon. The servants, with whom the
munificence of the deceased had amply supplied their establishment,
announced that dinner was prepared; and Ines, who retained more presence
of mind than the rest, gently suggested to her husband the necessity of
not betraying their emotions to their servants. He obeyed her hint
mechanically, and walked into the dining-hall, forgetting for the first
time to offer his arm to his infirm father. His family followed, but,
when seated at the table, they seemed not to know for what purpose they
were collected there. Walberg, consumed by that _thirst of anxiety_
which nothing seems sufficient to quench, called repeatedly for wine;
and his wife, who found even the attempt to eat impossible in the
presence of the gazing and unmoved attendants, dismissed them by a
signal, but did not feel the desire of food restored by their absence.
The old couple eat as usual, and sometimes looked up with an expression
of vague and vacant wonder, and a kind of sluggish reluctance to admit
the fear or belief of approaching calamity. Towards the end of their
cheerless meal, Walberg was called out; he returned in a few minutes,
and there was no appearance of change in his countenance. He seated
himself, and only his wife perceived the traces of a wild smile stealing
over the trembling lines of his face, as he filled a large glass of
wine, and raised it to his lips, pronouncing--“A health to the heirs of
Guzman.” But instead of drinking the wine, he dashed the glass to the
floor, and burying his head in the drapery of the table on which he
flung himself, he exclaimed, “Not a ducat,--not a ducat,--all left to
the church!--Not a ducat!” * * * * *

“In the evening the priest called, and found the family much more
composed. The certainty of evil had given them a kind of courage.
Suspence is the only evil against which it is impossible to set up a
defence,--and, like young mariners in an untried sea, they almost felt
ready to welcome the storm, as a relief from the deadly and loathsome
sickness of anxiety. The honest resentment, and encouraging manner of
the priest, were a cordial to their ears and hearts. He declared his
belief, that nothing but the foulest means that might be resorted to by
interested and bigotted monks, could have extorted such a will from the
dying man,--his readiness to attest, in every court in Spain, the
intentions of the testator (till within a few hours of his death) to
have bequeathed his whole fortune to his family,--intentions which he
had repeatedly expressed to him and others, and to whose effect he had
seen a former will of no long date,--and, finally, gave his strenuous
advice to Walberg to bring the matter to legal arbitration, in aid of
which he promised his personal exertions, his influence with the ablest
advocates in Seville, and every thing--but money.

“The family that night went to bed with spirits exalted by hope, and
slept in peace. One circumstance alone marked a change in their feelings
and habits. As they were retiring, the old man laid his tremulous hand
on the shoulder of Walberg, and said mildly, “My son, shall we pray
before we retire?”--“Not to-night, father,” said Walberg, who perhaps
feared the mention of their heretical worship might alienate the
friendly priest, or who felt the agitation of his heart too great for
the solemn exercise; “Not to-night, I am--too happy!”

“The priest was as good as his word,--the ablest advocates in Seville
undertook the cause of Walberg. Proofs of undue influence, of
imposition, and of terror being exercised on the mind of the testator,
were ingeniously made out by the diligence and spiritual authority of
the priest, and skilfully arranged and ably pleaded by the advocates.
Walberg’s spirits rose with every hour. The family, at the time of
Guzman’s death, were in possession of a considerable sum of money, but
this was soon expended, together with another sum which the frugality of
Ines had enabled her to save, and which she now cheerfully produced in
aid of her husband’s exigencies, and in confidence of eventual success.
When all was gone, other resources still remained,--the spacious house
was disposed of, the servants dismissed, the furniture sold (as usual)
for about a fourth of its value, and, in their new and humble abode in
the suburbs of Seville, Ines and her daughters contentedly resumed those
domestic duties which they had been in the habit of performing in their
quiet home in Germany. Amid these changes, the grandfather and
grandmother experienced none but mere change of place, of which they
hardly appeared conscious. The assiduous attention of Ines to their
comforts was increased, not diminished, by the necessity of being
herself the sole ministrant to them; and smiling she pleaded want of
appetite, or trifling indisposition, as an excuse for her own and her
children’s meal, while theirs was composed of every thing that could
tempt the tasteless palate of age, or that she remembered was acceptable
to theirs.

“The cause had now come to a hearing, and for the two first days the
advocates of Walberg carried all before them. On the third the
ecclesiastical advocates made a firm and vigorous stand. Walberg
returned much dispirited;--his wife saw it, and therefore assumed no
airs of cheerfulness, which only increase the irritation of misfortune,
but she was equable, and steadily and tranquilly occupied in domestic
business the whole evening in his sight. As they were separating for the
night, by a singular contingency, the old man again reminded his son of
the forgotten hour of family prayer. “Not to-night, father,” said
Walberg impatiently; “not to-night; I am--too unhappy!”--“Thus,” said
the old man, lifting up his withered hands, and speaking with an energy
he had not showed for years,--“thus, O my God! prosperity and adversity
alike furnish us with excuses for neglecting thee!” As he tottered from
the room, Walberg declined his head on the bosom of his wife, who sat
beside him, and shed a few bitter tears. And Ines whispered to herself,
“The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit,--a broken heart he will not
despise.” * * * * * *

“The cause had been carried on with a spirit and expedition that had no
precedent in the courts of Spain, and the fourth day was fixed on for a
final hearing and termination of the cause. The day dawned, and at the
dawn of day Walberg arose, and walked for some hours before the gates of
the hall of justice; and when they were opened, he entered, and sat down
mechanically on a seat in the vacant hall, with the same look of
profound attention, and anxious interest, that he would have assumed had
the court been seated, and the cause about to be decided. After a few
moment’s pause, he sighed, started, and appearing to awake from a dream,
quitted his seat, and walked up and down the empty passages till the
court was prepared to sit.

“The court met early that day, and the cause was powerfully advocated.
Walberg sat on one seat, without ever changing his place, till all was
over; and it was then late in the evening, and he had taken no
refreshment the entire day, and he had never changed his place, and he
had never changed the close and corrupted atmosphere of the crowded
court for a moment. Quid multis morer? The chance of a heretic stranger,
against the interests of churchmen in Spain, may be calculated by the
most shallow capacity.

“The family had all that day sat in the innermost room of their humble
dwelling. Everhard had wished to accompany his father to the court,--his
mother withheld him. The sisters involuntarily dropt their work from
time to time, and their mother gently reminded them of the necessity of
renewing it. They did resume it, but their hands, at variance with their
feelings, made such blunders, that their mother, δακρυοεν γελασασα,
removed their work, and suggested to them some active employment in
household affairs. While they were thus engaged, evening came on,--the
family from time to time suspended their ordinary occupations, and
crowded to the window to watch the return of their father. Their mother
no longer interfered,--she sat in silence, and this silence formed a
strong contrast to the restless impatience of her children. “That is my
father,” exclaimed the voices of the four at once, as a figure crossed
the street. “That is not my father,” they repeated, as the figure
slowly retired. A knock was heard at the door,--Ines herself rushed
forward to open it. A figure retreated, advanced again, and again
retreated. Then it seemed to rush past her, and enter the house like
a shadow. In terror she followed it, and with terror unutterable saw
her husband kneeling among his children, who in vain attempted to raise
him, while he continued to repeat, “No, let me kneel,--let me kneel, I
have undone you all! The cause is lost, and I have made beggars of you
all!”--“Rise,--rise, dearest father,” cried the children, gathering
round him, “nothing is lost, if you are saved!”--“Rise, my love, from
that horrible and unnatural humiliation,” cried Ines, grasping the
arms of her husband; “help me, my children,--father,--mother, will you
not help me?”--and as she spoke, the tottering, helpless, and almost
lifeless figures of the aged grandfather and grandmother arose
from their chairs, and staggering forwards, added their feeble
strength,--their _vis impotentiæ_, to sustain or succour the weight
that dragged heavily on the arms of the children and their mother. By
this sight, more than by any effort, Walberg was raised from the
posture that agonized his family, and placed in a chair, around which
hung the wife and children, while the aged father and mother, retreating
torpidly to their seats, seemed to lose in a few moments the keen
consciousness of evil that had inspired them for an instant with a
force almost miraculous. Ines and her children hung round Walberg, and
uttered all of consolation that helpless affection could suggest; but
perhaps there is not a more barbed arrow can be sent through the heart,
than by the thought that the hands that clasp ours so fondly cannot
earn for us or themselves the means of another meal,--that the lips
that are pressed to ours so warmly, may the next ask us for bread,
and--ask in vain!

“It was perhaps fortunate for this unhappy family, that the very
extremity of their grief rendered its long indulgence impossible,--the
voice of necessity made itself be heard distinctly and loudly amid all
the cry and clamour of that hour of agony. Something must be done for
the morrow,--and it was to be done immediately. “What money have you?”
was the first articulate sentence Walberg uttered to his wife; and when
she whispered the small sum that the expences of their lost cause had
left them, he shivered with a brief emphatic spasm of horror,--then
bursting from their arms, and rising, he crossed the room, as if he
wished to be alone for a moment. As he did so, he saw his youngest
child playing with the long strings of his grandfather’s band,--a mode
of sportive teazing in which the urchin delighted, and which was at
once chid and smiled at. Walberg struck the poor child vehemently, and
then catching him in his arms, bid him--“Smile as long as he could!”
* * * * *

“They had means of subsistence at least for the following week; and that
was such a source of comfort to them, as it is to men who are quitting a
wreck, and drifting on a bare raft with a slender provision towards some
coast, which they hope to reach before it is exhausted. They sat up all
that night together in earnest counsel, after Ines had taken care to see
the father and mother of her husband comfortably placed in their
apartment. Amid their long and melancholy conference, hope sprung up
insensibly in the hearts of the speakers, and a plan was gradually
formed for obtaining the means of subsistence. Walberg was to offer his
talents as a musical teacher,--Ines and her daughters were to undertake
embroidery,--and Everhard, who possessed exquisite taste both in music
and drawing, was to make an effort in both departments, and the friendly
priest was to be applied to for his needful interest and recommendation
for all. The morning broke on their long-protracted consultation, and
found them unwearied in discussing its subject. “We shall not starve,”
said the children hopefully.--“I trust not,” said Walberg
sighingly.--His wife, who knew Spain, said not a word.----




CHAPTER XXVIII.

                     ------This to me
    In dreadful secrecy they did impart,
    And I with them the third night kept the watch.

    SHAKESPEARE.


“As they spoke, a soft knock was heard, such as kindness gives at the
door of misfortune, and Everhard started up to answer it. “Stay,” said
Walberg, absently, “Where are the servants?” Then recollecting himself,
he smiled agonizingly, and waved his hand to his son to go. It was the
good priest. He entered, and sat down in silence,--no one spoke to him.
It might be truly said, as it is sublimely said in the original, “There
was neither speech nor language, but voices were heard among them--_and
felt too_.” The worthy priest piqued himself on his orthodoxy of all
matters of belief and form enjoined by the Catholic church; and,
moreover, had acquired a kind of monastic apathy, of sanctified
stoicism, which priests sometimes imagine is the conquest of grace over
the rebellion of nature, when it is merely the result of a profession
that denies nature its objects and its ties. Yet so it was, that as he
sat among this afflicted family, after complaining of the keenness of
the morning air, and wiping away in vain the moisture, which he said it
had brought into his eyes, he at last yielded to his feelings, and
“lifted up his voice and wept.” But tears were not all he had to offer.
On hearing the plans of Walberg and his family, he promised, with a
faultering voice, his ready assistance in promoting them; and, as he
rose to depart, observing that he had been entrusted by the faithful
with a small sum for the relief of the unfortunate, and knew not where
it could be better bestowed, he dropped from the sleeve of his habit a
well filled purse on the floor, and hurried away.

“The family retired to rest as the day approached, but rose in a few
hours afterwards without having slept; and the remainder of that day,
and the whole of the three following, were devoted to applications at
every door where encouragement might be expected, or employment
obtained, the priest in person aiding every application. But there were
many circumstances unfavourable to the ill-starred family of Walberg.
They were strangers, and, with the exception of their mother, who acted
as interpreter, ignorant of the language of the country. This was “a
sore evil,” extending almost to the total preclusion of their exertions
as teachers. They were also heretics,--and this alone was a sufficient
bar to their success in Seville. In some families the beauty of the
daughters, in others that of the son, was gravely debated as an
important objection. In others the recollection of their former
splendour, suggested a mean and rancorous motive to jealous inferiority
to insult them by a rejection, for which no other cause could be
assigned. Unwearied and undismayed, they renewed their applications
every day, at every house where admission could be obtained, and at many
where it was denied; and each day they returned to examine the
diminished stock, to divide the scantier meal, calculate how far it was
possible to reduce the claims of nature to the level of their ebbing
means, and smile when they talked of the morrow to each other, but weep
when they thought of it alone. There is a withering monotony in the
diary of misery,--“one day telleth another.” But there came at length a
day, when the last coin was expended, the last meal devoured, the last
resource exhausted, the last hope annihilated, and the friendly priest
himself told them weeping, he had nothing to give them but his prayers.

“That evening the family sat in profound and stupified silence together
for some hours, till the aged mother of Walberg, who had not for some
months uttered any thing but indistinct monosyllables, or appeared
conscious of any thing that was going on, suddenly, with that ominous
energy that announces its effort to be the last,--that bright flash of
parting life that precedes its total extinction, exclaimed aloud,
apparently addressing her husband, “There is something wrong here,--why
did they bring us from Germany? They might have suffered us to die
there,--they have brought us here to mock us, I think. Yesterday,--(her
memory evidently confounding the dates of her son’s prosperous and
adverse fortune), yesterday they clothed me in silk, and I drank wine,
and to-day they give me this sorry crust,--(flinging away the piece of
bread which had been her share of the miserable meal),--there is
something wrong here. I will go back to Germany,--I will!” and she rose
from her seat in the sight of the astonished family, who, horror-struck,
as they would have been at the sudden resuscitation of a corse, ventured
not to oppose her by word or movement. “I will go back to Germany,” she
repeated; and, rising, she actually took three or four firm and equal
steps on the floor, while no one attempted to approach her. Then her
force, both physical and mental, seemed to fail,--she tottered,--her
voice sunk into hollow mutterings, as she repeated, “I know the way,--I
know the way,--if it was not so dark.--I have not far to go,--I am very
near--_home_!” As she spoke, she fell across the feet of Walberg. The
family collected round her, and raised--a corse. “Thank God!” exclaimed
her son, as he gazed on his mother’s corse.--And this reversion of the
strongest feeling of nature,--this wish for the death of those for whom,
in other circumstances, we would ourselves have died, makes those who
have experienced it feel as if there was no evil in life but want, and
no object of rational pursuit but the means of avoiding it. Alas! if it
be so, for what purpose were hearts that beat, and minds that burn,
bestowed on us? Is all the energy of intellect, and all the enthusiasm
of feeling, to be expended in contrivances how to meet or shift off the
petty but torturing pangs of hourly necessity? Is the fire caught from
heaven to be employed in lighting a faggot to keep the cold from the
numbed and wasted fingers of poverty. Pardon this digression, Senhor,”
said the stranger, “but _I had a painful feeling, that forced me to make
it_.” He then proceeded.

“The family collected around the dead body,--and it might have been a
subject worthy the pencil of the first of painters, to witness its
interment, as it took place the following night. As the deceased was a
heretic, the corse was not allowed to be laid in consecrated ground; and
the family, solicitous to avoid giving offence, or attracting notice on
the subject of their religion, were the only attendants on the funeral.
In a small inclosure, at the rear of their wretched abode, her son dug
his mother’s grave, and Ines and her daughters placed the body in it.
Everhard was absent in search of employment,--as they hoped,--and a
light was held by the youngest child, who smiled as he watched the
scene, as if it had been a pageant got up for his amusement. That light,
feeble as it was, showed the strong and varying expression of the
countenances on which it fell;--in Walberg’s there was a stern and
fearful joy, that she whom they were laying to rest had been “taken from
the evil to come,”--in that of Ines there was grief, mingled with
something of horror, at this mute and unhallowed ceremony.--Her
daughters, pale with grief and fear, wept silently; but their tears were
checked, and the whole course of their feelings changed, when the light
fell on another figure who appeared suddenly standing among them on the
edge of the grave,--it was that of Walberg’s father. Impatient of being
left alone, and wholly unconscious of the cause, he had groped and
tottered his way till he reached the spot; and now, as he saw his son
heap up the earth over the grave, he exclaimed, with a brief and feeble
effort of reminiscence, sinking on the ground, “Me, too,--lay me there,
the same spot will serve for both!” His children raised and supported
him into the house, where the sight of Everhard, with an unexpected
supply of provisions, made them forget the horrors of the late scene,
and postpone once more the fears of want till to-morrow. No inquiry how
this supply was obtained, could extort more from Everhard than that it
was the gift of charity. He looked exhausted and dreadfully pale,--and,
forbearing to press him with further questions, they partook of this
manna-meal,--this food that seemed to have dropped from heaven, and
separated for the night. * * * *

“Ines had, during this period of calamity, unremittingly enforced the
application of her daughters to those accomplishments from which she
still derived the hopes of their subsistence. Whatever were the
privations and disappointments of the day, their musical and other
exercises were strictly attended to; and hands enfeebled by want and
grief, plied their task with as much assiduity as when occupation was
only a variation of luxury. This attention to the ornaments of life,
when its actual necessaries are wanted,--this sound of music in a house
where the murmurs of domestic anxiety are heard every moment,--this
subservience of talent to necessity, all its generous enthusiasm lost,
and only its possible utility remembered or valued,--is perhaps the
bitterest strife that ever was fought between the opposing claims of our
artificial and our natural existence. But things had now occurred that
shook not only the resolution of Ines, but even affected her feelings
beyond the power of repression. She had been accustomed to hear, with
delight, the eager application of her daughters to their musical
studies;--now--when she heard them, the morning after the interment of
their grandmother, renewing that application--she felt as if the sounds
struck through her heart. She entered the room where they were, and they
turned towards her with their usual smiling demand for her approbation.

“The mother, with the forced smile of a sickening heart, said she
believed there was no occasion for their practising any further that
day. The daughters, who understood her too well, relinquished their
instruments, and, accustomed to see every article of furniture converted
into the means of casual subsistence, they thought no worse than that
their ghitarras might be disposed of this day, and the next they hoped
they would have to teach on those of their pupils. They were mistaken.
Other symptoms of failing resolution,--of utter and hopeless
abandonment, appeared that day. Walberg had always felt and expressed
the strongest feelings of tender respect towards his parents--his father
particularly, whose age far exceeded that of his mother. At the division
of their meal that day, he shewed a kind of wolfish and greedy jealousy
that made Ines tremble. He whispered to her--“How much my father
eats--how heartily he feeds while we have scarce a morsel!”--“And let us
want that morsel, before your father wants one!” said Ines in a
whisper--“I have scarce tasted any thing myself.”--“Father--father,”
cried Walberg, shouting in the ear of the doting old man, “you are
eating heartily, while Ines and her children are starving!” And he
snatched the food from his father’s hand, who gazed at him vacantly, and
resigned the contested morsel without a struggle. A moment afterwards
the old man rose from his seat, and with horrid unnatural force, tore
the untasted meat from his grandchildren’s lips, and swallowed it
himself, while his rivelled and toothless mouth grinned at them in
mockery at once infantine and malicious.

“Squabbling about your supper?” cried Everhard, bursting among them with
a wild and feeble laugh,--“Why, here’s enough for to-morrow--and
to-morrow.” And he flung indeed ample means for two day’s subsistence on
the table, but he looked _paler and paler_. The hungry family devoured
the hoard, and forgot to ask the cause of his increasing paleness, and
obviously diminished strength. * * * * * *

“They had long been without any domestics, and as Everhard disappeared
mysteriously every day, the daughters were sometimes employed on the
humble errands of the family. The beauty of the elder daughter, Julia,
was so conspicuous, that her mother had often undertaken the most menial
errands herself, rather than send her daughter into the streets
unprotected. The following evening, however, being intently employed in
some domestic occupation, she allowed Julia to go out to purchase their
food for to-morrow, and lent her veil for the purpose, directing her
daughter to arrange it in the Spanish fashion, with which she was well
acquainted, so as to hide her face.

“Julia, who went with trembling steps on her brief errand, had somehow
deranged her veil, and a glimpse of her beauty was caught by a cavalier
who was passing. The meanness of her dress and occupation suggested
hopes to him which he ventured to express. Julia burst from him with the
mingled terror and indignation of insulted purity, but her eyes rested
with unconscious avidity on the handful of gold which glittered in his
hand.--She thought of her famishing parents,--of her own declining
strength, and neglected useless talents. The gold still sparkled before
her,--she felt--she knew not what, and to escape from some feelings is
perhaps the best victory we can obtain over them. But when she arrived
at home, she eagerly thrust the small purchase she had made into her
mother’s hand, and, though hitherto gentle, submissive, and tractable,
announced, in a tone of decision that seemed to her startled mother
(whose thoughts were always limited to the exigencies of the hour) like
that of sudden insanity, that she would rather starve than ever again
tread the streets of Seville alone.

“As Ines retired to her bed, she thought she heard a feeble moan from
the room where Everhard lay, and where, from their being compelled to
sell the necessary furniture of the bed, he had entreated his parents to
allow Maurice to sleep with him, alleging that the warmth of his body
would be a substitute for artificial covering to his little brother.
Twice those moans were heard, but Ines did not dare to awake Walberg,
who had sunk into that profound sleep which is as often the refuge of
intolerable misery, as that of saturated enjoyment. A few moments after,
when the moans had ceased, and she had half persuaded herself it was
only the echo of that wave that seems for ever beating in the ears of
the unfortunate,--the curtains of her bed were thrown open, and the
figure of a child covered with blood, stained in breast, arms, and legs,
appeared before her, and cried,--“It is Everhard’s blood--he is bleeding
to death,--I am covered with his blood!--Mother--mother--rise and save
Everhard’s life!” The object, the voice, the words, seemed to Ines like
the imagery of some terrible dream, such as had lately often visited her
sleep, till the tones of Maurice, her youngest, and (in her heart) her
favourite child, made her spring from the bed, and hurry after the
little blood-spotted figure that paddled before her on its naked feet,
till she reached the adjoining room where Everhard lay. Amid all her
anguish and fear, she trod as lightly as Maurice, lest she should awake
Walberg.

“The moon-light fell strongly through the unshuttered windows on the
wretched closet that just contained the bed. Its furniture was
sufficiently scanty, and in his spasms Everhard had thrown off the
sheet. So he lay, as Ines approached his bed, in a kind of corse-like
beauty, to which the light of the moon gave an effect that would have
rendered the figure worthy the pencil of a Murillo, a Rosa, or any of
those painters, who, inspired by the genius of suffering, delight in
representing the most exquisite of human forms in the extremity of human
agony. A St Bartholomew flayed, with his skin hanging about him in
graceful drapery--a St Laurence, broiled on a gridiron, and exhibiting
his finely-formed anatomy on its bars, while naked slaves are blowing
the coals beneath it,--even these were inferior to the form
half-veiled,--half-disclosed by the moon-light as it lay. The snow-white
limbs of Everhard were extended as if for the inspection of a sculptor,
and moveless, as if they were indeed what they resembled, in hue and
symmetry, those of a marble statue. His arms were tossed above his head,
and the blood was trickling fast from the opened veins of both,--his
bright and curled hair was clotted with the red stream that flowed from
his arms,--his lips were blue, and a faint and fainter moan issued from
them as his mother hung over him. This sight banished in a moment all
other fears and feelings, and Ines shrieked aloud to her husband for
assistance. Walberg, staggering from his sleep, entered the room,--the
object before him was enough. Ines had only strength left to point to
it. The wretched father rushed out in quest of medical aid, which he was
obliged to solicit gratuitously, and in bad Spanish, while his accents
betrayed him at every door he knocked at,--and closed them against him
as a foreigner and a heretic. At length a barber-surgeon (for the
professions were united in Seville) consented, with many a yawn, to
attend him, and came duly armed with lint and styptics. The distance was
short, and he was soon by the bed of the young sufferer. The parents
observed, with consternation unspeakable, the languid looks of
recognition, the ghastly smile of consciousness, that Everhard viewed
him with, as he approached the bed; and when he had succeeded in
stopping the hæmorrhage, and bound up the arms, a whisper passed between
him and the patient, and the latter raised his bloodless hand to his
lips, and uttered, “Remember our bargain.” As the man retired, Walberg
followed, and demanded to know the meaning of the words he had heard.
Walberg was a German, and choleric--the surgeon was a Spaniard, and
cool. “I shall tell you to-morrow, Senhor,” said he, putting up his
instruments,--“in the mean time be assured of my gratuitous attendance
on your son, and of his certain recovery. We deem you heretics in
Seville, but that youth is enough to canonize the whole family, and
cover a multitude of sins.” And with these words he departed. The next
day he attended Everhard, and so for several, till he was completely
recovered, always refusing the slightest remuneration, till the father,
whom misery had made suspicious of every thing and nothing, watched at
the door, and heard the horrible secret. He did not disclose it to his
wife,--but from that hour, it was observed that his gloom became more
intense, and the communications he used to hold with his family, on the
subject of their distress, and the modes of evading it by hourly
expedients, utterly and finally ceased.

“Everhard, now recovered, but still pale as the widow of Seneca, was at
last able to join the family consultation, and give advice, and suggest
resources, with a mental energy that his physical weakness could not
overcome. The next day, when they were assembled to debate on the means
of procuring subsistence for the following one, they for the first time
missed their father. At every word that was uttered, they turned to ask
for his sanction--but he was not there. At last he entered the room, but
without taking a part in their consultation. He leaned gloomily against
the wall, and while Everhard and Julia, at every sentence, turned their
appealing looks towards him, he sullenly averted his head. Ines,
appearing to pursue some work, while her trembling fingers could scarce
direct the needle, made a sign to her children not to observe him. Their
voices were instantly depressed, and their heads bent closely towards
each other. Mendicity appeared the only resource of this unfortunate
family,--and they agreed, that the evening was the best time for trying
its effect. The unhappy father remained rocking against the shattered
wainscot till the arrival of evening. Ines repaired the clothes of the
children, which were now so decayed, that every attempt at repair made a
fresh rent, and the very thread she worked with seemed less attenuated
than the worn-out materials it wrought on.

“The grandfather, still seated in his ample chair by the care of Ines,
(for his son had grown very indifferent about him), watched her moving
fingers, and exclaimed, with the petulance of dotage, “Aye,--you are
arraying them in embroidery, while I am in rags.--In rags!” he repeated,
holding out the slender garments which the beggared family could with
difficulty spare him. Ines tried to pacify him, and showed her work, to
prove that it was the remnants of her children’s former dress she was
repairing; but, with horror unutterable, she perceived her husband
incensed at these expressions of dotage, and venting his frantic and
fearful indignation in language that she tried to bury the sound of, by
pressing closer to the old man, and attempting to fix his bewildered
attention on herself and her work. This was easily accomplished, and all
was well, till they were about to separate on their wretched precarious
errands. Then a new and untold feeling trembled at the heart of one of
the young wanderers. Julia remembered the occurrence of a preceding
evening,--she thought of the tempting gold, the flattering language, and
the tender tone of the young cavalier. She saw her family perishing
around her for want,--she felt it consuming her own vitals,--and as she
cast her eye round the squalid room, the gold glittered brighter and
brighter in her eye. A faint hope, aided perhaps by a still more faint
suggestion of venial pride, swelled in her heart. “Perhaps he might love
me,” she whispered to herself, “and think me not unworthy of his hand.”
Then despair returned to the charge. “I must die of famine,” she
thought, “if I return unaided,--and why may I not by my death benefit my
family! I will never survive shame, but they may,--for they will not
know it!”--She went out, and took a direction different from that of the
family.

“Night came on,--the wanderers returned slowly one by one,--_Julia was
the last_. Her brothers and sister had each obtained a trifling alms,
for they had learned Spanish enough to beg in,--and the old man’s face
wore a vacant smile, as he saw the store produced, which was, after all,
scarce sufficient to afford a meal for the youngest. “And have you
brought us nothing, Julia?” said her parents. She stood apart, and in
silence. Her father repeated the question in a raised and angry voice.
She started at the sound, and, rushing forward, buried her head in her
mother’s bosom. “Nothing,--nothing,” she cried, in a broken and
suffocated voice; “I tried,--my weak and wicked heart submitted to the
thought for a moment,--but no,--no, not even to save you from perishing,
could I!--I came home to perish first myself!” Her shuddering parents
comprehended her,--and amid their agony they blessed her and wept,--but
not from grief. The meal was divided, of which Julia at first steadily
refused to partake, as she had not contributed to it, till her
reluctance was overcome by the affectionate importunity of the rest, and
she complied.

“It was during this division of what all believed to be their last meal,
that Walberg gave one of those proofs of sudden and fearful violence of
temper, bordering on insanity, which he had betrayed latterly. He seemed
to notice, with sullen displeasure, that his wife had (as she always
did) reserved the largest portion for his father. He eyed it askance at
first, muttering angrily to himself. Then he spoke more aloud, though
not so as to be heard by the deaf old man, who was sluggishly devouring
his sordid meal. Then the sufferings of his children seemed to inspire
him with a kind of wild resentment, and he started up, exclaiming, “My
son sells his blood to a surgeon, to save us from perishing(2)! My
daughter trembles on the verge of prostitution, to procure us a meal!”
Then fiercely addressing his father, “And what dost thou do, old dotard?
Rise up,--rise up, and beg for us thyself, or thou must starve!”--and,
as he spoke, he raised his arm against the helpless old man. At this
horrid sight, Ines shrieked aloud, and the children, rushing forward,
interposed. The wretched father, incensed to madness, dealt blows among
them, which were borne without a murmur; and then, the storm being
exhausted, he sat down and wept.

  (2) Fact,--it occurred in a French family not many years ago.

“At this moment, to the astonishment and terror of all except Walberg,
the old man, who, since the night of his wife’s interment, had never
moved but from his chair to his bed, and that not without assistance,
rose suddenly from his seat, and, apparently in obedience to his son,
walked with a firm and steady pace towards the door. When he had reached
it, he paused, looked back on them with a fruitless effort at
recollection, and went out slowly;--and such was the terror felt by all
at this last ghastly look, which seemed like that of a corse moving on
to the place of its interment, that no one attempted to oppose his
passage, and several moments elapsed before Everhard had the
recollection to pursue him.

“In the mean time, Ines had dismissed her children, and sitting as near
as she dared to the wretched father, attempted to address some soothing
expressions to him. Her voice, which was exquisitely sweet and soft,
seemed to produce a mechanical effect on him. He turned towards her at
first,--then leaning his head on his arm, he shed a few silent
tears,--then flinging it on his wife’s bosom, he wept aloud. Ines seized
this moment to impress on his heart the horror she felt from the outrage
he had committed, and adjured him to supplicate the mercy of God for a
crime, which, in her eyes, appeared scarce short of parricide. Walberg
wildly asked what she alluded to; and when, shuddering, she uttered the
words,--“Your father,--your poor old father!”--he smiled with an
expression of mysterious and supernatural confidence that froze her
blood, and, approaching her ear, softly whispered, “I have no father! He
is dead,--long dead! I buried him the night I dug my mother’s grave!
Poor old man,” he added with a sigh, “it was the better for him,--he
would have lived only to weep, and perish perhaps with hunger. But I
will tell you, Ines,--and let it be a secret, I wondered what made our
provisions decrease so, till what was yesterday sufficient for four, is
not to-day sufficient for one. I watched, and at last I discovered--it
must be a secret--an old goblin, who daily visited this house. It came
in the likeness of an old man in rags, and with a long white beard, and
it devoured every thing on the table, while the children stood hungry
by! But I struck at--I cursed it,--I chased it in the name of the
All-powerful, and it is gone. Oh it was a fell devouring goblin!--but
it will haunt us no more, and we shall have enough. Enough,” said
the wretched man, involuntarily returning to his habitual
associations,--“enough for to-morrow!”

“Ines, overcome with horror at this obvious proof of insanity, neither
interrupted or opposed him; she attempted only to soothe him, internally
praying against the too probable disturbance of her own intellects.
Walberg saw her look of distrust, and, with the quick jealousy of
partial insanity, said, “If you do not credit me in that, still less, I
suppose, will you in the account of that fearful visitation with which I
have latterly been familiar.”--“Oh, my beloved!” said Ines, who
recognized in these words the source of a fear that had latterly, from
some extraordinary circumstances in her husband’s conduct, taken
possession of her soul, and made the fear even of famine trifling in
comparison,--“I dread lest I understand you too well. The anguish of
want and of famine I could have borne,--aye, and seen you bear, but the
horrid words you have lately uttered, the horrid thoughts that escape
you in your sleep,--when I think on these, and guess at”---- “You need
not guess,” said Walberg, interrupting her, “I will tell you all.” And,
as he spoke, his countenance changed from its expression of wildness to
one of perfect sanity and calm confidence,--his features relaxed, his
eye became steady, and his tone firm.--“Every night since our late
distresses, I have wandered out in search of some relief, and
supplicated every passing stranger;--latterly, I have met every night
the enemy of man, who”---- “Oh cease, my love, to indulge these horrible
thoughts,--they are the results of your disturbed unhappy state of
mind.”--“Ines, listen to me. I see that figure as plainly as I see
yours,--I hear his voice as distinctly as you hear mine this moment.
Want and misery are not naturally fertile in the production of
imagination,--they grasp at realities too closely. No man, who wants a
meal, conceives that a banquet is spread before him, and that the
tempter invites him to sit down and eat at his ease. No,--no, Ines, the
evil one, or some devoted agent of his in human form, besets me every
night,--and how I shall longer resist the snare, I know not.”--“And in
what form does he appear?” said Ines, hoping to turn the channel of his
gloomy thoughts, while she appeared to follow their direction. “In that
of a middle-aged man, of a serious and staid demeanour, and with nothing
remarkable in his aspect except the light of two burning eyes, whose
lustre is almost intolerable. He fixes them on me sometimes, and I feel
as if there was fascination in their glare. Every night he besets me,
and few like me could have resisted his seductions. He has offered, and
proved to me, that it is in his power to bestow all that human cupidity
could thirst for, on the condition that----I cannot utter! It is one so
full of horror and impiety, that, even to listen to it, is scarce less a
crime than to comply with it!”

“Ines, still incredulous, yet imagining that to soothe his delirium
was perhaps the best way to overcome it, demanded what that condition
was. Though they were alone, Walberg would communicate it only in a
whisper; and Ines, fortified as she was by reason hitherto undisturbed,
and a cool and steady temper, could not but recollect some vague
reports she had heard in her early youth, before she quitted Spain,
of a being permitted to wander through it, with power to tempt men
under the pressure of extreme calamity with similar offers, which had
been invariably rejected, even in the last extremities of despair
and dissolution. She was not superstitious,--but, her memory now
taking part with her husband’s representation of what had befallen
him, she shuddered at the possibility of his being exposed to similar
temptation; and she endeavoured to fortify his mind and conscience,
by arguments equally appropriate whether he was the victim of a
disturbed imagination, or the real object of this fearful persecution.
She reminded him, that if, even in Spain, where the abominations of
Antichrist prevailed, and the triumph of the mother of witchcrafts
and spiritual seduction was complete, the fearful offer he alluded
to had been made and rejected with such unmitigated abhorrence,
the renunciation of one who had embraced the pure doctrines of the
gospel should be expressed with a tenfold energy of feeling and
holy defiance. “You,” said the heroic woman, “you first taught me
that the doctrines of salvation are to be found alone in the holy
scriptures,--I believed you, and wedded you in that belief. We are
united less in the body than in the soul, for in the body neither of
us may probably sojourn much longer. You pointed out to me, not the
legends of fabulous saints, but the lives of the primitive apostles
and martyrs of the true church. There I read no tales of “voluntary
humility,” of self-inflicted--fruitless sufferings, but I read that
the people of God were “destitute, afflicted, tormented.” And shall
we dare to murmur at following the examples of those you have pointed
out to me as ensamples of suffering? They bore the spoiling of their
goods,--they wandered about in sheep skins and goat skins,--they
resisted unto blood, striving against sin.--And shall we lament the
lot that has fallen to us, when our hearts have so often burned within
us, as we read the holy records together? Alas! what avails feeling
till it is brought to the test of fact? How we deceived ourselves, in
believing that we indeed participated in the feelings of those holy
men, while we were so far removed from the test by which they were
proved! We read of imprisonments, of tortures, and of flames!--We
closed the book, and partook of a comfortable meal, and retired to
a peaceful bed, triumphing in the thought, while saturated with all
the world’s good, that if their trials had been ours, we could have
sustained those trials as they did. Now, _our_ hour has come,--it is an
hour sharp and terrible!”--“It is!” murmured the shuddering husband.
“But shall we therefore shrink?” replied his wife. “Your ancestors,
who were the first in Germany that embraced the reformed religion,
have bled and blazed for it, as you have often told me,--can there be
a stronger attestation to it?”--“I believe there can,” said Walberg,
whose eyes rolled fearfully,--“that of starving for it!--Oh Ines,”
he exclaimed, as he grasped her hands convulsively, “I have felt,--I
still feel, that a death at the stake would be mercy compared to
the lingering tortures of protracted famine,--to the death that we
die daily--and yet do not die! What is this I hold?” he exclaimed,
grasping unconsciously the hand he held in his. “It is my hand, my
love,” answered the trembling wife.--“Yours!--no--impossible!--Your
fingers were soft and cool, but these are dry,--is this a human
hand?”--“It is mine,” said the weeping wife. “Then you must have been
famishing,” said Walberg, awakening as if from a dream. “We have all
been so latterly,” answered Ines, satisfied to restore her husband’s
sanity, even at the expense of this horrible confession,--“We have all
been so--but I have suffered the least. When a family is famishing,
the children think of their meals--but the mother thinks only of her
children. I have lived on as little as--I could,--I had indeed no
appetite.”--“Hush,” said Walberg, interrupting her--“what sound was
that?--was it not like a dying groan?”--“No--it is the children who
moan in their sleep.”--“What do they moan for?” “Hunger I believe,”
said Ines, involuntarily yielding to the dreadful conviction of
habitual misery.--“And I sit and hear this,” said Walberg, starting
up,--“I sit to hear their young sleep broken by dreams of hunger,
while for a word’s speaking I could pile this floor with mountains of
gold, and all for the risk of”---- “Of what?”--said Ines, clinging
to him,--“of what?--Oh! think of that!--what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?--Oh! let us starve, die, rot before your eyes,
rather than you should seal your perdition by that horrible”---- “Hear
me, woman!” said Walberg, turning on her eyes almost as fierce and
lustrous as those of Melmoth, and whose light, indeed, seemed borrowed
from his; “Hear me!--My soul is lost! They who die in the agonies of
famine know no God, and want none--if I remain here to famish among
my children, I shall as surely blaspheme the Author of my being, as I
shall renounce him under the fearful conditions proposed to me!--Listen
to me, Ines, and tremble not. To see my children die of famine will
be to me instant suicide and impenitent despair! But if I close with
this fearful offer, I may yet repent,--I may yet escape!--There is
hope on one side--on the other there is none--none--none! Your hands
cling round me, but their touch is cold!--You are wasted to a shadow
with want! Shew me the means of procuring another meal, and I will spit
at the tempter, and spurn him!--But where is that to be found?--Let
me go, then, to meet him!--You will pray for me, Ines,--will you
not?--and the children?--No, let them not pray for me!--in my despair
I forgot to pray myself, and their prayers would now be a reproach to
me.--Ines!--Ines--What? am I talking to a corse?” He was indeed, for
the wretched wife had sunk at his feet senseless. “Thank God!” he again
emphatically exclaimed, as he beheld her lie to all appearance lifeless
before him. “Thank God a word then has killed her,--it was a gentler
death than famine! It would have been kind to have strangled her with
these hands! Now for the children!” he exclaimed, while horrid thoughts
chased each other over his reeling and unseated mind, and he imagined
he heard the roar of a sea in its full strength thundering in his
ears, and saw ten thousand waves dashing at his feet, and every wave
of blood. “Now for the children!”--and he felt about as if for some
implement of destruction. In doing so, his left hand crossed his right,
and grasping it, he exclaimed as if he felt a sword in his hand,--“This
will do--they will struggle--they will supplicate,--but I will tell
them their mother lies dead at my feet, and then what can they say?
Hold now,” said the miserable man, sitting calmly down, “If they cry to
me, what shall I answer? Julia, and Ines her mother’s namesake,--and
poor little Maurice, who smiles even amid hunger, and whose smiles are
worse than curses!--I will tell them their mother is dead!” he cried,
staggering towards the door of his childrens’ apartment--“Dead without
a blow!--that shall be their answer and their doom.”

“As he spoke, he stumbled over the senseless body of his wife; and the
tone of his mind once more strung up to the highest pitch of conscious
agony, he cried, “Men!--men!--what are your pursuits and your
passions?--your hopes and fears?--your struggles and your
triumphs?--Look on me!--learn from a human being like yourselves, who
preaches his last and fearful sermon over the corse of his wife, and
approaching the bodies of his sleeping children, whom he soon hopes to
see corses also--corses made so by his own hand!--Let all the world
listen to me!--let them resign factitious wants and wishes, and furnish
those who hang on them for subsistence with the means of bare
subsistence!--There is no care, no thought beyond this! Let our children
call on me for instruction, for promotion, for distinction, and call in
vain--I hold myself innocent. They may find those for themselves, or
want them if they list--but let them never in vain call on me for bread,
as they have done,--as they do now! I hear the moans of their hungry
sleep!--World--world, be wise, and let your children curse you to your
face for any thing but want of bread! Oh that is the bitterest of
curses,--and it is felt most when it is least uttered! I have felt it
often, but I shall feel it no longer!”--And the wretch tottered towards
the beds of his children.

“Father!--father!” cried Julia, “are these your hands? Oh let me live,
and I will do any thing--any thing but”---- “Father!--dear father!”
cried Ines, “spare us!--to-morrow may bring another meal!” Maurice, the
young child, sprung from his bed, and cried, clinging round his father,
“Oh, dear father, forgive me!--but I dreamed a wolf was in the room, and
was tearing out our throats; and, father, I cried so long, that I
thought you never would come. And now--Oh God! oh God!”--as he felt the
hands of the frantic wretch grasping his throat,--“are you the wolf?”

“Fortunately those hands were powerless from the very convulsion of the
agony that prompted their desperate effort. The daughters had swooned
from horror,--and their swoon appeared like death. The child had the
cunning to counterfeit death also, and lay extended and stopping his
breath under the fierce but faultering gripe that seized his young
throat--then relinquished--then grasped it again--and then relaxed its
hold as at the expiration of a spasm.

“When all was over, as the wretched father thought, he retreated from
the chamber. In doing so, he stumbled over the corse-like form of his
wife.--A groan announced that the sufferer was not dead. “What does this
mean?” said Walberg, staggering in his delirium,--“does the corse
reproach me for murder?--or does one surviving breath curse me for the
unfinished work?”

“As he spoke, he placed his foot on his wife’s body. At this moment, a
loud knock was heard at the door. “They are come!” said Walberg, whose
frenzy hurried him rapidly through the scenes of an imaginary murder,
and the consequence of a judicial process. “Well!--come in--knock again,
or lift the latch--or enter as ye list--here I sit amid the bodies of my
wife and children--I have murdered them--I confess it--ye come to drag
me to torture, I know--but never--never can your tortures inflict on me
more than the agony of seeing them perish by hunger before my eyes. Come
in--come in--the deed is done!--The corse of my wife is at my foot, and
the blood of my children is on my hands--what have I further to fear?”
But while the wretched man spoke thus, he sunk sullenly on his chair,
appearing to be employed in wiping from his fingers the traces of blood
with which he imagined they were stained. At length the knocking at the
door became louder,--the latch was lifted,--and three figures entered
the apartment in which Walberg sat. They advanced slowly,--two from age
and exhaustion,--and the third from strong emotion. Walberg heeded them
not,--his eyes were fixed,--his hands locked in each other;--nor did he
move a limb as they approached.

“Do you not know us?” said the foremost, holding up a lanthern which he
held in his hand. Its light fell on a groupe worthy the pencil of a
Rembrandt. The room lay in complete darkness, except where that strong
and unbroken light fell. It glared on the rigid and moveless obduracy of
Walberg’s despair, who appeared stiffening into stone as he sat. It
showed the figure of the friendly priest who had been Guzman’s director,
and whose features, pale and haggard with age and austerities, seemed to
struggle with the smile that trembled over their wrinkled lines. Behind
him stood the aged father of Walberg, with an aspect of perfect apathy,
except when, with a momentary effort at recollection, he shook his white
head, seeming to ask himself why he was there--and wherefore he could
not speak. Supporting him stood the young form of Everhard, over whose
cheek and eye wandered a glow and a lustre too bright to last, and
instantly succeeded by paleness and dejection. He trembled,
advanced,--then shrinking back, clung to his infirm grandfather, as if
needing the support he appeared to give. Walberg was the first to break
the silence. “I know ye who ye are,” he said hollowly--“ye are come to
seize me--ye have heard my confession--why do you delay? Drag me away--I
would rise and follow you if I could, but I feel as if I had grown to
this seat--you must drag me from it yourselves.”

“As he spoke, his wife, who had remained stretched at his feet, rose
slowly but firmly; and, of all that she saw or heard, appearing to
comprehend only the meaning of her husband’s words, she clasped her arms
round him, as if to oppose his being torn from her, and gazed on the
groupe with a look of impotent and ghastly defiance. “Another witness,”
cried Walberg, “risen from the dead against me? Nay, then, it is time to
be gone,”--and he attempted to rise. “Stay, father,” said Everhard,
rushing forward and detaining him in his seat; “stay,--there is good
news, and this good priest has come to tell it,--listen to him, father,
I cannot speak.”--“You! oh you! Everhard,” answered the father, with a
look of mournful reproach, “you a witness against me too,--I never
raised my hand against you!--Those whom I murdered are silent, and will
you be my accuser?”

“They all now gathered round him, partly in terror and partly in
consolation,--all anxious to disclose to him the tidings with which
their hearts were burdened, yet fearful lest the freight might be too
much for the frail vessel that rocked and reeled before them, as if the
next breeze would be like a tempest to it. At last it burst forth from
the priest, who, by the necessities of his profession, was ignorant of
domestic feelings, and of the felicities and agonies which are
inseparably twined with the fibres of conjugal and parental hearts. He
knew nothing of what Walberg might feel as a husband or father,--for he
could never be either; but he felt that good news must be good news,
into whatever ears they were poured, or by whatever lips they might be
uttered. “We have the will,” he cried abruptly, “the true will of
Guzman. The other was--asking pardon of God and the saints for saying
so--no better than a forgery. The will is found, and you and your family
are heirs to all his wealth. I was coming to acquaint you, late as it
was, having with difficulty obtained the Superior’s permission to do so,
and in my way I met this old man, whom your son was conducting,--how
came he out so late?” At these words Walberg was observed to shudder
with a brief but strong spasm. “The will is found!” repeated the priest,
perceiving how little effect the words seemed to have on Walberg,--and
he raised his voice to its utmost pitch. “The will of my uncle is
found,” repeated Everhard. “Found,--found,--found!” echoed the aged
grandfather, not knowing what he said, but vaguely repeating the last
words he heard, and then looking round as if asking for an explanation
of them. “The will is found, love,” cried Ines, who appeared restored to
sudden and perfect consciousness by the sound; “Do you not hear, love?
We are wealthy,--we are happy! Speak to us, love, and do not stare so
vacantly,--speak to us!” A long pause followed. At length,--“Who are
those?” said Walberg in a hollow voice, pointing to the figures before
him, whom he viewed with a fixed and ghastly look, as if he was gazing
on a band of spectres. “Your son, love,--and your father,--and the good
friendly priest. Why do you look so doubtfully on us?”--“And what do
they come for?” said Walberg. Again and again the import of their
communication was told him, in tones that, trembling with varied
emotion, scarce could express their meaning. At length he seemed faintly
conscious of what was said, and, looking round on them, uttered a long
and heavy sigh. They ceased to speak, and watched him in
silence.--“Wealth!--wealth!--it comes too late. Look there,--look
there!” and he pointed to the room where his children lay.

“Ines, with a dreadful presentiment at her heart, rushed into it, and
beheld her daughters lying apparently lifeless. The shriek she uttered,
as she fell on the bodies, brought the priest and her son to her
assistance, and Walberg and the old man were left together alone,
viewing each other with looks of complete insensibility; and this apathy
of age, and stupefaction of despair, made a singular contrast with the
fierce and wild agony of those who still retained their feelings. It was
long before the daughters were recovered from their death-like swoon,
and still longer before their father could be persuaded that the arms
that clasped him, and the tears that fell on his cold cheek, were those
of his living children.

“All that night his wife and family struggled with his despair. At last
recollection seemed to burst on him at once. He shed some tears;--then,
with a minuteness of reminiscence that was equally singular and
affecting, he flung himself before the old man, who, speechless and
exhausted, sat passively in his chair, and exclaiming, “Father, forgive
me!” buried his head between his father’s knees. * * * * *

“Happiness is a powerful restorative,--in a few days the spirits of all
appeared to have subsided into a calm. They wept sometimes, but their
tears were no longer painful;--they resembled those showers in a fine
spring morning, which announce the increasing warmth and beauty of the
day. The infirmities of Walberg’s father made the son resolve not to
leave Spain till his dissolution, which took place in a few months. He
died in peace, blessing and blessed. His son was his only spiritual
attendant, and a brief and partial interval of recollection enabled him
to understand and express his joy and confidence in the holy texts which
were read to him from the scriptures. The wealth of the family had now
given them importance; and, by the interest of the friendly priest, the
body was permitted to be interred in consecrated ground. The family then
set out for Germany, where they reside in prosperous felicity;--but to
this hour Walberg shudders with horror when he recals the fearful
temptations of the stranger, whom he met in his nightly wanderings in
the hour of his adversity, and the horrors of this visitation appear to
oppress his recollection more than even the images of his family
perishing with want.

“There are other narratives,” continued the stranger, “relating to this
mysterious being, which I am in possession of, and which I have
collected with much difficulty; for the unhappy, who are exposed to his
temptations, consider their misfortunes as a crime, and conceal, with
the most anxious secresy, every circumstance of this horrible
visitation. Should we again meet, Senhor, I may communicate them to you,
and you will find them no less extraordinary than that I have just
related. But it is now late, and you need repose after the fatigue of
your journey.”--So saying, the stranger departed.

                   *       *       *       *       *

“Don Francisco remained seated in his chair, musing on the singular tale
he had listened to, till the lateness of the hour, combining with his
fatigue, and the profound attention he had paid to the narrative of the
stranger, plunged him insensibly into a deep slumber. He was awoke in a
few minutes by a slight noise in the room, and looking up perceived
seated opposite to him another person, whom he never recollected to have
seen before, but who was indeed the same who had been refused admittance
under the roof of that house the preceding day. He appeared seated
perfectly at his ease, however; and to Don Francisco’s look of surprise
and inquiry, replied that he was a traveller, who had been by mistake
shown into that apartment,--that finding its occupant asleep and
undisturbed by his entrance, he had taken the liberty of remaining
there, but was willing to retire if his presence was considered
intrusive.

“As he spoke, Don Francisco had leisure to observe him. There was
something remarkable in his expression, though the observer did not find
it easy to define what it was; and his manner, though not courtly or
conciliating, had an ease which appeared more the result of independence
of thought, than of the acquired habitudes of society.

“Don Francisco welcomed him gravely and slowly, not without a sensation
of awe for which he could scarcely account;--and the stranger returned
the salutation in a manner that was not likely to diminish that
impression. A long silence followed. The stranger (who did not announce
his name) was the first to break it, by apologizing for having, while
seated in an adjacent apartment, involuntarily overheard an
extraordinary tale or narrative related to Don Francisco, in which he
confessed he took a profound interest, such as (he added, bowing with an
air of grim and reluctant civility) would, he trusted, palliate his
impropriety in listening to a communication not addressed to him.

“To all this Don Francisco could only reply by bows equally rigid, (his
body scarce forming an acute angle with his limbs as he sat), and by
looks of uneasy and doubtful curiosity directed towards his strange
visitor, who, however, kept his seat immoveably, and seemed, after all
his apologies, resolved to sit out Don Francisco.

“Another long pause was broken by the visitor. “You were listening, I
think,” he said, “to a wild and terrible story of a being who was
commissioned on an unutterable errand,--even to tempt spirits in woe, at
their last mortal extremity, to barter their hopes of future happiness
for a short remission of their temporary sufferings.”--“I heard nothing
of that,” said Don Francisco, whose recollection, none of the clearest
naturally, was not much improved by the length of the narrative he had
just listened to, and by the sleep into which he had fallen since he
heard it. “Nothing?” said the visitor, with something of abruptness and
asperity in his tone that made the hearer start--“nothing?--I thought
there was mention too of that unhappy being to whom Walberg confessed
his severest trials were owing,--in comparison with whose fearful
visitations those of even famine were as dust in the balance.”--“Yes,
yes,” answered Don Francisco, startled into sudden recollection, “I
remember there was a mention of the devil,--or his agent,--or
something”---- “Senhor,” said the stranger interrupting him, with an
expression of wild and fierce derision, which was lost on
Aliaga--“Senhor, I beg you will not confound personages who have the
honour to be so nearly allied, and yet so perfectly distinct as the
devil and his agent, or agents. You yourself, Senhor, who, of course, as
an orthodox and inveterate Catholic, must abhor the enemy of mankind,
have often acted as his agent, and yet would be somewhat offended at
being mistaken for him.” Don Francisco crossed himself repeatedly, and
devoutly disavowed his ever having been an agent of the enemy of man.
“Will you dare to say so?” said his singular visitor, not raising his
voice as the insolence of the question seemed to require, but depressing
it to the lowest whisper as he drew his seat nearer his astonished
companion--“Will you dare to say so?--Have you never erred?--Have you
never felt one impure sensation?--Have you never indulged a transient
feeling of hatred, or malice, or revenge?--Have you never forgot to do
the good you ought to do,--or remembered to do the evil you ought not to
have done?--Have you never in trade overreached a dealer, or banquetted
on the spoils of your starving debtor?--Have you never, as you went to
your daily devotions, cursed from your heart the wanderings of your
heretical brethren,--and while you dipped your fingers in the holy
water, hoped that every drop that touched your pores, would be visited
on them in drops of brimstone and sulphur?--Have you never, as you
beheld the famished, illiterate, degraded populace of your country,
exulted in the wretched and temporary superiority your wealth has given
you,--and felt that the wheels of your carriage would not roll less
smoothly if the way was paved with the heads of your countrymen?
Orthodox Catholic--old Christian--as you boast yourself to be,--is not
this true?--and dare you say you have not been an agent of Satan? I tell
you, whenever you indulged one brutal passion, one sordid desire, one
impure imagination--whenever you uttered one word that wrung the heart,
or embittered the spirit of your fellow-creature--whenever you made that
hour pass in pain to whose flight you might have lent wings of
down--whenever you have seen the tear, which your hand might have wiped
away, fall uncaught, or forced it from an eye which would have smiled on
you in light had you permitted it--whenever you have done this, you have
been ten times more an agent of the enemy of man than all the wretches
whom terror, enfeebled nerves, or visionary credulity, has forced into
the confession of an incredible compact with the author of evil, and
whose confession has consigned them to flames much more substantial than
those the imagination of their persecutors pictured them doomed to for
an eternity of suffering! Enemy of mankind!” the speaker
continued,--“Alas! how absurdly is that title bestowed on the great
angelic chief,--the morning star fallen from its sphere! What enemy has
man so deadly as himself? If he would ask on whom he should bestow that
title aright, let him smite his bosom, and his heart will
answer,--Bestow it here!”

“The emotion with which the stranger spoke, roused and affected even the
sluggish and incrusted spirit of the listener. His conscience, like a
state coach-horse, had hitherto only been brought on solemn and pompous
occasions, and then paced heavily along a smooth and well-prepared
course, under the gorgeous trappings of ceremony;--now it resembled the
same animal suddenly bestrid by a fierce and vigorous rider, and urged
by lash and spur along a new and rugged road. And slow and reluctant as
he was to own it, he felt the power of the weight that pressed, and the
bit that galled him. He answered by a hasty and trembling renunciation
of all engagements, direct or indirect, with the evil power; but he
added, that he must acknowledge he had been too often the victim of his
seductions, and trusted for the forgiveness of his wanderings to the
power of the holy church, and the intercession of the saints.

“The stranger (though he smiled somewhat grimly at this declaration)
seemed to accept the concession, and apologized, in his turn, for the
warmth with which he had spoken; and which he begged Don Francisco would
interpret as a mark of interest in his spiritual concerns. This
explanation, though it seemed to commence favourably, was not followed,
however, by any attempt at renewed conversation. The parties appeared to
stand aloof from each other, till the stranger again alluded to his
having overheard the singular conversation and subsequent narrative in
Aliaga’s apartment. “Senhor,” he added, in a voice whose solemnity
deeply impressed the hearer, wearied as he was,--“I am acquainted with
circumstances relating to the extraordinary person who was the daily
watcher of Walberg’s miseries, and the nightly tempter of his
thoughts,--known but to him and me. Indeed I may add, without the
imputation of vanity or presumption, that I am as well acquainted as
himself with every event of his extraordinary existence; and that your
curiosity, if excited at all about him, could be gratified by none so
amply and faithfully as by myself.”--“I thank you, Senhor,” answered Don
Francisco, whose blood seemed congealing in his veins at the voice and
expression of the stranger, he knew not why--“I thank you, but my
curiosity has been completely satisfied by the narrative I have already
listened to. The night is far spent, and I have to pursue my journey
to-morrow; I will therefore defer hearing the particulars you offer to
gratify me with till our next meeting.”

“As he spoke, he rose from his seat, hoping that this action would
intimate to the intruder, that his presence was no longer desirable. The
latter continued, in spite of the intimation, fixed in his seat. At
length, starting as if from a trance, he exclaimed, “When shall our next
meeting be?”

“Don Francisco, who did not feel particularly anxious to renew the
intimacy, slightly mentioned, that he was on his journey to the
neighbourhood of Madrid, where his family, whom he had not seen for many
years, resided--that the stages of his journey were uncertain, as he
would be obliged to wait for communications from a friend and future
relative,--(he alluded to Montilla his intended son-in-law, and as he
spoke, the stranger gave a peculiar smile),--and also from certain
mercantile correspondents, whose letters were of the utmost importance.
Finally, he added, in a disturbed tone, (for the awe of the stranger’s
presence hung round him like a chilling atmosphere, and seemed to freeze
even his words as they issued from his mouth), he could
not--easily--tell when he might again have the honour of meeting the
stranger. “You cannot,” said the stranger, rising and drawing his mantle
over one shoulder, while his reverted eyes glanced fearfully on the pale
auditor--“You cannot,--but I can. Don Francisco di Aliaga, we shall meet
to-morrow night!”

“As he spoke, he still continued to stand near the door, fixing on
Aliaga eyes whose light seemed to burn more intensely amid the dimness
of the wretched apartment. Aliaga had risen also, and was gazing on his
strange visitor with dim and troubled vision,--when the latter, suddenly
retreating from the door, approached him and said, in a stifled and
mysterious whisper, “Would you wish to witness the fate of those whose
curiosity or presumption breaks on the secrets of that mysterious being,
and dares to touch the folds of the veil in which his destiny has been
enshrouded by eternity? If you do, look here!” And as he spoke, he
pointed to a door which Don Francisco well remembered to be that which
the person whom he had met at the inn the preceding evening, and who had
related to him the tale of Guzman’s family, (or rather relatives), had
retired by. Obeying mechanically the waving of the arm, and the
beckoning of the stranger’s awful eye, rather than the impulse of his
own will, Aliaga followed him. They entered the apartment; it was
narrow, and dark, and empty. The stranger held a candle aloft, whose dim
light fell on a wretched bed, where lay what had been the form of a
living man within a few hours. “Look there!” said the stranger; and
Aliaga with horror beheld the figure of the being who had been
conversing with him the preceding part of that very evening,--extended a
corse!

“Advance--look--observe!” said the stranger, tearing off the sheet which
had been the only covering of the sleeper who had now sunk into the long
and last slumber--“There is no mark of violence, no distortion of
feature, or convulsion of limb--no hand of man was on him. He sought the
possession of a desperate secret--he obtained it, but he paid for it the
dreadful price that can be paid but once by mortals. So perish those
whose presumption exceeds their power!”

“Aliaga, as he beheld the body, and heard the words of the stranger,
felt himself disposed to summon the inmates of the house, and accuse the
stranger of murder; but the natural cowardice of a mercantile spirit,
mingled with other feelings which he could not analyse, and dared not
own, withheld him,--and he continued to gaze alternately on the corse
and the corse-like stranger. The latter, after pointing emphatically to
the body, as if intimating the danger of imprudent curiosity, or
unavailing disclosure, repeated the words, “We meet again to-morrow
night!” and departed.

“Aliaga, overcome by fatigue and emotion, sunk down by the corse, and
remained in that trance-like state till the servants of the inn entered
the room. They were shocked to find a dead body in the bed, and scarce
less shocked at the death-like state in which they found Aliaga. His
known wealth and distinction procured for him those attentions which
otherwise their terrors or their suspicions might have withheld. A sheet
was cast over the body, and Aliaga was conveyed to another apartment,
and attended sedulously by the domestics.

“In the mean time, the Alcaide arrived; and having learned that the
person who had died suddenly in the inn was one totally unknown, as
being only a writer, and a man of no importance in public or private
life, and that the person found near his bed in a passive stupor was a
wealthy merchant,--snatched, with some trepidation, the pen from the
ink-horn which hung at his button-hole, and sketched the record of this
sapient inquest:---- “That a guest had died in the house, none could
deny; but no one could suspect Don Francisco di Aliaga of murder.”

“As Don Francisco mounted his mule the following day, on the strength of
this just verdict, a person, who did not apparently belong to the house,
was particularly solicitous in adjusting his stirrups, &c.; and while
the obsequious Alcaide bowed oft and profoundly to the wealthy merchant,
(whose liberality he had amply experienced for the favourable colour he
had given to the strong circumstantial evidence against him), this
person whispered, in a voice that reached only the ears of Don
Francisco, “We meet to-night!”

“Don Francisco checked his mule as he heard the words. He looked round
him--the speaker was gone. Don Francisco rode on with a feeling known to
few, and which those who have felt are perhaps the least willing to
communicate.




CHAPTER XXIX.

    Χαλεπον δε το φιλησαι·
    χαλεπον το μη φιλησαι·
    χαλεπωτερον δε παντων
    αποτυγχανειν φιλουντα.


“Don Francisco rode on most of that day. The weather was mild, and his
servants holding occasionally large umbrellas over him as he rode,
rendered travelling supportable. In consequence of his long absence from
Spain, he was wholly unacquainted with his route, and obliged to depend
on a guide; and the fidelity of a Spanish guide being as proverbial and
trust-worthy as Punic faith, towards evening Don Francisco found himself
just where the Princess Micomicona, in the romance of his countryman, is
said to have discovered Don Quixote,--“amid a labyrinth of rocks.” He
immediately dispatched his attendants in various directions, to discover
the track they were to pursue. The guide gallopped after as fast as his
wearied mule could go, and Don Francisco, looking round, after a long
delay on the part of his attendants, found himself completely alone.
Neither the weather nor the prospect was calculated to raise his
spirits. The evening was very misty, unlike the brief and brilliant
twilight that precedes the nights of the favoured climates of the south.
Heavy showers fell from time to time,--not incessant, but seeming like
the discharge of passing clouds, that were instantly succeeded by
others. Those clouds gathered blacker and deeper every moment, and hung
in fantastic wreaths over the stony mountains that formed a gloomy
perspective to the eye of the traveller. As the mists wandered over
them, they seemed to rise and fade, and shift their shapes and their
stations like the hills of Ubeda(3), as indistinct in form and as dim in
hue, as the atmospheric illusions which in that dreary and deceptive
light sometimes gave them the appearance of primeval mountains, and
sometimes that of fleecy and baseless clouds.

  (3) Vied Cervantes, spud Don Quixote DE Collins Obed.

“Don Francisco at first dropt the reins on his mule’s neck, and uttered
sundry ejaculations to the Virgin. Finding this did no good,--that the
hills still seemed to wander before his bewildered eyes, and the mule,
on the other hand, remained immoveable, he bethought himself of calling
on a variety of saints, whose names the echoes of the hills returned
with the most perfect punctuality, but not one of whom happened just
then to be at leisure to attend to his petitions. Finding the case thus
desperate, Don Francisco struck spurs into his mule, and gallopped up a
rocky defile, where the hoofs of his beast struck fire at every step,
and their echo from the rocks of granite made the rider tremble, lest he
was pursued by banditti at every step he took. The mule, so provoked,
gallopped fiercely on, till the rider, weary as he was, and somewhat
incommoded by its speed, drew up the reins more tightly, at hearing the
steps of another rider close behind him. The mule paused instantly. Some
say that animals have a kind of instinct in discovering and recognizing
the approach of beings not of this world. However that may be, Don
Francisco’s mule stood as if its feet had been nailed to the road, till
the approach of the traveller set it once more into a gallop, on which,
as it appeared, the gallop of the pursuer, whose course seemed fleeter
than that of an earthly rider, gained fast, and in a few moments a
singular figure rode close beside Don Francisco.

“He was not in a riding dress, but muffled from head to foot in a long
cloke, whose folds were so ample as almost to hide the flanks of his
beast. As soon as he was abreast with Aliaga, he removed that part of
the cloke which covered his head and shoulders, and, turning towards
him, disclosed the unwelcome countenance of his mysterious visitor the
preceding night. “We meet again, Senhor,” said the stranger, with his
peculiar smile, “and fortunately for you, I trust. Your guide has ridden
off with the money you advanced him for his services, and your servants
are ignorant of the roads, which, in this part of the country, are
singularly perplexed. If you will accept of me as your guide, you will,
I believe, have reason to congratulate yourself on our encounter.”

“Don Francisco, who felt that no choice was left, acquiesced in silence,
and rode on, not without reluctance, by the side of his strange
companion. The silence was at length broken, by the stranger’s pointing
out the village at which Aliaga proposed to pass the night, at no very
great distance, and at the same time noticing the approaching of his
servants, who were returning to their master, after having made a
similar discovery. These circumstances contributing to restore Aliaga’s
courage, he proceeded with some degree of confidence, and even began to
listen with interest to the conversation of the stranger; particularly
as he observed, that though the village was near, the windings of the
road were likely to retard their arrival for some hours. The interest
which had thus been excited, the stranger seemed resolved to improve to
the uttermost. He rapidly unfolded the stores of his rich and copiously
furnished mind; and, by skilfully blending his displays of general
knowledge with particular references to the oriental countries where
Aliaga had resided, their commerce, their customs, and their manners,
and with a perfect acquaintance with the most minute topics of
mercantile discourse,--he so far conciliated his fellow-traveller, that
the journey, begun in terror, ended in delight, and Aliaga heard with a
kind of pleasure, (not however unmixed with awful reminiscences), the
stranger announce his intention of passing the night at the same inn.

“During the supper, the stranger redoubled his efforts, and confirmed
his success. He was indeed a man who could please when he pleased, and
whom. His powerful intellects, extensive knowledge, and accurate memory,
qualified him to render the hour of companionship delightful to all whom
genius could interest, or information amuse. He possessed a fund of
anecdotical history, and, from the fidelity of his paintings, always
appeared himself to have been an agent in the scenes he described. This
night, too, that the attractions of his conversation might want no
charm, and have no shade, he watchfully forbore those bursts of
passion,--those fierce explosions of misanthropy and malediction, and
that bitter and burning irony with which, at other times, he seemed to
delight to interrupt himself and confound his hearer.

“The evening thus passed pleasurably; and it was not till supper was
removed, and the lamp placed on the table beside which the stranger and
he were seated alone, that the ghastly scene of the preceding night rose
like a vision before the eyes of Aliaga. He thought he saw the corse
lying in a corner of the room, and waving its dead hand, as if to beckon
him away from the society of the stranger. The vision passed away,--he
looked up,--they were alone. It was with the utmost effort of his mixed
politeness and fear, that he prepared himself to listen to the tale
which the stranger had frequently, amid their miscellaneous
conversation, alluded to, and showed an evident anxiety to relate.

“These allusions were attended with unpleasant reminiscences to the
hearer,--but he saw that it was to be, and armed himself as he might
with courage to hear. “I would not intrude on you, Senhor,” said the
stranger, with an air of grave interest which Aliaga had never seen him
assume before--“I would not intrude on you with a narrative in which you
can feel but little interest, were I not conscious that its relation may
operate as a warning the most awful, salutary, and efficacious to
yourself.”--“Me!” exclaimed Don Francisco, revolting with all the horror
of an orthodox Catholic at the sound.--“Me!” he repeated, uttering a
dozen ejaculations to the saints, and making the sign of the cross twice
that number of times.--“Me!” he continued, discharging a whole volley of
fulmination against all those who, being entangled in the snares of
Satan, sought to draw others into them, whether in the shape of heresy,
witchcraft, or otherwise. It might be observed, however, that he laid
most stress on heresy, the latter evil, from the rigour of their
mythology, or other causes, which it were not unworthy philosophical
curiosity to inquire into, being almost unknown in Spain;--and he
uttered this protestation (which was doubtless very sincere) with such a
hostile and denunciatory tone, that Satan, if he was present, (as the
speaker half imagined), would have been almost justified in making
reprisals. Amid the assumed consequence which passion, whether natural
or artificial, always gives to a man of mediocrity, he felt himself
withering in the wild laugh of the stranger. “You,--you!” he exclaimed,
after a burst of sound that seemed rather like the convulsion of a
demoniac, than the mirth, however frantic, of a human being--“you!--oh,
there’s metal more attractive! Satan himself, however depraved, has a
better taste than to crunch such a withered scrap of orthodoxy as you
between his iron teeth. No!--the interest I alluded to as possible for
you to feel, refers to another one, for whom you ought to feel if
possible more than for yourself. Now, worthy Aliaga, your personal fears
being removed, sit and listen to my tale. You are sufficiently
acquainted, through the medium of commercial feelings, and the general
information which your habits have forced on you, with the history and
manners of those heretics who inhabit the country called England.”

“Don Francisco, as a merchant, avouched his knowledge of their being
fair dealers, and wealthy liberal speculators in trade; but (crossing
himself frequently) he pronounced his utter detestation of them as
enemies to the holy church, and implored the stranger to believe that he
would rather renounce the most advantageous contract he had ever made
with them in the mercantile line, than be suspected of---- “I suspect
nothing,” said the stranger, interrupting him, with that smile that
spoke darker and bitterer things than the fiercest frown that ever
wrinkled the features of man.--“Interrupt me no more,--listen, as you
value the safety of a being of more value than all your race beside. You
are acquainted tolerably with the English history, and manners, and
habits; the latter events of their history are indeed in the mouths of
all Europe.” Aliaga was silent, and the stranger proceeded.




The Lovers’ Tale.


“In a part of that heretic country lies a portion of land they call
Shropshire, (“I have had dealings with Shrewsbury merchants,” said
Aliaga to himself, “they furnished goods, and paid bills with
distinguished punctuality,”)--there stood Mortimer Castle, the seat of a
family who boasted of their descent from the age of the Norman
Conqueror, and had never mortgaged an acre, or cut down a tree, or
lowered a banner on their towers at the approach of a foe, for five
hundred years. Mortimer castle had held out during the wars of Stephen
and Matilda,--it had even defied the powers that summoned it to
capitulation alternately, (about once a week), during the struggle
between the houses of York and Lancaster,--it had also disdained the
summons of Richard and Richmond, as their successive blasts shook its
battlements, while the armies of the respective leaders advanced to the
field of Bosworth. The Mortimer family, in fact, by their power, their
extensive influence, their immense wealth, and the independency of their
spirit, had rendered themselves formidable to every party, and superior
to all.

“At the time of the Reformation, Sir Roger Mortimer, the descendant of
this powerful family, vigorously espoused the cause of the Reformers;
and when the nobility and gentry of the neighbourhood sent their usual
dole, at Christmas, of beef and ale to their tenants, Sir Roger, with
his chaplain attending him, went about from cottage to cottage,
distributing Bibles in English, of the edition printed by Tyndal in
Holland. But his loyalism prevailed so far, that he circulated along
with them the uncouth print, cut out of his own copy, of the King (Henry
VIII.) dispensing copies of the Bible from both hands, which the people,
as represented in the engraving, caught at with theirs, and seemed to
devour as the word of life, almost before it could reach them.

“In the short reign of Edward, the family was protected and cherished;
and the godly Sir Edmund, son and successor to Sir Roger, had the Bible
laid open in his hall window, that while his domestics passed on their
errands, as he expressed himself,--“he that runs may read.” In that of
Mary, they were oppressed, confiscated, and menaced. Two of their
servants were burned at Shrewsbury; and it was said that nothing but a
large sum, advanced to defray the expences of the entertainments made at
Court on the arrival of Philip of Spain, saved the godly Sir Edmund from
the same fate.

“Sir Edmund, to whatever cause he owed his safety, did not enjoy it
long. He had seen his faithful and ancient servants brought to the
stake, for the opinions he had taught them,--he had attended them in
person to the awful spot, and seen the Bibles he had attempted to place
in their hands flung into the flames, as they were kindled round
them,--he had turned with tottering steps from the scene, but the crowd,
in the triumph of their barbarity, gathered round, and kept him close,
so that he not only involuntarily witnessed the whole spectacle, but
felt the very heat of the flames that were consuming the bodies of the
sufferers. Sir Edmund returned to Mortimer Castle, and died.

“His successor, during the reign of Elizabeth, stoutly defended the
rights of the Reformers, and sometimes grumbled at those of prerogative.
These grumblings were said to have cost him dear--the court of purveyors
charged him £.3000, an enormous sum in those days, for an expected visit
of the Queen and her court--a visit which was never paid. The money was,
however, paid; and it was said that Sir Orlan de Mortimer raised part of
the money by disposing of his falcons, the best in England, to the Earl
of Leicester, the _then_ favourite of the Queen. At all events, there
was a tradition in the family, that when, on his last ride through his
territorial demesne, Sir Orlando saw his favourite remaining bird fly
from the falconer’s hand, and break her jesses, he exclaimed, “Let her
fly; she knows the way to my lord of Leicester’s.”

“During the reign of James, the Mortimer family took a more decided
part. The influence of the Puritans (whom James hated with a hatred
passing that of even a controversialist, and remembered with pardonable
filial resentment, as the inveterate enemies of his ill-fated mother)
was now increasing every hour. Sir Arthur Mortimer was standing by King
James at the first representation of “Bartholomew Fair,” written by Ben
Jonson, when the prologue uttered these words(4):

    “Your Majesty is welcome to a Fair;
    Such place, such men, such language, and such ware,
    You must expect--with these the _zealous noise_
    Of your land’s faction, scandalized at toys.”

  (4) Vide Jonson’s play, in which is introduced a Puritan preacher, a
  _Banbury man_, named Zeal-of-the-land Busy.

“My lord,” said the King, (for Sir Arthur was one of the lords of the
privy council), “how deem you by that?”--“Please your Majesty,” answered
Sir Arthur, “those Puritans, as I rode to London, cut off mine horse’s
tail, as they said the ribbons with which it was tied savoured too much
of the pride of the beast on which the scarlet whore sits. Pray God
their shears may never extend from the tails of horses to the heads of
kings!” And as he spoke with affectionate and ominous solicitude, he
happened to place his hand on the head of Prince Charles, (afterwards
Charles I.), who was sitting next his brother Henry, Prince of Wales,
and to whom Sir Arthur Mortimer had had the high honour to be sponsor,
as proxy for a sovereign prince.

“The awful and troubled times which Sir Arthur had predicted soon
arrived, though he did not live to witness them. His son, Sir Roger
Mortimer, a man lofty alike in pride and in principle, and immoveable in
both,--an Arminian in creed, and an aristocrat in politics,--the zealous
friend of the misguided Laud, and the bosom-companion of the unfortunate
Strafford,--was among the first to urge King Charles to those
high-handed and impolitic measures, the result of which was so fatal.

“When the war broke out between the King and the Parliament, Sir Roger
espoused the royal cause with heart and hand,--raised a large sum in
vain, to prevent the sale of the crown-jewels in Holland,--and led five
hundred of his tenants, armed at his own expence, to the battles of
Edge-hill and Marston-moor.

“His wife was dead, but his sister, Mrs Ann Mortimer, a woman of
uncommon beauty, spirit, and dignity of character, and as firmly
attached as her brother to the cause of the court, of which she had been
once the most brilliant ornament, presided over his household, and by
her talents, courage, and promptitude, had been of considerable service
to the cause.

“The time came, however, when valour and rank, and loyalty and beauty,
found all their efforts ineffectual; and of the five hundred brave men
that Sir Roger had led into the field to his sovereign’s aid, he brought
back thirty maimed and mutilated veterans to Mortimer Castle, on the
disastrous day that King Charles was persuaded to put himself into the
hands of the disaffected and mercenary Scots, who sold him for their
arrears of pay due by the Parliament.

“The reign of rebellion soon commenced,--and Sir Roger, as a
distinguished loyalist, felt the severest scourge of its power.
Sequestrations and compositions,--fines for malignancy, and forced loans
for the support of a cause he detested,--drained the well-filled
coffers, and depressed the high spirit, of the aged loyalist. Domestic
inquietude was added to his other calamities. He had three
children.--His eldest son had fallen fighting in the King’s cause at the
battle of Newbury, leaving an infant daughter, then supposed the heiress
of immense wealth. His second son had embraced the Puritanic cause, and,
lapsing from error to error, married the daughter of an Independent,
whose creed he had adopted; and, according to the custom of those days,
fought all day at the head of his regiment, and preached and prayed to
them all night, in strict conformity with that verse in the psalms,
which served him alternately for his text and his battle-word--“Let the
praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hands.”
This double exercise of the sword and the word, however, proved too much
for the strength of the saint-militant; and after having, during
Cromwell’s Irish campaign, vigorously headed the attack on Cloghan
Castle(5), the ancient seat of the O’Moores, princes of Leix,--and being
scalded through his buff-coat by a discharge of hot water from the
bartizan,--and then imprudently given the word of exhortation for an
hour and forty minutes to his soldiers, on the bare heath that
surrounded the castle, and under a drenching rain,--he died of a
pleurisy in three days, and left, like his brother, an infant daughter
who had remained in England, and had been educated by her mother. It was
said in the family, that this man had written the first lines of
Milton’s poem “on the new forcers of conscience under the Long
Parliament.” It is certain, at least, that when the fanatics who
surrounded his dying bed were lifting up their voices to sing a hymn, he
thundered with his last breath,

    “Because ye have thrown off your prelate lord,
    And with stiff vows renounce his Liturgy,
    To seize the widowed w--e pluralitie,
    From them whose sin ye envied not, abhorr’d,” &c.

  (5) I have been an inmate in this castle for many months--it is still
  inhabited by the venerable descendant of that ancient family. His son
  is now High-Sheriff of the King’s county. Half the castle was battered
  down by Oliver Cromwell’s forces, and rebuilt in the reign of Charles
  the Second. The remains of the _castle_ are a tower of about forty
  feet square, and five stories high, with a single spacious apartment
  on each floor, and a narrow staircase communicating with each, and
  reaching to the bartizan. A beautiful ash-plant, which I have often
  admired, is now displaying its foliage between the stones of the
  bartizan,--and how it got or grew there, heaven only knows. There it
  is, however; and it is better to see it there than to feel the
  discharge of hot water or molten lead from the apertures.

“Sir Roger felt, though from different causes, pretty much the same
degree of emotion on the deaths of his two sons. He was fortified
against affliction at the death of the elder, from the consolation
afforded him by the cause in which he had fallen; and that in which the
apostate, as his father always called him, had perished, was an equal
preventive against his feeling any deep or bitter grief on his
dissolution.

“When his eldest son fell in the royal cause, and his friends gathered
round him in officious condolence, the old loyalist replied, with a
spirit worthy of the proudest days of classic heroism, “It is not for my
dead son that I should weep, but for my living one.” His tears, however,
were flowing at that time for another cause.

“His only daughter, during his absence, in spite of the vigilance of Mrs
Ann, had been seduced by some Puritan servants in a neighbouring family,
to hear an Independent preacher of the name of Sandal, who was then a
serjeant in Colonel Pride’s regiment, and who was preaching in a barn in
the neighbourhood, in the intervals of his military exercises. This man
was a natural orator, and a vehement enthusiast; and, with the license
of the day, that compromised between a pun and a text, and delighted in
the union of both, this serjeant-preacher had baptized himself by the name
of--“Thou-art-not-worthy-to-unloose-the-latchets-of-his-shoes,--_Sandal_.”

“This was the text on which he preached, and his eloquence had such
effect on the daughter of Sir Roger Mortimer, that, forgetting the
dignity of her birth, and the loyalty of her family, she united her
destiny with this low-born man; and, believing herself to be suddenly
inspired from this felicitous conjunction, she actually out-preached two
female Quakers in a fortnight after their marriage, and wrote a letter
(very ill-spelled) to her father, in which she announced her intention
to “suffer affliction with the people of God,” and denounced his eternal
damnation, if he declined embracing the creed of her husband;--which
creed was changed the following week, on his hearing a sermon from the
celebrated Hugh Peters, and a month after, on hearing an itinerant
preacher of the Ranters or Antinomians, who was surrounded by a troop of
licentious, half-naked, drunken disciples, whose vociferations of--“We
are the naked truth,” completely silenced a fifth-monarchy man, who was
preaching from a tub on the other side of the road. To this preacher
Sandal was introduced, and being a man of violent passions, and
unsettled principles, he instantly embraced the opinions of the last
speaker, (dragging his wife along with him into every gulph of polemical
or political difficulty he plunged in), till he happened to hear another
preacher of the Cameronians, whose constant topic, whether of triumph or
of consolation, was the unavailing efforts made in the preceding reign,
to force the Episcopalian system down the throats of the Scots; and, in
default of a text, always repeated the words of Archy, jester to Charles
the First, who, on the first intimation of the reluctance of the Scots
to admit Episcopal jurisdiction, exclaimed to Archbishop Laud, “My Lord,
who is the fool now?”--for which he had his coat stripped over his head,
and was forbid the court. So Sandal vacillated between creed and creed,
between preacher and preacher, till he died, leaving his widow with one
son. Sir Roger announced to his widowed daughter, his determined purpose
never to see her more, but he promised his protection to her son, if
entrusted to his care. The widow was too poor to decline compliance with
the offer of her deserted father.

“So in Mortimer Castle were, in their infancy, assembled the three
grandchildren, born under such various auspices and destinies. Margaret
Mortimer the heiress, a beautiful, intelligent, spirited girl, heiress
of all the pride, aristocratical principle, and possible wealth of the
family; Elinor Mortimer, the daughter of the Apostate, received rather
than admitted into the house, and educated in all the strictness of her
Independent family; and John Sandal, the son of the rejected daughter,
whom Sir Roger admitted into the Castle only on the condition of his
being engaged in the service of the royal family, banished and
persecuted as they were; and he renewed his correspondence with some
emigrant loyalists in Holland, for the establishment of his protegé,
whom he described, in language borrowed from the Puritan preachers, as
“a brand snatched from the burning.”

“While matters were thus at the Castle, intelligence arrived of Monk’s
unexpected exertions in favour of the banished family. The result was as
rapid as it was auspicious. The Restoration took place within a few days
after, and the Mortimer family were then esteemed of so much
consequence, that an express, girthed from his waist to his shoulders,
was dispatched from London to announce the intelligence. He arrived when
Sir Roger, whose chaplain he had been compelled by the ruling party to
dismiss as a malignant, was reading prayers himself to his family. The
return and restoration of Charles the Second was announced. The old
loyalist rose from his knees, waved his cap, (which he had reverently
taken from his white head), and, suddenly changing his tone of
supplication for one of triumph, exclaimed, “Lord, now lettest thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation!” As he spoke, the old man sunk on the cushion which Mrs
Ann had placed beneath his knees. His grandchildren rose from their
knees to assist him,--it was too late,--his spirit had parted in that
last exclamation.




CHAPTER XXX.

    ------She sat, and thought
    Of what a sailor suffers.

    COWPER.


“The intelligence that was the cause of old Sir Roger’s death, who might
be said to be conducted from this world to the next by a blessed
_euthanasia_, (a kind of passing with a light and lofty step from a
narrow entry to a spacious and glorious apartment, without ever feeling
he trod the dark and rugged threshold that lies between), was the signal
and pledge to this ancient family of the restitution of their faded
honours, and fast-declining possessions. Grants, reversals of fines,
restoration of land and chattels, and offers of pensions, and
provisions, and remunerations, and all that royal gratitude, in the
effervescence of its enthusiasm, could bestow, came showering on the
Mortimer family, as fast and faster than fines, confiscations, and
sequestrations, had poured on them in the reign of the usurper. In fact,
the language of King Charles to the Mortimers was like that of the
Eastern monarchs to their favourites,--“Ask what thou wilt, and it shall
be granted to thee, even to the half of my kingdom.” The Mortimers asked
only for their own,--and being thus more reasonable, both in their
expectations and demands, than most other applicants at that period,
they succeeded in obtaining what they required.

“Thus Mrs Margaret Mortimer (so unmarried females were named at the date
of the narrative) was again acknowledged as the wealthy and noble
heiress of the Castle. Numerous invitations were sent to her to visit
the court, which, though recommended by letters from divers of the
court-ladies, who had been acquainted, traditionally at least, with her
family, and enforced by a letter from Catherine of Braganza, written by
her own hand, in which she acknowledged the obligations of the king to
the house of Mortimer, were steadily rejected by the high-minded heiress
of its honours and its spirit.--“From these towers,” said she to Mrs
Ann, “my grandfather led forth his vassals and tenants in aid of his
king,--to these towers he led what was left of them back, when the royal
cause seemed lost for ever. Here he lived and died for his
sovereign,--and here will I live and die. And I feel that I shall do
more effectual service to his Majesty, by residing on my estates, and
protecting my tenants, and repairing,”--she added with a smile,--“even
with my needle, the rents made in the banners of our house by many a
Puritan’s bullet, than if I flaunted it in Hyde-Park in my glass coach,
or masqueraded it all night in that of (6)St James’s, even though I were
sure to encounter the Duchess of Cleveland on one side, and Louise de
Querouaille on the other,--fitter place for them than me.”--And so
saying, Mrs Margaret Mortimer resumed her tapestry work. Mrs Ann looked
at her with an eye that spoke volumes,--and the tear that trembled in it
made the lines more legible.

  (6) See a comedy of Wycherly’s, entitled, “Love in a Wood, or St
  James’s Park,” where the company are represented going there at night
  in masks, and with torches.

“After the decided refusal of Mrs Margaret Mortimer to go to London, the
family resumed their former ancestorial habits of stately regularity,
and decorous grandeur, such as became a magnificent and well-ordered
household, of which a noble maiden was the head and president. But this
regularity was without rigour, and this monotony without apathy--the
minds of these highly fated females were too familiar with trains of
lofty thinking, and images of noble deeds, to sink into vacancy, or feel
depression from solitude. I behold them,” said the stranger, “as I once
saw them, seated in a vast irregularly shaped apartment, wainscotted
with oak richly and quaintly carved, and as black as ebony--Mrs Ann
Mortimer, in a recess which terminated in an ancient casement window,
the upper panes of which were gorgeously emblazoned with the arms of the
Mortimers, and some legendary atchievements of the former heroes of the
family. A book she valued much(7) lay on her knee, on which she fixed
her eyes intently--the light that came through the casement chequering
its dark lettered pages with hues of such glorious and fantastic
colouring, that they resembled the leaves of some splendidly-illuminated
missal, with all its pomp of gold, and azure, and vermilion.

  (7) Taylor’s Book of Martyrs.

“At a little distance sat her two grand-nieces, employed in work, and
relieving their attention to it by conversation, for which they had
ample materials. They spoke of the poor whom they had visited and
assisted,--of the rewards they had distributed among the industrious and
orderly,--and of the books which they were studying; and of which the
well-filled shelves of the library furnished them with copious and noble
stores.

“Sir Roger had been a man of letters as well as of arms. He had been
often heard to say, that next to a well-stocked armoury in time of war,
was a well-stocked library in time of peace; and even in the midst of
his latter grievances and privations, he contrived every year to make an
addition to his own.

“His grand-daughters, well instructed by him in the French and Latin
languages, had read Mezeray, Thuanus, and Sully. In English, they had
Froissart in the black-letter translation of Pynson, imprinted 1525.
Their poetry, exclusive of the classics, consisted chiefly of Waller,
Donne, and that constellation of writers that illuminated the drama in
the latter end of the reign of Elizabeth, and the commencement of that
of James,--Marlow, and Massinger, and Shirley, and Ford--_cum multis
aliis_. Fairfax’s translations had made them familiar with the
continental poets; and Sir Roger had consented to admit, among his
modern collection, the Latin poems (the only ones then published) of
Milton, for the sake of that _in Quintum Novembris_,--for Sir Roger,
next to the fanatics, held the Catholics in utter abomination.”

“Then he will be damned to all eternity,” said Aliaga, “and that’s some
satisfaction.”

“Thus their retirement was not inelegant, nor unaccompanied with those
delights at once soothing and elating, which arise from a judicious
mixture of useful occupation and literary tastes.

“On all they read or conversed of, Mrs Ann Mortimer was a living
comment. Her conversation, rich in anecdote, and accurate to minuteness,
sometimes rising to the loftiest strains of eloquence, as she related
“deeds of the days of old,” and often borrowing the sublimity of
inspiration, as the reminiscences of religion softened and solemnized
the spirit with which she spake,--like the influence of time on fine
paintings, that consecrates the tints it mellows, and makes the colours
it has half obscured more precious to the eye of feeling and of taste,
than they were in the glow of their early beauty,--her conversation was
to her grand-nieces at once history and poetry.

“The events of English history then not recorded, had a kind of
traditional history more vivid, if not so faithful as the records of
modern historians, in the memories of those who had been agents and
sufferers (the terms are probably synonimous) in those memorable
periods.

“There was an entertainment then, banished by modern dissipation now,
but alluded to by the great poet of that nation, whom your orthodox and
undeniable creed justly devotes to eternal damnation.

    “In winter’s tedious nights sit by the fire,

    * * * * * *

    ----------------and tell the tales
    Of woful ages long ago betid;
    And send the hearers weeping to their beds.

    * * * * * *

    We cited up a thousand heavy times.”

    * * * * * *

“When memory thus becomes the depository of grief, how faithfully is the
charge kept!--and how much superior are the touches of one who paints
from the life, and the heart, and the senses,--to those of one who dips
his pen in his ink-stand, and casts his eye on a heap of musty
parchments, to glean his facts or his feelings from them! Mrs Ann
Mortimer had much to tell,--and she told it well. If history was the
subject, she could relate the events of the civil wars--events which
resembled indeed those of all civil wars, but which derived a peculiar
strength of character, and brilliancy of colouring, from the hand by
which they were sketched. She told of the time when she rode behind her
brother, Sir Roger, to meet the King at Shrewsbury; and she almost
echoed the shout uttered in the streets of that loyal city, when the
University of Oxford sent in its plate to be coined for the exigences of
the royal cause. She told also, with grave humour, the anecdote of Queen
Henrietta making her escape with some difficulty from a house on
fire,--and, when her life was scarce secure from the flames that
consumed it, rushing back among them--to save her lap-dog!

“But of all her historical anecdotes, Mrs Ann valued most what she had
to relate of her own family. On the virtue and valour of her brother Sir
Roger, she dwelt with an unction whose balm imparted itself to her
hearers; and even Elinor, in spite of the Puritanism of her early
principles, wept as she listened. But when Mrs Ann told of the King
taking shelter for one night in the Castle, under the protection only of
her mother and herself, to whom he intrusted his rank and his
misfortunes, (arriving under a disguise),--(Sir Roger being absent
fighting his battles in Yorkshire)--when she added that her aged mother,
Lady Mortimer, then seventy-four, after spreading her richest velvet
mantle, lined with fur, as a quilt for the bed of her persecuted
sovereign, tottered into the armoury, and, presenting the few servants
that followed her with what arms could be found, adjured them by brand
and blade, by lady’s love, and their hopes of heaven, to defend her
royal guest. When she related that a band of fanatics, after robbing a
church of all its silver-plate, and burning the adjacent vicarage, drunk
with their success, had invested the Castle, and cried aloud for “_the
man_” to be brought unto them, that he might be hewed to pieces before
the Lord in Gilgal--and Lady Mortimer had called on a young French
officer in Prince Rupert’s corps, who, with his men, had been billetted
on the Castle for some days--and that this youth, but seventeen years of
age, had met two desperate attacks of the assailants, and twice retired
covered with his own blood and that of the assailants, whom he had in
vain attempted to repel--and that Lady Mortimer, finding all was lost,
had counselled the royal fugitive to make his escape,--and furnished him
with the best horse left in Sir Roger’s stables to effect his flight,
while she returned to the great hall, whose windows were now shattered
by the balls that hissed and flew round her head, and whose doors were
fast yielding to the crows and other instruments which a Puritan smith,
who was both chaplain and colonel of the band, had lent them, and
instructed them in the use of--and how Lady Mortimer fell on her knees
before the young Frenchman, and adjured him to make good the defence
till King Charles was safe, and free, and far--and how the young
Frenchman had done all that man could do;--and finally, when the Castle,
after an hour’s obstinate resistance, yielded to the assault of the
fanatics, he had staggered, covered with blood, to the foot of the great
chair which that ancient lady had immoveably occupied, (paralyzed by
terror and exhaustion), and dropping his sword, _then for the first
time_, exclaimed, “J’ai fait mon devoir!” and expired at her feet--and
how her mother sat in the same rigour of attitude, while the fanatics
ravaged through the Castle,--drank half the wines in the cellar,--thrust
their bayonets through the family-pictures, which they called the idols
of the high-places,--fired bullets through the wainscot, and converted
half the female servants after their own way,--and on finding their
search after the King fruitless, in mere wantonness of mischief, were
about to discharge a piece of ordnance in the hall that must have
shattered it in pieces, while Lady Mortimer sat torpidly looking
on,--till, perceiving that the piece was accidentally pointed towards
the very door through which King Charles had passed from the hall, her
recollection seemed suddenly to return, and starting up and rushing
before the mouth of the piece, exclaimed, “_Not there!_--you shall not
_there_!”--and as she spoke, dropt dead in the hall. When Mrs Ann told
these and other thrilling tales of the magnanimity, the loyalty, and the
sufferings of her high ancestry, in a voice that alternately swelled
with energy, and trembled with emotion, and as she told them, pointed to
the spot where each had happened,--her young hearers felt a deep
stirring of the heart,--a proud yet mellowed elation that never yet was
felt by the reader of a written history, though its pages were as
legitimate as any sanctioned by the royal licenser at Madrid.

“Nor was Mrs Ann Mortimer less qualified to take an interesting share in
their lighter studies. When Waller’s poetry was its subject, she could
tell of the charms of his Sacharissa, whom she knew well,--the Lady
Dorothea Sidney, daughter of the Earl of Leicester,--and compare, with
those of his Amoret, the Lady Sophia Murray. And in balancing the claims
of these poetical heroines, she gave so accurate an account of their
opposite styles of beauty,--entered so minutely into the details of
their dress and deportment,--and so affectingly hinted, with a
mysterious sigh, that there was _one_ then at court whom Lucius, Lord
Falkland, the gallant, the learned, and the polished, had whispered was
far superior to both,----that her auditors more than suspected she had
herself been one of the most brilliant stars in that galaxy whose faded
glories were still reflected in her memory,--and that Mrs Ann, amid her
piety and patriotism, still blended a fond reminiscence of the
gallantries of that court where her youth had been spent,--and over
which the beauty, the magnificent taste, and national _gaiete_ of the
ill-fated Henrietta, had once thrown a light as dazzling as it was
transient. She was listened to by Margaret and Elinor with equal
interest, but with far different feelings. Margaret, beautiful,
vivacious, haughty, and generous, and resembling her grandfather and his
sister alike in character and person, could have listened for ever to
narrations that, while they confirmed her principles, gave a kind of
holiness to the governing feelings of her heart, and made her enthusiasm
a kind of virtue in her eyes. An aristocrat in politics, she could not
conceive that public virtue could soar to a higher pitch than a devoted
attachment to the house of Stuart afforded for its flight; and her
religion had never given her any disturbance.----Strictly attached to
the Church of England, as her forefathers had been from its first
establishment, she included in an adherence to this not only all the
graces of religion, but all the virtues of morality; and she could
hardly conceive how there could be majesty in the sovereign, or loyalty
in the subject, or valour in man, or virtue in woman, unless they were
comprised within the pale of the Church of England. These qualities,
with their adjuncts, had been always represented to her as co-existent
with an attachment to monarchy and Episcopacy, and vested solely in
those heroic characters of her ancestry, whose lives, and even deaths,
it was a proud delight to their young descendant to listen to,--while
all the opposite qualities,--all that man can hate, or woman
despise,--had been represented to her as instinctively resident in the
partizans of republicanism and the Presbytery. Thus her feelings and her
principles,--her reasoning powers and the habits of her life, all took
one way; and she was not only unable to make the least allowance for a
divergence from this way, but utterly unable to conceive that another
existed for those who believed in a God, or acknowledged human power at
all. She was as much at a loss to conceive how any good could come out
of that Nazareth of her abhorrence, as an ancient geographer would have
been to have pointed out America in a classical map.--Such was Margaret.

“Elinor, on the other hand, bred up amid a clamour of perpetual
contention,--for the house of her mother’s family, in which her first
years had been passed, was, in the language of the profane of those
times, a scruple-shop, where the godly of all denominations held their
conferences of contradiction,--had her mind early awakened to
differences of opinion, and opposition of principle. Accustomed to hear
these differences and oppositions often expressed with the most unruly
vehemence, she had never, like Margaret, indulged in a splendid
aristocracy of imagination, that bore every thing before it, and made
prosperity and adversity alike pay tribute to the pride of its triumph.
Since her admission into the house of her grandfather, the mind of
Elinor had become still more humble and patient,--more subdued and
self-denied. Compelled to hear the opinions she was attached to decried,
and the characters she reverenced vilified, she sat in reflective
silence; and, balancing the opposite extremes which she was destined to
witness, she came to the right conclusion,--that there must be good on
both sides, however obscured or defaced by passion and by interest, and
that great and noble qualities must exist in either party, where so much
intellectual power, and so much physical energy, had been displayed by
both. Nor could she believe that these clear and mighty spirits would be
for ever opposed to each other in their future destinations,--she loved
to view them as children who had “fallen out by the way,” from mistaking
the path that led to their father’s house, but who would yet rejoice
together in the light of his presence, and smile at the differences that
divided them on their journey.

“In spite of the influence of her early education, Elinor had learned to
appreciate the advantages of her residence in her grandfather’s castle.
She was fond of literature and of poetry. She possessed imagination and
enthusiasm,--and these qualities met with their loveliest indulgence
amid the picturesque and historical scenery that surrounded the
Castle,--the lofty tales told within its walls, and to which every stone
in them seemed to cry out in attestation,--and the heroic and chivalrous
characters of its inmates, with whom the portraits of their high
descended ancestry seemed starting from their gorgeous frames to
converse, as the tale of their virtues and their valour was told in
their presence. This was a different scene from that in which she had
passed her childhood. The gloomy and narrow apartments, divested of all
ornament, and awaking no associations but those of an awful
futurity--the uncouth habits, austere visages, denunciatory language,
and polemical fury of its inmates or guests, struck her with a feeling
for which she reproached herself, but did not suppress; and though she
continued a rigid Calvinist in her creed, and listened whenever she
could to the preaching of the non-conformist ministers, she had adopted
in her pursuits the literary tastes, and in her manners the dignified
courtesy, that became the descendant of the Mortimers.

“Elinor’s beauty, though of a style quite different from that of her
cousin, was yet beauty of the first and finest character. Margaret’s was
luxuriant, lavish, and triumphant,--every movement displayed a conscious
grace,--every look demanded homage, and obtained it the moment it was
demanded. Elinor’s was pale, contemplative, and touching;--her hair was
as black as jet, and the thousand small curls into which, according to
the fashion of the day, it was woven, seemed as if every one of them had
been twined by the hand of nature,--they hung so softly and shadowingly,
that they appeared like a veil dropping over the features of a nun, till
she shook them back, and there beamed among them an eye of dark and
brilliant light, like a star amid the deepening shades of twilight. She
wore the rich dress prescribed by the taste and habits of Mrs Ann, who
had never, even in the hour of extreme adversity, relaxed in what may be
called the rigour of her aristocratical costume, and would have thought
it little less than a desecration of the solemnity, had she appeared at
prayers, even though celebrated (as she loved to term it) in the
Castle-hall, unless arrayed in satins and velvets, that, like ancient
suits of armour, could have stood alone and erect without the aid of
human inhabitant. There was a soft and yielding tone in the gently
modulated harmony of Elinor’s form and movements,--a gracious melancholy
in her smile,--a tremulous sweetness in her voice,--an appeal in her
look, which the heart that refused to answer could not have living pulse
within its region. No head of Rembrandt’s, amid its contrasted luxuries
of light and shade,--no form of Guido’s, hovering in exquisite and
speechful undulation between earth and heaven, could vie with the tint
and character of Elinor’s countenance and form. There was but one touch
to be added to the picture of her beauty, and that touch was given by no
physical grace,--no exterior charm. It was borrowed from a feeling as
pure as it was intense,--as unconscious as it was profound. The secret
fire that lit her eyes with that lambent glory, while it caused the
paleness of her young cheek,--that preyed on her heart, while it seemed
to her imagination that she clasped a young cherub in her arms, like the
unfortunate queen of Virgil,--that fire was a secret even to
herself.--She knew she felt, but knew not what she felt.

“When first admitted into the Castle, and treated with sufficient
_hauteur_ by her grandfather and his sister, who could not forget the
mean descent and fanatic principles of her father’s family, she
remembered, that, amid the appalling grandeur and austere reserve of her
reception, her cousin, John Sandal, was the only one who spoke to her in
accents of tenderness, or turned on her an eye that beamed consolation.
She remembered him as the beautiful and gentle boy who had lightened all
her tasks, and partaken in all her recreations.

“At an early age John Sandal, at his own request, had been sent to sea,
and had never since visited the Castle. On the Restoration, the
remembered services of the Mortimer family, and the high fame of the
youth’s courage and ability, had procured him a distinguished situation
in the navy. John Sandal’s consequence now rose in the eyes of the
family, of whom he was at first an inmate on toleration only; and even
Mrs Ann Mortimer began to express some anxiety to hear tidings of her
valiant cousin John. When she spoke thus, the light of Elinor’s eye fell
on her aunt with as rich a glow as ever summer sun on an evening
landscape; but she felt, at the same moment, an oppression,--an
indefinable suspension of thought, of speech, almost of breath, which
was only relieved by the tears which, when retired from her aunt’s
presence, she indulged in. Soon this feeling was exchanged for one of
deeper and more agitating interest. The war with the Dutch broke out,
and Captain John Sandal’s name, in spite of his youth, appeared
conspicuous among those of the officers appointed to that memorable
service.

“Mrs Ann, long accustomed to hear the names of her family uttered always
in the same breath with the stirring report of high heroic deeds, felt
the elation of spirit she had experienced in by-gone days, combined with
happier associations, and more prosperous auguries. Though far advanced
in life, and much declined in strength, it was observed, that during the
reports of the war, and while she listened to the accounts of her
kinsman’s valour and fast-advancing eminence, her step became firm and
elastic, her lofty figure dilated to its youthful height, and a colour
at times visited her cheek, with as rich and brilliant a tinge as when
the first sighs of love murmured over its young roses. The high minded
Margaret, partaking that enthusiasm which merged all personal feeling in
the glory of her family and of her country, heard of the perils to which
her cousin (whom she hardly remembered) was exposed, only with a haughty
confidence that he would meet them as she felt she would have met them
herself, had she been, like him, the last male descendant of the family
of Mortimer. Elinor trembled and wept,--and when alone she prayed
fervently.

“It was observable, however, that the respectful interest with which she
had hitherto listened to the family legends so eloquently told by Mrs
Ann, was now exchanged for a restless and unappeaseable anxiety for
tales of the naval heroes who had dignified the family history. Happily
she found a willing narrator in Mrs Ann, who had little need to search
her memory, and no occasion to consult her invention, for splendid
stories of those whose home was the deep, and whose battle-field was the
wild waste ocean. Amid the gallery richly hung with family portraits,
she pointed out the likeness of many a bold adventurer, whom the report
of the riches and felicities of the new discovered world had tempted on
speculations sometimes wild and disastrous, sometimes prosperous beyond
the golden dreams of cupidity. “How precarious!--how perilous!” murmured
Elinor, shuddering. But when Mrs Ann told the tale of her uncle, the
literary speculator, the polished scholar, the brave and gentle of the
family, who had accompanied Sir Walter Raleigh on his calamitous
expedition, and years after died of grief for his calamitous death,
Elinor, with a start of horror, caught her aunt’s arm, emphatically
extended towards the portrait, and implored her to desist. The decorum
of the family was so great, that this liberty could not be taken without
an apology for indisposition;--it was duly though faintly made, and
Elinor retired to her apartment.

“From February 1665,--from the first intelligence of De Ruyter’s
enterprises, till the animating period when the Duke of York was
appointed to the command of the Royal fleet,--all was eager and
anticipative excitement, and eloquent expatiations on ancient
achievements, and presageful hopes of new honours, on the part of the
heiress of Mortimer and Mrs Ann, and profound and speechless emotion on
that of Elinor.

“The hour arrived, and an express was dispatched from London to Mortimer
Castle with intelligence, in which King Charles, with that splendid
courtesy which half redeemed his vices, announced himself most deeply
interested, inasmuch as it added to the honours of the loyal family,
whose services he appreciated so highly. The victory was complete,--and
Captain John Sandal, in the phrase which the King’s attachment to French
manners and language was beginning to render popular, had “covered
himself with glory.” Amid the thickest of the fight, in an open boat, he
had carried a message from Lord Sandwich to the Duke of York, under a
shower of balls, and when older officers had stoutly declined the
perilous errand; and when, on his return, Opdam the Dutch Admiral’s ship
blew up, amid the crater of the explosion John Sandal plunged into the
sea, to save the half-drowning, half-burning wretches who clung to the
fragments that scorched them, or sunk in the boiling waves; and
then,--dismissed on another fearful errand, flung himself between the
Duke of York and the ball that struck at one blow the Earl of Falmouth,
Lord Muskerry, and Mr Boyle, and when they all fell at the same moment,
wiped, with unfaultering hand, and on bended knee, their brains and
gore, with which the Duke of York was covered from head to foot. When
this was read by Mrs Ann Mortimer, with many pauses, caused by sight dim
with age, and diffused with tears,--and when at length, finishing the
long and laborious read detail, Mrs Ann exclaimed--“He is a hero!”
Elinor tremblingly whispered to herself--“He is a Christian.”

“The details of such an event forming a kind of era in a family so
sequestered, imaginative, and heroic, as that of the Mortimers, the
contents of the letter signed by the King’s own hand were read over and
over again. They formed the theme of converse at their meals, and the
subject of their study and comment when alone. Margaret dwelt much on
the gallantry of the action, and half-imagined she saw the tremendous
explosion of Opdam’s ship. Elinor repeated to herself, “And he plunged
amid the burning wave to save the lives of the men he had conquered!”
And some months elapsed before the brilliant vision of glory, and of
grateful royalty, faded from their imagination; and when it did, like
that of Micyllus, it left honey on the eye-lids of the dreamer.

“From the date of the arrival of this intelligence, a change had taken
place in the habits and manners of Elinor, so striking as to become the
object of notice to all but herself. Her health, her rest, and her
imagination, became the prey of indefinable fantasies. The cherished
images of the past,--the lovely visions of her golden childhood,--seemed
fearfully and insanely contrasted in her imagination with the ideas of
slaughter and blood,--of decks strewed with corses,--and of a young and
terrible conqueror bestriding them amid showers of ball and clouds of
fire. Her very senses reeled between these opposite impressions. Her
reason could not brook the sudden transition from the smiling and
Cupid-like companion of her childhood, to the hero of the embattled
deep, and of nations and navies on fire,--garments rolled in blood,--the
thunder of the battle and the shouting.

“She sat and tried, as well as her wandering fancy would allow her, to
reconcile the images of that remembered eye, whose beam rested on her
like the dark blue of a summer heaven swimming in dewy light,--with the
flash that darted from the burning eye of the conqueror, whose light was
as fatal where it fell as his sword. She saw him, as he had once sat
beside her, smiling like the first morning in spring,--and smiled in
return. The slender form, the soft and springy movements, the kiss of
childhood that felt like velvet, and scented like balm,--was suddenly
exchanged in her dream (for all her thoughts were dreams) for a fearful
figure of one drenched in blood, and spattered with brains and gore. And
Elinor, half-screaming, exclaimed, “Is this he whom I loved?” Thus her
mind, vacillating between contrasts so strongly opposed, began to feel
its moorings give way. She drifted from rock to rock, and on every rock
she struck a wreck.

“Elinor relinquished her usual meetings with the family--she sat in her
own apartment all the day, and most of the evening. It was a lonely
turret projecting so far from the walls of the Castle, that there were
windows, or rather casements, on three sides. There Elinor sat to catch
the blast, let it blow as it would, and imagined she heard in its
moanings the cries of drowning seamen. No music that her lute, or that
which Margaret touched with a more powerful and brilliant finger, could
wean her from this melancholy indulgence.

“Hush!” she would say to the females who attended her--“Hush! let me
listen to the blast!--It waves many a banner spread for victory,--it
sighs over many a head that has been laid low!”

“Her amazement that a being could be at once so gentle and so
ferocious--her dread that the habits of his life must have converted the
_angel of her wilderness_ into a brave but brutal seaman, estranged from
the feelings that had rendered the beautiful boy so indulgent to her
errors,--so propitiatory between her and her proud relatives,--so aidant
in all her amusements,--so necessary to her very existence.--The tones
of this dreamy life harmonized, awfully for Elinor, with the sound of
the blast as it shook the turrets of the Castle, or swept the woods that
groaned and bowed beneath its awful visitings. And this secluded life,
intense feeling, and profound and heart-rooted secret of her silent
passion, held perhaps fearful and indescribable alliance with that
aberration of mind, that prostration at once of the heart and the
intellect, that have been found to bring forth, according as the agents
were impelled, “the savour of life unto life, or of death unto death.”
She had all the intensity of passion, combined with all the devotedness
of religion; but she knew not which way to steer, or what gale to
follow. She trembled and shrunk from her doubtful pilotage, and the
rudder was left to the mercy of the winds and waves. Slender mercy do
those experience who commit themselves to the tempests of the mental
world--better if they had sunk at once amid the strife of the dark
waters in their wild and wintry rage; there they would soon have arrived
at the haven where they would be secure.

“Such was the state of Elinor, when the arrival of one who had been long
a stranger in the vicinity of the Castle caused a strong sensation in
its inhabitants.

“The widow Sandal, the mother of the young seaman, who had hitherto
lived in obscurity on the interest of the small fortune bequeathed her
by Sir Roger, (under the rigid injunction of never visiting the Castle),
suddenly arrived in Shrewsbury, which was scarce a mile from it, and
declared her intention of fixing her residence there.

“The affection of her son had showered on her, with the profusion of a
sailor, and the fondness of a child, all the rewards of his
services--but their glory;--and in comparative affluence, and honoured
and pointed to as the mother of the young hero who stood high in royal
favour, the widow of many sorrows took up her abode once more near the
seat of her ancestors.

“At this period, every step taken by the member of a family was a
subject of anxious and solemn consultation to those who considered
themselves its heads, and there was a kind of chapter held in Mortimer
Castle on this singular movement of the widow Sandal. Elinor’s heart
beat hard during the debate--it subsided, however, at the determination,
that the severe sentence of Sir Roger was not to be extended beyond his
death, and that a descendant of the house of Mortimer should never live
neglected while almost under the shadow of its walls.

“The visit was accordingly solemnly paid, and gratefully
received,--there was much stately courtesy on the part of Mrs Ann
towards her niece, (whom she called cousin after the old English
fashion), and a due degree of retrospective humility and decorous
dejection on that of the widow. They parted mutually softened towards,
if not pleased with each other, and the intercourse thus opened was
unremittingly sustained by Elinor, whose weekly visits of ceremony soon
became the daily visits of interest and of habit. The object of the
thoughts of both was the theme of the tongue of but one; and, as is not
uncommon, she who said nothing felt the most. The details of his
exploits, the description of his person, the fond enumeration of the
promises of his childhood, and the graces and goodliness of his youth,
were dangerous topics for the listener, to whom the bare mention of his
name caused an intoxication of the heart, from which it scarce recovered
for hours.

“The frequency of these visits was not observed to be diminished by a
faint rumour, which the widow seemed to believe, rather from hope than
probability, that Captain Sandal was about to visit the neighbourhood of
the Castle. It was one evening in autumn, that Elinor, who had been
prevented during the day from visiting her aunt, set out attended only
by her maid and her usher. There was a private path through the park,
that opened by a small door on the verge of the suburbs where the widow
lived. Elinor, on her arrival, found her aunt from home, and was
informed she had gone to pass the evening with a friend in Shrewsbury.
Elinor hesitated for a moment, and then recollecting that this friend
was a grave staid widow of one of Oliver’s knights, wealthy, however,
and well respected, and a common acquaintance, she resolved to follow
her thither. As she entered the room, which was spacious, but dimly lit
by an old-fashioned casement window, she was surprised to see it filled
with an unusual number of persons, some of whom were seated, but the
greater number were collected in the ample recess of the window, and
among them Elinor saw a figure, remarkable rather for its height, than
its attitude or pretension,--it was that of a tall slender boy, about
eighteen, with a beautiful infant in his arms, whom he was caressing
with a tenderness that seemed rather associated with the retrospective
fondness of brotherhood, than the anticipated hope of paternity. The
mother of the infant, proud of the notice bestowed on her child, made,
however, the usual incredulous apology for its troubling him.

“Troubling me!” said the boy, in tones that made Elinor think it was the
first time she had heard music. “Oh, no--if you knew how fond I am of
children,--how long it is since I had the delight of pressing one to my
breast--how long it may be again before”---- and averting his head, he
bowed it over the babe. The room was very dark, from the increasing
shades of evening, deepened by the effect of the heavy wainscotting of
its walls; but at this moment, the last bright light of an autumnal
evening, in all its rich and fading glory, burst on the casement,
powering on every object a golden and purpureal light. That end of the
apartment in which Elinor sat remained in the deepest shade. She then
distinctly beheld the figure which her heart seemed to recognize before
her senses. His luxuriant hair, of the richest brown, (its feathery
summits tinged by the light resembling the halo round some glorified
head), hung, according to the fashion of the day, in clusters on his
bosom, and half-concealed the face of the infant, as it lay like a
nestling among them.

“His dress was that of a naval officer,--it was splendidly adorned with
lace, and the superb insignia of a foreign order, the guerdon of some
daring deed; and as the infant played with these, and then looked
upward, as if to repose its dazzled sight on the smile of its young
protector, Elinor thought she had never beheld association and contrast
so touchingly united,--it was like a finely coloured painting, where the
tints are so mellowed and mingled into each other, that the eye feels no
transition in passing from one brilliant hue to another, with such
exquisite imperceptibility are they graduated,--it was like a fine piece
of music, where the art of the modulator prevents your knowing that you
pass from one key to another; so softly are the intermediate tones of
harmony touched, that the ear knows not where it wanders, but wherever
it wanders, feels its path is pleasant. The young loveliness of the
infant, almost assimilated to the beauty of the youthful caresser, and
yet contrasted with the high and heroic air of his figure, and the
adornments of his dress, (splendid as they were), all emblematic of
deeds of peril and of death, seemed to the imagination of Elinor like
the cherub-angel of peace reposing on the breast of valour, and
whispering that his toils were done. She was awoke from her vision by
the voice of the widow.--“Niece, this is your cousin John Sandal.”
Elinor started, and received the salute of her kinsman, thus abruptly
introduced, with an emotion, which, if it deprived her of those courtly
graces which ought to have embellished her reception of the
distinguished stranger, gave her, at least, the more touching ones of
diffidence.

“The forms of the day admitted of, and even sanctioned, a mode of
salutation since exploded; and as Elinor felt the pressure of a lip as
vermeil as her own, she trembled to think that that lip had often given
the war-word to beings athirst for human blood, and that the arm that
enfolded her so tenderly had pointed the weapons of death with
resistless and terrible aim against bosoms that beat with all the cords
of human affection. She loved her young kinsman, but she trembled in the
arms of the hero.

“John Sandal sat down by her, and in a few moments the melody of his
tones, the gentle facility of his manner, the eyes that smiled when the
lips were closed, and the lips whose smile was more eloquent in silence
than the language of the brightest eyes, made her gradually feel at ease
with herself--she attempted to converse, but paused to listen--she tried
to look up, but felt like the worshippers of the sun, sickening under
the blaze she gazed on,--and _averted her eyes that she might see_.
There was a mild, inoppressive, but most seductive light in the
dark-blue eyes that fell so softly on hers, like moon-light floating
over a fine landscape. And there was a young and eloquent tenderness in
the tones of that voice, which she expected to have spoken in thunder,
that disarmed and dulcified speech almost to luxury. Elinor sat, and
imbibed poison at every inlet of the senses, ear, and eye, and touch,
for her kinsman, with a venial, and to her imperceptible licence, had
taken her hand as he spoke. And he spoke much, but not of war and blood,
of the scenes where he had been so eminent, and of the events to which
his simple allusion would have given interest and dignity,--but of his
return to his family, of the delight he felt at again beholding his
mother, and of the hopes that he indulged of being not an unwelcome
visitor at the Castle. He inquired after Margaret with affectionate
earnestness, and after Mrs Ann with reverential regard; and in
mentioning the names of these relatives, he spoke like one whose heart
was at home before his steps, and whose heart could make every spot
where it rested a home to itself and to others. Elinor could have
listened for ever. The names of the relatives she loved and revered
sounded in her ears like music, but the advancing night warned her of
the necessity of returning to the Castle, where the hours were
scrupulously observed; and when John Sandal offered to attend her home,
she had no longer a motive to delay her departure.

“It had appeared dark in the room where they were sitting, but it was
still rich and purple twilight in the sky, when they set out for the
Castle.

“Elinor took the path through the park, and, absorbed in new feelings,
was for the first time insensible of its woodland beauty, at once gloomy
and resplendent, mellowed by the tints of autumnal colouring, and
glorious with the light of an autumnal evening,--till she was roused to
attention by the exclamations of her companion, who appeared rapt into
delight at what he beheld. This sensibility of nature, this fresh and
unworn feeling, in one whom she had believed hardened by scenes of toil
and terror against the perception of beauty,--whom her imagination had
painted to her as _fitter to cross the Alps, than to luxuriate in
Campania_,--touched her deeply. She attempted to reply, but was
unable,--she remembered how her quick susceptibility of nature had
enabled her to sympathize with and improve on the admiration expressed
by others, and she wondered at her silence, for she knew not its cause.

“As they approached the Castle, the scene became glorious beyond the
imagination of a painter, whose eye has dreamed of sun-set in foreign
climes. The vast edifice lay buried in shade,--all its varied and
strongly charactered features of tower and pinnacle, bartizan and
battlement, were melted into one dense and sombrous mass. The distant
hills, with their conical summits, were still clearly defined in the
dark-blue heaven, and their peaks still retained a hue of purple so
brilliant and lovely, that it seemed as if the light had loved to linger
there, and, parting, had left that tint as the promise of a glorious
morning. The woods that surrounded the Castle stood as dark, and
apparently as solid as itself. Sometimes a gleam like gold trembled over
the tufted foliage of their summits, and at length, through a glade
which opened among the dark and massive boles of the ancient trees, one
last rich and gorgeous flood of light burst in, turned every blade of
grass it touched into emerald for a moment,--paused on its lovely
work--and parted. The effect was so instantaneous, brilliant, and
evanishing, that Elinor had scarce time for a half uttered exclamation,
as she extended her arm in the direction where the light had fallen so
brightly and so briefly. She raised her eyes to her companion, in that
full consciousness of perfect sympathy that make words seem like
counters, compared to the sterling gold of a heart-minted look. Her
companion had turned towards it too. He neither uttered exclamation, nor
pointed with finger,--he smiled, and his countenance was as that of an
angel. It seemed to reflect and answer the last bright farewell of day,
as if friends had parted smiling at each other. It was not alone the
lips that smiled,--the eyes, the cheeks, every feature had its share in
that effulgent light that was diffused over his aspect, and all combined
to make that harmony to the eye, which is often as deliciously
perceptible, as the combination of the most exquisite voices with the
most perfect modulation, is to the ear. To the last hour of her mortal
existence, that smile, and the scene where it was _uttered_, were
engraved on the heart of Elinor. It announced at once a spirit, that,
like the ancient statue, answered every ray of light that fell on it
with a voice of melody, and blended the triumph of the glories of nature
with the profound and tender felicities of the heart. They spoke no more
during the remainder of their walk, but there was more eloquence in
their silence than in many words. * * * * * *

“It was almost night before they arrived at the Castle. Mrs Ann received
her distinguished kinsman with stately cordiality, and affection mingled
with pride. Margaret welcomed him rather as the hero than the relative;
and John, after the ceremonies of introduction, turned to repose himself
on the smile of Elinor. They had arrived just at the time when the
chaplain was about to read the evening prayers,--a form so strictly
adhered to at the Castle, that not even the arrival of a stranger was
permitted to interfere with its observance. Elinor watched this moment
with peculiar solicitude;--her religious feelings were profound, and
amid all the young hero’s vivid display of the gentlest affections, and
purest sensibilities by which our wretched existence can be enhanced or
beautified, she still dreaded that religion, the companion of deep
thought and solemn habits, might wander far for an abode before it
settled in the heart of a sailor. The last doubt passed from her mind,
as she beheld the intense but silent devotion with which John mingled in
the family rite. There is something very ennobling in the sight of male
piety. To see that lofty form, that never bowed to man, bowed to the
earth to God,--to behold the knee, whose joints would be as adamant
under the influence of mortal force or threat, as flexible as those of
infancy in the presence of the Almighty,--to see the locked and lifted
hands, to hear the fervent aspiration, to feel the sound of the mortal
weapon as it drags on the floor beside the kneeling warrior,--these are
things that touch the senses and the heart at once, and suggest the
awful and affecting image of all physical energy prostrate before the
power of the Divinity. Elinor watched him even to the forgetfulness of
her own devotions;--and when his white hands, that seemed never formed
to grasp a weapon of destruction, were clasped in devotion, and one of
them slightly and occasionally raised to part the redundant curls that
shaded his face as he knelt, she thought that she beheld at once angelic
strength and angelic purity.

“When the service concluded, Mrs Ann, after repeating her solemn welcome
to her nephew, could not help expressing her satisfaction at the
devotion he had showed; but she mingled with that expression a kind of
incredulity, that men accustomed to toil and peril could ever have
devotional feelings. John Sandal bowed to the congratulatory part of Mrs
Ann’s speech, and, resting one hand on his short sword, and with the
other removing the thick ringlets of his luxuriant hair, he stood before
them a hero in deed, and a boy in form. A blush overspread his young
features, as he said, in accents at once emphatic and tremulous, “Dear
Aunt, why should you accuse those of neglecting the protection of the
Almighty who need it most. They who “go down to the sea in ships, and
occupy their business in the great waters,” have the best right to feel,
in their hour of peril, “it is but the wind and the storm fulfilling his
word.” A seaman without a belief and hope in God, is worse off than a
seaman without chart or pilot.”

“As he spoke with that trembling eloquence that makes conviction be felt
almost before it is heard, Mrs Ann held out to him her withered but
still snow-white hand to kiss. Margaret presented hers also, like a
heroine to a feudal knight; and Elinor turned aside, and wept in
delicious agony. * * * * * * * *

“When we set ourselves resolutely to discover perfection in a character,
we are always sure to find it. But Elinor needed little aid from the
pencil of imagination to colour the object that had been stamped by an
ineffaceable touch upon her heart. Her kinsman’s character and temper
developed themselves slowly, or rather were developed by external and
accidental causes; for a diffidence almost feminine prevented his ever
saying much,--and when he did, himself was the last theme he touched on.
He unfolded himself like a blowing flower,--the soft and silken leaves
expanded imperceptibly to the eye, and every day the tints were
deepening, and the scent becoming richer, till Elinor was dazzled by
their lustre, and inebriated with the fragrance.

“This wish to discover excellencies in the object we love, and to
identify esteem and passion by seeking the union of moral beauty and
physical grace, is a proof that love is of a very ennobling
character,--that, however the stream may be troubled by many things, the
source at least is pure,--and that the heart capable of feeling it
intensely, proves it possesses an energy that may one day be rewarded by
a brighter object, and a holier flame, than earth ever afforded, or
nature ever could kindle. * * * * * * * * *

“Since her son’s arrival, the widow Sandal had betrayed a marked degree
of anxiety, and a kind of restless precaution against some invisible
evil. She was now frequently at the Castle. She could not be blind to
the increasing attachment of John and Elinor,--and her only thought was
how to prevent the possibility of their union, by which the interest of
the former and her own importance would be materially affected.

“She had obtained, by indirect means, a knowledge of the contents of Sir
Roger’s will; and the whole force of a mind which possessed more of art
than of power, and of a temper which had more passion than energy, was
strained to realize the hopes it suggested. Sir Roger’s will was
singular. Alienated as he was from his daughter Sandal, and his younger
son the father of Elinor, by the connexions they had adopted, it seemed
to be the strongest object of his wishes to unite their descendants, and
invest the wealth and rank of the house of Mortimer in the last of its
representatives. He had therefore bequeathed his immense estates to his
grand-daughter Margaret, in the event of her marrying her kinsman John
Sandal;--in the case of his marrying Elinor, he was entitled to no more
than her fortune of £.5000;--and the bequest of the greater part of the
property to a distant relative who bore the name of Mortimer, was to be
the consequence of the non-intermarriage of Sandal with either of his
cousins.

“Mrs Ann Mortimer, anticipating the effect that this opposition of
interest to affection might produce in the family, had kept the contents
of the will a secret,--but Mrs Sandal had discovered it by means of the
domestics at the Castle, and her mind wrought intensely on the
discovery. She was a woman too long familiar with want and privation to
dread any evil but their continuance, and too ambitious of the
remembered distinctions of her early life, not to risk any thing that
might enable her to recover them. She felt a personal feminine jealousy
of the high-minded Mrs Ann, and the noble-hearted beautiful Margaret,
which was unappeasable; and she hovered round the walls of the Castle
like a departed spirit groaning for its re-admission to the place from
which it had been driven, and feeling and giving no peace till its
restoration was accomplished.

“When with these feelings was united the anxiety of maternal ambition
for her son, who might be raised to a noble inheritance, or sunk to
comparative mediocrity by his choice, the result may be easily guessed;
and the widow Sandal, once determined on the end, felt little scruple
about the means. Want and envy had given her an unslakeable appetite
for the restored splendours of her former state; and false religion
had taught her every shade and penumbra of hypocrisy, every meanness
of artifice, every obliquity of insinuation. In her varied life she
had known the good, and chosen the evil. The widow Sandal was now
determined to interpose an insurmountable obstruction to their union.
* * * * * * * *

“Mrs Ann still flattered herself that the secret of Sir Roger’s will was
suppressed. She saw the intense and disruptable feeling that seemed to
mark John and Elinor for each other; and, with a feeling half-borrowed
from magnanimity, half from romance, (for Mrs Ann had been fond of the
high-toned romances of her day), she looked forward to the felicity of
their union as being little disturbed by the loss of land and
lordship,--of the immense revenues,--and the far-descended titles of the
Mortimer family.

“Highly as she prized these distinctions, dear to every noble mind, she
prized still more highly the union of devoted hearts and congenial
spirits, who, trampling on the golden apples that were flung in their
path, pressed forward with unremitting ardour for the prize of felicity.

“The wedding-day of John and Elinor was fixed,--the bridal clothes were
made,--the noble and numerous friends summoned,--the Castle hall
decorated, the bells of the parish church ringing out a loud and merry
peal, and the blue-coated serving men adorned with favours, and employed
in garnishing the wassail bowl, which was doomed by many a thirsty eye
to be often drained and often replenished. Mrs Ann herself took with her
own hands, from an ample chest of ebony, a robe of velvet and satin,
which she had worn at the court of James the First, on the marriage of
the princess Elizabeth with the prince palatine, of whom the former, to
borrow the language of a contemporary writer, had “brided and bridled it
so well, and indeed became herself so handsomely,” that Mrs Ann, as she
arrayed herself, thought she saw the splendid vision of the royal bridal
float before her faded eyes in dim but gorgeous pageantry once more. The
heiress, too, attired herself splendidly, but it was observed, that her
beautiful cheek was paler than even that of the bride, and the smile
which held a fixed unjoyous station on her features all that morning,
seemed more like the effort of resolution than the expression of
felicity. The widow Sandal had betrayed considerable agitation, and
quitted the Castle at an early hour. The bridegroom had not yet
appeared, and the company, after having in vain for some time awaited
his arrival, set out for the church, where they supposed he was
impatiently expecting them.

“The cavalcade was magnificent and numerous--the dignity and consequence
of the Mortimer family had assembled all who had aspired to the
distinction of their acquaintance, and such was then the feudal grandeur
attendant on the nuptials of a high-descended family, that relatives,
however remote in blood or in local distance, collected for sixty miles
in every direction around the Castle, and presented a “host of friends,
gorgeously arrayed and attended on that eventful morning.”

“Most of the company, even including the females, were mounted on
horseback, and this, by apparently increasing the number of the
procession, added to its tumultuous magnificence. There were some
cumbrous vehicles, misnomed carriages, of a fashion indescribably
inconvenient, but gorgeously gilded and painted,--and the Cupids on the
pannels had been re-touched for the occasion. The bride was lifted on
her palfrey by two peers,--Margaret rode beside her gallantly
attended,--and Mrs Ann, who once more saw nobles contending for her
withered hand, and adjusting her silken rein, felt the long-faded
glories of her family revive, and led the van of the pompous procession
with as much dignity of demeanour, and as much glow of faded beauty,
once eminent and resistless, as if she still followed the gorgeous
nuptial progress of the princess palatine. They arrived at the
church,--the bride, the relatives, the splendid company, the
minister--all but the bridegroom, were there. There was a long painful
silence. Several gentlemen of the bridal party rode rapidly out in every
direction in which it was thought probable to meet him,--the clergyman
stood at the altar, till, weary of standing, he retired. The crowd from
the neighbouring villages, combined with the numerous attendants, filled
the church-yard. Their acclamations were incessant,--the heat and
distraction became intolerable, and Elinor begged for a few moments to
be allowed to retire to the vestry.

“There was a casement window which opened on the road, and Mrs Ann
supported the bride as she tottered towards it, attempting to loose her
wimple, and veil of costly lace. As Elinor approached the casement, the
thundering hoofs of a horse at full speed shook the road. Elinor looked
up mechanically,--the rider was John Sandal,--he cast a look of horror
at the pale bride, and plunging his desperate spurs deeper, disappeared
in a moment. * * * * *

“A year after this event, two figures were seen to walk, or rather
wander, almost every evening, in the neighbourhood of a small hamlet in
a remote part of Yorkshire. The vicinage was picturesque and attractive,
but these figures seemed to move amid the scenery like beings, who, if
they still retained eyes for nature, had lost all heart for it. That wan
and attenuated form, so young, yet so withered, whose dark eyes emit a
fearful light amid features chill and white as those of a statue, and
the young graces of whose form seem to have been nipt like those of a
lily that bloomed too soon in spring, and was destroyed by the frost of
the treacherous season, whose whispers had first invited it to
bud,--that is Elinor Mortimer,--and that figure that walks beside her,
so stiff and rectangular, that it seems as its motion was regulated by
mechanism, whose sharp eyes are directed so straight forward, that they
see neither tree on the right hand, or glade on the left, or heaven
above, or earth beneath, or any thing but a dim vision of mystic
theology for ever before them, which is aptly reflected in their cold
contemplative light, that is the Puritan maiden sister of her mother,
with whom Elinor had fixed her residence. Her dress is arranged with as
much precision as if a mathematician had calculated the angles of every
fold,--every pin’s point knows its place, and does its duty--the plaits
of her round-eared cap do not permit one hair to appear on her narrow
forehead, and her large hood, adjusted after the fashion in which it was
worn by the godly sisters, who rode out to meet Prynne on his return
from the pillory, lends a deeper shade to her rigid features,--a
wretched-looking lacquey is carrying a huge clasped bible after her, in
the mode in which she remembered to have seen Lady Lambert and Lady
Desborough march to prayer, attended by their pages, while she proudly
followed in their train, distinguished as the sister of that godly man
and powerful preacher of the word, Sandal. From the day of her
disappointed nuptials, Elinor, with that insulted feeling of maiden
pride, which not even the anguish of her broken heart could suppress,
had felt an unappeaseable anxiety to quit the scene of her disgrace and
her misfortune. It was vainly opposed by her aunt and Margaret, who,
horror-struck at the event of those disastrous nuptials, and wholly
unconscious of the cause, had implored her, with all the energy of
affection, to fix her residence at the Castle, within whose walls they
pledged themselves he who had abandoned her should never be permitted to
place his foot. Elinor answered the impassioned importunities, only by
eager and clinging pressures of her cold hands, and by tears which
trembled on her eye-lids, without the power to fall.--“Nay, stay with
us,” said the kind and noble-hearted Margaret, “you shall not leave us!”
And she pressed the hands of her kinswoman, with that cordial touch that
gives a welcome as much to the heart as to the home of the
inviter.--“Dearest cousin,” said Elinor, answering, for the first time,
this affectionate appeal with a faint and ghastly smile--“I have so many
enemies within these walls, that I can no longer encounter them with
safety to my life.”--“Enemies!” repeated Margaret.--“Yes, dearest
cousin--there is not a spot where _he_ trod--not a prospect on which he
has gazed--not an echo which has repeated the sound of his voice,--that
does not send daggers through my heart, which those who wish me to live
would not willingly see infixed any longer.” To the emphatic agony with
which these words were uttered, Margaret had nothing to reply but with
tears; and Elinor set out on her journey to the relative of her mother,
a rigid Puritan, who resided in Yorkshire.

“As the carriage was ordered for her departure, Mrs Ann, supported by
her female attendants, stood on the draw-bridge to take leave of her
niece, with solemn and affectionate courtesy. Margaret wept bitterly,
and aloud, as she stood at a casement, and waved her hand to Elinor. Her
aunt never shed a tear, till out of the presence of the domestics,--but
when all was over,--“she entered into her chamber, and wept there.”

“When her carriage had driven some miles from the Castle, a servant on a
fleet horse followed it at full speed with Elinor’s lute, which had been
forgotten,--it was offered to her, and after viewing it for some moments
with a look in which memory struggled with grief, she ordered its
strings to be broken on the spot, and proceeded on her journey.

“The retreat to which Elinor had retired, did not afford her the
tranquillity she expected. Thus, change of place always deceives us with
the tantalizing hope of relief, as we toss on the feverish bed of life.

“She went in a faint expectation of the revival of her religious
feelings--she went to wed, amid the solitude and desert where she had
first known him, the immortal bridegroom, who would never desert her as
the mortal one had done,--but she did not find him there--the voice of
God was no longer heard in the garden--either her religious sensibility
had abated, or those from whom she first received the impression, had no
longer power to renew it, or perhaps the heart which has exhausted
itself on a mortal object, does not find its powers soon recruited to
meet the image of celestial beneficence, and exchange at once the
visible for the invisible,--the felt and present, for the future and the
unknown.

“Elinor returned to the residence of her mother’s family in the hope of
renewing former images, but she found only the words that had conveyed
those ideas, and she looked around in vain for the impressions they had
once suggested. When we thus come to feel that _all_ has been illusion,
even on the most solemn subjects,--that the future world seems to be
deserting us along with the present, and that our own hearts, with all
their treachery, have done us no more wrong than the false impressions
which we have received from our religious instructors, we are like the
deity in the painting of the great Italian artist, extending one hand to
the sun, and the other to the moon, but touching neither. Elinor had
imagined or hoped, that the language of her aunt would have revived her
habitual associations--she was disappointed. It is true no pains were
spared--when Elinor wished to read, she was furnished amply with the
Westminster Confession, or Prynne’s Histriomastrix; or if she wished for
lighter pages, for the Belles Lettres of Puritanism, there were John
Bunyan’s Holy War, or the life of Mr Badman. If she closed the book in
despair at the insensibility of her untouched heart, she was invited to
a godly conference, where the non-conformist ministers, who had been, in
the language of the day, extinguished under the Bartholomew bushel(8),
met to give the precious word in season to the scattered fold of the
Lord. Elinor knelt and wept too at these meetings; but, while her form
was prostrated before the Deity, her tears fell for one whom she dared
not name. When, in incontroulable agony, she sought, like Joseph, where
she might weep unobserved and unrestrained, and rushed into the narrow
garden that skirted the cottage of her aunt, and wept there, she was
followed by the quiet, sedate figure, moving at the rate of an inch in a
minute, who offered her for her consolation, the newly published and
difficultly obtained work of Marshall on Sanctification.

  (8) Anachronism--n’importe.

“Elinor, accustomed too much to that fatal excitement of the heart,
which renders all other excitement as faint and feeble as the air of
heaven to one who has been inhaling the potent inebriation of the
strongest perfumes, wondered how this being, so abstracted, cold, and
unearthly, could tolerate her motionless existence. She rose at a fixed
hour,--at a fixed hour she prayed,--at a fixed hour received the godly
friends who visited her, and whose existence was as monotonous and
apathetic as her own,--at a fixed hour she dined,--and at a fixed hour
she prayed again, and then retired,--yet she prayed without unction, and
fed without appetite, and retired to rest without the least inclination
to sleep. Her life was mere mechanism, but the machine was so well wound
up, that it appeared to have some quiet consciousness and sullen
satisfaction in its movements.

“Elinor struggled in vain for the renewal of this life of cold
mediocrity,--she thirsted for it as one who, in the deserts of Afric,
expiring for want of water, would wish for the moment to be an inmate of
Lapland, to drink of their eternal snows,--yet at that moment wonders
how its inhabitants can live among SNOW. She saw a being far inferior to
herself in mental power,--of feelings that hardly deserved the
name--_tranquil_, and wondered that she herself was wretched.--Alas! she
did not know, that the heartless and unimaginative are those alone who
entitle themselves to the comforts of life, and who can alone enjoy
them. A cold and sluggish mediocrity in their occupations or their
amusements, is all they require--pleasure has with them no meaning but
the exemption from actual suffering, nor do they annex any idea to pain
but the immediate infliction of corporeal suffering, or of external
calamity--the source of pain or pleasure is never found in their
_hearts_--while those who have profound feelings scarce ever look
elsewhere for either. So much the worse for them,--the being reduced to
providing for the necessities of human life, and being satisfied when
that provision is made, is perhaps the best condition of human
life--beyond that, all is the dream of insanity, or the agony of
disappointment. Far better the dull and dusky winter’s day, whose gloom,
if it never abates, never increases,--(and to which we lift up an eye of
listlessness, in which there is no apprehension of future and added
terrors),--to the glorious fierceness of the summer’s day, whose sun
sets amid purple and gold,--while, panting under its parting beams, we
see the clouds collecting in the darkening East, and view the armies of
heaven on their march, whose thunders are to break our rest, and whose
lightnings may crumble us to ashes. * * * * *

“Elinor strove hard with her fate,--the strength of her intellect had
been much developed since her residence at Mortimer Castle, and there
also the energies of her heart had been developed fatally. How dreadful
is the conflict of superior intellect and a burning heart, with the
perfect mediocrity of the characters and circumstances they are
generally doomed to live with! The battering-rams play against
wool-bags,--the lightnings glance on ice, hiss, and are extinguished.
The greater strength we exhibit, we feel we are more and more paralyzed
by the weakness of our enemies,--our very energy becomes our bitterest
enemy, as it fights in vain against the impregnable fortress of total
vacuity! It is in vain we assail a foe who neither knows our language or
uses our weapons. Elinor gave it up,--yet still she struggled with her
own feelings; and perhaps the conflict which she now undertook was the
hardest of all. She had received her first religious impressions under
the roof of her Puritanic aunt, and, true or false, they had been so
vivid, that she was anxious to revive them. When the heart is robbed of
its first-born, there is nothing it will not try to adopt. Elinor
remembered a very affecting scene that had occurred in her childhood,
beneath the roof where she now resided.

“An old non-conformist minister, a very Saint John for sanctity of life,
and simplicity of manners, had been seized by a magistrate while giving
the word of consolation to a few of his flock who had met at the cottage
of her aunt.

“The old man had supplicated for a moment’s delay on the part of the
civil power, and its officers, by an unusual effort of toleration or of
humanity, complied. Turning to his congregation, who, amid the tumult of
the arrest, had never risen from their knees, and only changed the voice
of supplication from praying with their pastor, to praying for him,--he
quoted to them that beautiful passage from the prophet Malachi, which
appears to give such delightful encouragement to the spiritual
intercourse of Christians,--“Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often
to one another, and the Lord heard it,” &c. As he spoke, the old man was
dragged away by some rougher hands, and died soon after in confinement.

“On the young imagination of Elinor, this scene was indelibly written.
Amid the magnificence of Mortimer Castle, it had never been effaced or
obscured, and now she tried to make herself in love with the sounds and
the scene that had so deeply touched her infant heart.

“Resolute in her purposes, she spared no pains to excite this
reminiscence of religion,--it was her last resource. Like the wife of
Phineas, she struggled to bear an heir of the soul, even while she named
him _Ichabod_,--and felt the glory was departed. She went to the narrow
apartment,--she seated herself in the very chair that venerable man
occupied when he was torn from it, and his departure appeared to her
like that of an ascending prophet. She would _then_ have caught the
folds of his mantle, and mounted with him, even though his flight had
led to prison and to death. She tried, by repeating his last words, to
produce the same effect they had once had on her heart, and wept in
indescribable agony at feeling those words had no meaning now for her.
When life and passion have thus rejected us, the backward steps we are
compelled to tread towards the path we have wandered from, are ten
thousand times more torturing and arduous than those we have exhausted
in their pursuit. Hope then supported our hands every step we took.
Remorse and disappointment scourge us back, and every step is tinged
with tears or with blood; and well it is for the pilgrim if that blood
is drained from his heart, for then--his pilgrimage will be sooner
terminated. * * * * * *

“At times Elinor, who had forgotten neither the language or habits of
her former existence, would speak in a manner that gave her Puritanic
relative hopes that, according to the language of the times, “the root
of the matter was in her,”--and when the old lady, in confidence of her
returning orthodoxy, discussed long and learnedly on the election and
perseverance of the saints, the listener would startle her by a burst of
feeling, that seemed to her aunt more like the ravings of a demoniac,
than the language of a human being,--especially one who had from her
youth known the Scriptures. She would say, “Dearest aunt, I am not
insensible of what you say; from a child, (thanks to your care), I have
known the holy scriptures. I _have_ felt the power of religion. At a
latter period I have experienced all the enjoyments of an intellectual
existence. Surrounded by splendour, I have conversed with enlarged
minds,--I have seen all that life can shew me,--I have lived with the
mean and the rich,--the spiritual in their poverty, and the
worldly-minded in their grandeur,--I have deeply drank of the cup which
both modes of existence held to my lip,--and at this moment I swear to
you,--_one moment of heart_,--one dream such as once I dreamed, (and
thought I should never awake from), is worth all the existence that the
earthly-minded lavish on this world, and those who mystify expend on the
next!”--“Unfortunate wretch! and undone for everlasting!” cried the
terrified Calvinist, lifting up her hands,--“Cease, cease,” said Elinor
with that dignity which grief alone can give,--“If I have indeed devoted
to an earthly love that which is due to God alone, is not my punishment
certain in a future state? Has it not already commenced here? May not
then all reproaches be spared when we are suffering more than human
enmity can wish us,--when our very existence is a bitterer reproach to
us than malignity can utter?”--As she spoke, she added, wiping a cold
tear from her wasted cheek, “My stroke is heavier than my groaning!”

“At other times she appeared to listen to the language of the Puritan
preachers (for all were preachers who frequented the house) with some
appearance of attention, and then, rushing from them without any
conviction but that of despair, exclaimed in her haste, “All men are
liars!” Thus it fares with those who wish to make an instant transition
from one world to another,--it is impossible,--the cold wave
interposes--for ever interposes, between the wilderness and the land of
promise--and we may as soon expect to tread the threshold which parts
life and death without pain, as to cross the interval which separates
two modes of existence so distinct as those of passion and religion,
without struggles of the soul inexpressible--without groanings which
cannot be uttered.

“To these struggles there was soon to be an addition. Letters at this
period circulated very slowly, and were written only on important
occasions. Within a very short period, Elinor received two letters
by express from Mortimer Castle, written by her cousin Margaret.
The first announced the arrival of John Sandal at the Castle,--the
second, the death of Mrs Ann,--the postscriptums of both contained
certain mysterious hints relative to the interruption of the
marriage,--intimations that the cause was known only to the writer,
to Sandal and to his mother,--and entreaties that Elinor would return
to the Castle, and partake of the _sisterly_ love with which Margaret
and John Sandal would be glad to receive her. The letters dropt from
her hand as she received them,--of John Sandal she had never ceased to
think, but she had never ceased to wish not to think,--and his name
even now gave her a pang which she could neither utter or suppress, and
which burst forth in an involuntary shriek, that seemed like the last
string that breaks in the exquisite and too-highly strung instrument of
the human heart.

“Over the account of Mrs Ann’s death, she lingered with that fearful
feeling that a young adventurer experiences, who sees a noble vessel set
out before him on a voyage of discovery, and wishes, while lingering in
harbour himself, that he was already at the shore where _it_ has
arrived, and tasted of its repose, and participated in its treasures.

“Mrs Ann’s death had not been unworthy of that life of magnanimity and
high heroic feeling which had marked every hour of her mortal
existence--she had espoused the cause of the rejected Elinor, and sworn
in the chapel of Mortimer Castle, while Margaret knelt beside, never to
admit within its walls the deserter of his betrothed bride.

“On a dim autumnal evening, when Mrs Ann, with fading sight but
undiminished feeling, was poring over some of Lady Russel’s letters in
manuscript, and, to relieve her eyes, sometimes glanced on the
manuscript of Nelson’s Fasts and Festivals of the Church of England,--it
was announced to her that a Cavalier (the servants well knew the charm
of that name to the ear of the ancient loyalist) had crossed the
draw-bridge, entered the hall, and was advancing to the apartment where
she sat. “Let him be admitted,” was her answer, and rising from her
chair, which was so lofty and so spacious, that as she lifted herself
from it to greet the stranger with a courtly reception, her form
appeared like a spectre rising from an ancient monument,--she stood
facing the entrance--at that entrance appeared John Sandal. She bent
forwards for a moment, but her eyes, bright and piercing, still
recognized him in a moment.

“Back!--back!”--exclaimed the stately ancestress, waving him
off with her withered hand--“Back!--profane not this floor with
another step!”--“Hear me, madam, for one moment--suffer me to
address you, even on my knees--I pay the homage to your rank and
relationship--misunderstand it not as an acknowledgement of guilt on my
part!”

“Mrs Ann’s features at this action underwent a slight contraction--a
short spasmodic affection. “Rise, Sir--rise,” she said--“and say what
you have to say--but utter it, Sir, at the door whose threshold you are
unworthy to tread.”

“John Sandal rose from his knees, and pointed instinctively as he rose
to the portrait of Sir Roger Mortimer, to whom he bore a striking
resemblance. Mrs Ann acknowledged the appeal--she advanced a few steps
on the oaken floor--she stood erect for a moment, and then, pointing
with a dignity of action which no pencil could embody to the portrait,
seemed to consider her attitude as a valid and eloquent answer--it
said--he to whose resemblance you point, and claim protection from,
never like you dishonoured these walls by an act of baseness--of
heartless treachery! Betrayer!--look to his portrait! Her expression had
in it something of the sublime--the next moment a strong spasm
contracted her features--she attempted to speak, but her lips no longer
obeyed her--she seemed to speak, but was not heard even by herself. She
stood for a moment before John Sandal in that rigid immoveable attitude
that says, “Advance not another step at your peril--insult not the
portraits of your ancestors--insult not their living representative, by
another step of intrusion!” As she spoke thus, (for her attitude spoke),
a stronger spasm contracted her features. She attempted to move--the
same rigid constriction extended to her limbs; and, waving her
prohibitory arm still, as if in defiance at once of the approach of
death and of her rejected kinsman, she dropt at his feet. * * * * * *

“She did not long survive the interview, nor did she ever recover the
use of speech. Her powerful intellect was, however, unimpaired; and to
the last she expressed herself most intelligibly by action, as
determined not to hear a word explanatory of Sandal’s conduct. This
explanation was therefore made to Margaret, who, though much shocked and
agitated at the first disclosure, seemed afterwards perfectly reconciled
to it. * * * * * * * *

“Shortly after the receipt of these letters, Elinor took a sudden, but
perhaps not singular resolution,--she determined to set out immediately
for Mortimer Castle. It was not her weariness of the withering life, the
αβιωτος βιος she lived at her Puritanic aunt’s--it was not the wish
to enjoy again the stately and splendid ceremonial of Mortimer Castle,
contrasted with the frugal fare and monastic rigour of the cottage in
Yorkshire--it was not even the wish for that change of place that
always flatters us with change of circumstance, as if we did not carry
our own hearts with us wherever we go, and might not therefore be sure
that an innate and eroding ulcer must be our companion from the Pole to
the Equator--it was not this, but a whisper half unheard, yet believed,
(just in proportion as it was inaudible and incredible), that murmured
from the bottom of her credulous heart, ‘Go--and _perhaps_’--

“Elinor set out on her journey, and after having performed it with fewer
difficulties than can be imagined, considering the state of the roads,
and the modes of travelling in the year 1667 or thereabouts, she arrived
in the vicinity of Mortimer Castle. It was a scene of reminiscence to
her,--her heart throbbed audibly as the carriage stopped at a Gothic
gate, through which there was a walk between two rows of lofty elms. She
alighted, and to the request of the servant who followed her, that he
might be permitted to shew her the way through a path entangled by the
intersecting roots of the trees, and dim with twilight, she answered
only by her tears. She waved him off, and advanced on foot and alone.
She remembered, from the bottom of her soul, how she had once wandered
amid that very grove with John Sandal--how his smile had shed a richer
light on the landscape, than even the purple smile of the dying
day-light. She thought of that smile, and lingered to catch it amid the
rich and burning hues flung by the fading light on the many-tinted boles
of the ancient trees. The trees were there--and the light was there--but
his smile, that once eclipsed the sun-light, was there no longer!

“She advanced alone--the lofty avenue of trees still retained its
magnificent depth of shade, and gorgeous colouring of trunk and leaf.
She sought among them for that which she had once felt--and God and
nature alone are conscious of the agony with which we demand from them
the object which we are conscious was once consecrated to our hearts,
and which we now require of both in vain! God withholds,--and Nature
denies them!

“As Elinor with trembling steps advanced towards the Castle, she saw the
funeral scutcheon which Mrs Margaret, in honour of her grand-aunt, had
caused to be affixed over the principal tower since her decease, with
the same heraldric decorum as if the last male of the Mortimer family
were extinct. Elinor looked up, and many thoughts rushed on her
heart.--“There is one departed,” she thought, “whose mind was always
fixed on glorious thoughts--the most exalted actions of humanity, or the
sublime associations of eternity! Her noble heart had room but for two
illustrious guests--the love of God, and the love of her country. They
tarried with her to the last, for they found the abode worthy of them;
and when they parted, the inmate found the mansion untenantable any
longer--the soul fled with its glorious visitors to heaven! My
treacherous heart welcomed another inmate, and how has he repaid its
hospitality?--By leaving the mansion in ruins!” As she spoke thus, she
approached the entrance of the Castle.

“In the spacious hall she was received by Margaret Mortimer with the
embrace of rooted affection, and by John Sandal, who advanced after the
first enthusiasm of meeting was over, with that calm and brother-like
good-will, from which there was--nothing to be hoped. There was the same
heavenly smile, the same clasp of the hand, the same tender and almost
feminine expression of anxiety for her safety--even Margaret herself,
who must have felt, and who did feel the perils of the long journey, did
not enter into them with that circumstantiality, or appear to sympathize
with them so vividly, or, when the tale of toil and travel was told,
appear to urge the necessity of speedy retirement, with such solicitude
as did John Sandal. Elinor, faint and gasping, grasped the hands of
both, and by an involuntary motion locked both together. The widow
Sandal was present--she shewed much agitation at the appearance of
Elinor; but when she saw this extraordinary and spontaneous movement, it
was observed she smiled.

“Soon after, Elinor retired to the apartment she had formerly occupied.
By the affectionate and delicate prevoyance of Margaret, the furniture
had all been changed--there was nothing to remind her of former days,
except her heart. She sat for some time reflecting on her reception, and
hope died within her heart as she thought of it. The strongest
expression of aversion or disdain would not have been so withering.

“It is certain that the fiercest passions may be exchanged for their
widest extremes in a time incredibly short, and by means the most
incalculable. Within the narrow circle of a day, enemies may embrace,
and lovers may hate,--but, in the course of centuries, pure complacency
and cordial good-will never can be exalted into passion. The wretched
Elinor felt this,--and feeling it, knew that all was lost.

“She had now, for many days, to undergo the torture of complacent and
fraternal affection from the man she loved,--and perhaps a keener
torture was never endured. To feel hands that we long to press to our
burning hearts, touch ours with cool and pulseless tranquillity--to see
eyes in whose light we live, throw on us a cold but smiling beam, that
gives light, but not fertility, to the parched and thirsting soil of the
heart--to hear the ordinary language of affectionate civility addressed
to us in tones of the most delicious suavity--to seek in these
expressions an ulterior meaning, and to find it not---- This--this is an
agony which only those who have felt can conceive!

“Elinor, with an effort that cost her heart many a pang, mingled in the
habits of the house, which had been greatly changed since the death of
Mrs Ann. The numerous suitors of the wealthy and noble heiress, now
crowded to the Castle; and, according to the custom of the times, they
were sumptuously entertained, and invited to prolong their stay by
numerous banquets.

“On these occasions, John Sandal was the first to pay distinguished
attention to Elinor. They danced together; and though her Puritanic
education had taught her an abhorrence of those “devil’s measures,” as
her family was accustomed to term them, she tried to adapt herself to
the gay steps of the Canaries(9), and the stately movements of the
Measures--(for the newer dances had not, even in report, reached
Mortimer Castle)--and her slender and graceful form needed no other
inspiration than the support of John Sandal’s arms, (who was himself an
exquisite dancer), to assume all the graces of that delightful exercise.
Even the practised courtiers applauded her. But, when it was over,
Elinor felt, that had John Sandal been dancing with a being the most
indifferent to him on earth, his manner would have been exactly the
same. No one could point with more smiling grace to her slight
deviations from the figure,--no one could attend her to her seat with
more tender and anxious politeness, and wave the vast fan of those days
over her with more graceful and assiduous courtesy. But Elinor felt that
these attentions, however flattering, were offered not by a lover. * * *
* * * * * *

  (9) In Cowley’s “Cutter of Coleman Street,” Mrs Tabitha, a rigid
  Puritan, tells her husband she had danced the Canaries in her youth.
  And in Rushworth’s Collections, if I remember right, Prynne vindicates
  himself from the charge of a general denunciation against dancing, and
  even speaks of the “Measures,” a stately, solemn dance, with some
  approbation.

“Sandal was absent on a visit to some neighbouring nobleman, and
Margaret and Elinor were one evening completely alone. Each seemed
equally anxious for an explanation, which neither appeared willing to
begin. Elinor had lingered till twilight at the casement, from which she
had seen him ride, and lingered still when to see him was no longer
possible. Her sight was strained to catch a glimpse of him through the
gathering clouds, as her imagination still toiled to catch a gleam of
that light of the heart, which now struggled dimly amid clouds of gloomy
and unpierceable mystery. “Elinor,” said Margaret emphatically, “look
for him no longer,--he never can be yours!”

“The sudden address, and the imperative tone of conviction, had upon
Elinor the effect of being addressed by a supernatural monitor. She was
unable even to ask how the terrible intelligence that burst on her so
decisively, was obtained.

“There is a state of mind in which we listen thus to a human voice as if
it were an oracle,--and instead of asking an explanation of the destiny
it announces, we wait submissively for what yet remains to be told. In
this mood, Elinor slowly advanced from the casement, and asked in a
voice of fearful calmness, “Has he explained himself perfectly to
you?”--“Perfectly.”--“And there is nothing to expect?”--“Nothing.”--“And
you have heard this from himself--his very self?”--“I have; and, dear
Elinor, let us never again speak on the subject.”--“Never!” answered
Elinor,--“Never!”

“The veracity and dignity of Margaret’s character, were inviolable
securities for the truth of what she uttered; and perhaps that was the
very reason why Elinor tried to shrink most from the conviction. In a
morbid state of heart, we cannot bear truth--the falsehood that
intoxicates us for a moment, is worth more than the truth that would
disenchant us for life.--_I hate him because he tells me the truth_, is
the language natural to the human mind, from the slave of power to the
slave of passion. * * * * * * * *

“Other symptoms that could not escape the notice of the most shallow,
struck her every hour. That devotion of the eye and heart,--of the
language and the look, that cannot be mistaken,--were all obviously
directed to Margaret. Still Elinor lingered in the Castle, and said to
herself, while every day she saw and felt what was passing, “Perhaps.”
That is the last word that quits the lips of those who love. * * * * * *

“She saw with all her eyes,--she felt to the bottom of her soul,--the
obviously increasing attachment of John Sandal and Margaret; yet still
she dreamed of interposing obstacles,--of _an explanation_. When passion
is deprived of its proper aliment, there is no telling the food on which
it will prey,--the impossibilities to which, like a famished garrison,
it will look for its wretched sustenance.

“Elinor had ceased to demand the heart of the being she was devoted to.
She now lived on his looks. She said to herself, Let him smile, though
not on me, and I am happy still--wherever the sun-light falls, the earth
must be blessed. Then she sunk to lower claims. She said, Let me but be
in his presence, and that is enough--let his smiles and his soul be
devoted to another, one wandering ray may reach me, and that will be
enough!

“Love is a very noble and exalting sentiment in its first germ and
principle. We never loved without arraying the object in all the glories
of moral as well as physical perfection, and deriving a kind of dignity
to ourselves from our capacity of admiring a creature so excellent and
dignified; but this lavish and magnificent prodigality of the
imagination often leaves the heart a bankrupt. Love in its iron age of
disappointment, becomes very degraded--it submits to be satisfied with
merely exterior indulgences--a look, a touch of the hand, though
occurring by accident--a kind word, though uttered almost unconsciously,
suffices for its humble existence. In its first state, it is like man
before the fall, inhaling the odours of paradise, and enjoying the
communion of the Deity; in the latter, it is like the same being toiling
amid the briar and the thistle, barely to maintain a squalid existence
without enjoyment, utility, or loveliness. * * * * * *

“About this time, her Puritan aunt made a strong effort to recover
Elinor out of the snare of the enemy. She wrote a long letter (a great
exertion for a woman far advanced in years, and never in the habits of
epistolary composition) adjuring her apostate niece to return to the
guide of her youth, and the covenant of her God,--to take shelter in the
everlasting arms while they were still held out to her,--and to flee to
the city of refuge while its gates were yet open to receive her. She
urged on her the truth, power, and blessedness of the system of Calvin,
which she termed the gospel.--She supported and defended it with all the
metaphysical skill, and all the scriptural knowledge she possessed,--and
the latter was not scanty.--And she affectingly reminded her, that the
hand that traced these lines, would be unable ever to repeat the
admonition, and would probably be mouldering into dust while she was
employed in their perusal.

“Elinor wept while she read, but that was all. She wept from physical
emotion, not from mental conviction; nor is there such an induration of
heart caused by any other power, as by that of the passion which seems
to soften it most. She answered the letter, however, and the effort
scarce cost her less than it did her decrepid and dying relative. She
acknowledged her dereliction of all religious feeling, and bewailed
it--the more, she added with painful sincerity, because I _feel my grief
is not sincere_. “Oh, my God!” she continued, “you who have clothed my
heart with such burning energies--you who have given to it a power of
loving so intense, so devoted, so concentrated--you have not given it in
vain;--no, in some happier world, or perhaps even in this, when this
“tyranny is overpast,” you will fill my heart with an image worthier
than him whom I once believed your image on earth. The stars, though
their light appears so dim and distant to us, were not lit by the
Almighty hand in vain. Their glorious light burns for remote and happier
worlds; and the beam of religion that glows so feebly to eyes almost
blind with earthly tears, may be rekindled when a broken heart has been
my passport to a place of rest. * * * * * * * *

“Do not think me, dear aunt, deserted by all hope of religion, even
though I have lost the sense of it. Was it not said by unerring lips to
a sinner, that her transgressions were forgiven because she _loved
much_? And does not this capacity of love prove that it will one day be
more worthily filled, and more happily employed. * * * * * *

“Miserable wretch that I am! At this moment, a voice from the bottom of
my heart asks me “_Whom_ hast thou loved so much? Was it man or God,
that thou darest to compare thyself with her who knelt and wept--not
before a mortal idol, but at the feet of an incarnate divinity?” * * * *
* *

“It may yet befall, that the ark which has floated through the waste of
waters may find its resting-place, and the trembling inmate debark on
the shores of an unknown but purer world.” * * * * * * * *




CHAPTER XXXI.

    There is an oak beside the froth-clad pool,
    Where in old time, as I have often heard,
    A woman desperate, a wretch like me,
    Ended her woes!--Her woes were not like mine!

    * * * * *

    ----------------Ronan will know;
    When he beholds me floating on the stream,
    His heart will tell him why Rivine died!

    HOME’S FATAL DISCOVERY.


“The increasing decline of Elinor’s health was marked by all the family;
the very servant who stood behind her chair looked sadder every
day--even Margaret began to repent of the invitation she had given her
to the Castle.

“Elinor felt this, and would have spared her what pain she could; but it
was not possible for herself to be insensible of the fast-fading remains
of her withering youth and blighted beauty. The place--the place itself,
was the principal cause of that mortal disease that was consuming her;
yet from that place she felt she had less resolution to tear herself
every day. So she lived, like those sufferers in eastern prisons, who
are not allowed to taste food unless mixed with poison, and who must
perish alike whether they eat or forbear.

“Once, urged by intolerable pain of heart, (tortured by living in the
placid light of John Sandal’s sunny smile), she confessed this to
Margaret. She said, “It is impossible for me to support this
existence--impossible! To tread the floor which those steps have
trod--to listen for their approach, and when they come, feel they do not
bear him we seek--to see every object around me reflect his image, but
never--never to see the reality--to see the door open which once
disclosed his figure, and when it opens, not to see _him_, and when he
does appear, to see him not what he was--to feel he is the same and not
the same,--the same to the eye, but not to the heart--to struggle thus
between the dream of imagination and the cruel awaking of reality--Oh!
Margaret--that undeception plants a dagger in the heart, whose point no
human hand can extract, and whose venom no human hand can heal!”
Margaret wept as Elinor spoke thus, and slowly, very slowly, expressed
her consent that Elinor should quit the Castle, if it was necessary for
her peace.

“It was the very evening after this conversation, that Elinor, whose
habit was to wander among the woods that surrounded the Castle
unattended, met with John Sandal. It was a glorious autumnal evening,
just like that on which they had first met,--the associations of nature
were the same, those of the heart alone had suffered change. There is
that light in an autumnal sky,--that shade in autumnal woods,--that dim
and hallowed glory in the evening of the year, which is indefinably
combined with recollections. Sandal, as they met, had spoken to her in
the same voice of melody, and with the same heart-thrilling tenderness
of manner, that had never ceased to visit her ear since their first
meeting, like music in dreams. She imagined there was more than usual
feeling in his manner; and the spot where they were, and which memory
made populous and eloquent with the imagery and speech of other days,
flattered this illusion. A vague hope trembled at the bottom of her
heart,--she thought of what she dared not to utter, and yet dared to
believe. They walked on together,--together they watched the last light
on the purple hills, the deep repose of the woods, whose summits were
still like “feathers of gold,”--together they once more tasted the
confidence of nature, and, amid the most perfect silence, there was a
mutual and unutterable eloquence in their hearts. The thoughts of other
days rushed on Elinor,--she ventured to raise her eyes to that
countenance which she once more saw “as it had been that of an angel.”
The glow and the smile, that made it appear like a reflexion of heaven,
were there still,--but that glow was borrowed from the bright flush of
the glorious west, and that smile was for nature,--not for her. She
lingered till she felt it fade with the fading light,--and a _last_
conviction striking her heart, she burst into an agony of tears. To his
words of affectionate surprise, and gentle consolation, she answered
only by fixing her appealing eyes on him, and agonizingly invoking his
name. She had trusted to nature, and to this scene of their first
meeting, to act as an interpreter between them,--and still even in
despair she trusted to it.

“Perhaps there is not a more agonizing moment than that in which we feel
the aspect of nature give a perfect vitality to the associations of
_our_ hearts, while they lie buried in those in which we try _in vain to
revive them_.

“She was soon undeceived. With that benignity which, while it speaks of
consolation, forbids hope--with that smile which angels may be supposed
to give on the last conflict of a sufferer who is casting off the
garments of mortality in pain and hope--with such an expression he whom
she loved regarded her. From another world he might have cast such a
glance on her,--and it sealed her doom in this for ever. * * * * * * *

“As, unable to witness the agony of the wound he had inflicted but could
not heal, he turned from her, the last light of day faded from the
hills--the sun of both worlds set on her eye and soul--she sunk on the
earth, and notes of faint music that seemed designed to echo the
words--“No--no--no--never--never more!” trembled in her ears. They were
as simple and monotonous as the words themselves, and were played
accidentally by a peasant boy who was wandering in the woods. But to the
unfortunate, every thing seems prophetic; and amid the shades of
evening, and accompanied by the sound of his departing footsteps, the
breaking heart of Elinor accepted the augury of these melancholy
notes(10). * * * * * * * * *

  (10) As this whole scene is taken from fact, I subjoin the notes whose
  modulation is so simple, and whose effect was so profound.

  [Music]

“A few days after this final meeting, Elinor wrote to her aunt in York
to announce, that if she still lived, and was not unwilling to admit
her, she would reside with her for life; and she could not help
intimating, that _her_ life would probably not outlast that of her
hostess. She did not tell what the widow Sandal had whispered to her at
her first arrival at the Castle, and what she now ventured to repeat
with a tone that struggled between the imperative and the
persuasive,--the conciliating and the intimidative. Elinor yielded,--and
the indelicacy of this representation, had only the effect to make her
shrink from its repetition.

“On her departure, Margaret wept, and Sandal shewed as much tender
officiousness about her journey, as if it were to terminate in their
renewed bridal. To escape from this, Elinor hastened her preparations
for departure.

“When she arrived at a certain distance from the Castle, she dismissed
the family carriage, and said she would go on foot with her female
servant to the farmhouse where horses were awaiting her. She went there,
but remained concealed, for the report of the approaching bridal
resounded in her ears. * * * * * * *

“The day arrived--Elinor rose very early--the bells rung out a merry
peal--(as she had once heard them do on another occasion)--the troops of
friends arrived in greater numbers, and with equal gaiety as they had
once assembled to escort her--she saw their equipages gleaming
along--she heard the joyous shouts of half the county--she imagined to
herself the timid smile of Margaret, and the irradiated countenance of
him who had been _her_ bridegroom.

“Suddenly there was a pause. She felt that the ceremony was going
on--was finished--that the irrevocable words were spoken--the
indissoluble tie was knit! Again the shout and wild joyance burst forth
as the sumptuous cavalcade returned to the Castle. The glare of the
equipages,--the splendid habits of the riders,--the cheerful groupe of
shouting tenantry,----she saw it all! * * * * * * * * * *

“When all was over, Elinor glanced accidentally at her dress--it was
white like her bridal habit;--shuddering she exchanged it for a mourning
habit, and set out, as she hoped, on her last journey.




CHAPTER XXXII.

    Fuimus, non sumus.


“When Elinor arrived in Yorkshire, she found her aunt was dead. Elinor
went to visit her grave. It was, in compliance with her last request,
placed near the window of the independent meeting-house, and bore for
inscription her favourite text, “Those whom he foreknew, he also
predestinated,” &c. &c. Elinor stood by the grave some time, but could
not shed a tear. This contrast of a life so rigid, and a death so
hopeful,--this silence of humanity, and eloquence of the grave,--pierced
through her heart, as it will through every heart that has indulged in
the inebriation of human passion, and feels that the draught has been
drawn from broken cisterns.

“Her aunt’s death made Elinor’s life, if possible, more secluded, and
her habits more monotonous than they would otherwise have been. She was
very charitable to the cottagers in her neighbourhood; but except to
visit their habitations, she never quitted her own. * * * * * * * *

“Often she contemplated a small stream that flowed at the end of her
garden. As she had lost all her sensibility of nature, another motive
was assigned for this mute and dark contemplation; and her servant, much
attached to her, watched her closely. * * * * * * * * *

“She was roused from this fearful state of stupefaction and despair,
which those who have felt shudder at the attempt to describe, by a
letter from Margaret. She had received several from her which lay
unanswered, (no unusual thing in those days), but this she tore open,
read with interest inconceivable, and prepared instantly to answer by
action.

“Margaret’s high spirits seemed to have sunk in her hour of danger. She
hinted that that hour was rapidly approaching, and that she earnestly
implored the presence of her affectionate kinswoman to soothe and
sustain in the moment of her approaching peril. She added, that the
manly and affectionate tenderness of John Sandal at this period, had
touched her heart more deeply, if possible, than all the former
testimonies of his affection--but that she could not bear his
resignation of all his usual habits of rural amusement, and of the
neighbouring society--that she in vain had chided him from her couch,
where she lingered in pain and hope, and hoped that Elinor’s presence
might induce him to yield to her request, as he must feel, on her
arrival, the dearest companion of her youth was present--and that, at
such a moment, a female companion was more suitable than even the
gentlest and most affectionate of the other sex. * * * * * * *

“Elinor set out directly. The purity of her feelings had formed an
impenetrable barrier between her heart and its object,--and she
apprehended no more danger from the presence of one who was wedded, and
wedded to her relative, than from that of her own brother.

“She arrived at the Castle--Margaret’s hour of danger had begun--she had
been very ill during the preceding period. The natural consequences of
her situation had been aggravated by a feeling of dignified
responsibility on the birth of an heir to the house of Mortimer--and
this feeling had not contributed to render that situation more
supportable.

“Elinor bent over the bed of pain--pressed her cold lips to the burning
lips of the sufferer--and prayed for her.

“The first medical assistance in the country (then very rarely employed
on such occasions) had been obtained at a vast expence. The widow
Sandal, declining all attendance on the sufferer, paced through the
adjacent apartments in agony unutterable and _unuttered_.

“Two days and nights went on in hope and terror--the bell-ringers sat up
in every church within ten miles round--the tenantry crowded round the
Castle with honest heartfelt solicitude--the neighbouring nobility sent
their messages of inquiry every hour. An accouchement in a noble family
was then an event of importance.

“The hour came--twins were born dead--and the young mother was fated to
follow them within a few hours! While life yet remained, Margaret shewed
the remains of the lofty spirit of the Mortimers. She sought with her
cold hand that of her wretched husband and of the weeping Elinor. She
joined them in an embrace which one of them at least understood, and
prayed that their union might be eternal. She then begged to see the
bodies of her infant sons--they were produced; and it was said that she
uttered expressions, intimating that, had they not been the heirs of the
Mortimer family--had not expectation been wound so high, and supported
by all the hopes that life and youth could flatter her with,--she and
they might yet have existed.

“As she spoke, her voice grew feebler, and her eyes dim--their last
light was turned on him she loved; and when sight was gone, she still
felt his arms enfold her. The next moment they enfolded--nothing!

“In the terrible spasms of masculine agony--the more intensely felt as
they are more rarely indulged--the young widower dashed himself on the
bed, which shook with his convulsive grief; and Elinor, losing all sense
but that of a calamity so sudden and so terrible, echoed his deep and
suffocating sobs, as if she whom they deplored had not been the only
obstacle to her happiness. * * * * * * * *

“Amid the voice of mourning that rung through the Castle from vault to
tower in that day of trouble, none was loud like that of the widow
Sandal--her wailings were shrieks, her grief was despair. Rushing
through the rooms like one distracted, she tore her hair out by the
roots, and imprecated the most fearful curses on her head. At length she
approached the apartment where the corse lay. The servants, shocked at
her distraction, would have withheld her from entering it, but could
not. She burst into the room, cast one wild look on its inmates--the
still corse and the dumb mourners--and then, flinging herself on her
knees before her son, confessed the secret of her guilt, and developed
to its foul base the foundation of that pile of iniquity and sorrow
which had now reached its summit.

“Her son listened to this horrible confession with fixed eye and
features unmoved; and at its conclusion, when the wretched penitent
implored the assistance of her son to raise her from her knees, he
repelled her outstretched hands, and with a weak wild laugh, sunk back
on the bed. He never could be removed from it till the corse to which he
clung was borne away, and then the mourners hardly knew which to
deplore--her who was deprived of the light of life, or him in whom the
light of reason was extinguished for ever! * * * * *

“The wretched, guilty mother, (but for her fate no one can be
solicitous), a few months after, on her dying bed, declared the secret
of her crime to a minister of an independent congregation, who was
induced, by the report of her despair, to visit her. She confessed that,
being instigated by avarice, and still more by the desire of regaining
her lost consequence in the family, and knowing the wealth and dignity
her son would acquire, and in which she must participate, by his
marriage with Margaret, she had, after using all the means of persuasion
and intreaty, been driven, in despair at her disappointment, to
fabricate a tale as false as it was horrible, which she related to her
deluded son on the evening before his intended nuptials with Elinor. She
had assured him he was not her son, but the offspring of the illicit
commerce of her husband the preacher with the Puritan mother of Elinor,
who had formerly been one of his congregation, and whose well-known and
strongly-expressed admiration of his preaching had been once supposed
extended to his person,--had caused her much jealous anxiety in the
early years of their marriage, and was now made the basis of this
horrible fiction. She added, that Margaret’s obvious attachment to her
cousin had, in some degree, palliated her guilt to herself; but that,
when she saw him quit her house in despair on the morning of his
intended marriage, and rush he knew not whither, she was half tempted to
recall him, and confess the truth. Her mind again became hardened, and
she reflected that her secret was safe, as she had bound him by an oath,
from respect to his father’s memory, and compassion to the guilty mother
of Elinor, never to disclose the truth to her daughter.

“The event had succeeded to her guilty wishes.--Sandal beheld Elinor
with the eyes of a brother, and the image of Margaret easily found a
place in his unoccupied affections. But, as often befals to the dealers
in falsehood and obliquity, the apparent accomplishment of her hopes
proved her ruin. In the event of the marriage of John and Margaret
proving issueless, the estates and title went to the distant relative
named in the will; and her son, deprived of reason by the calamities in
which her arts had involved him, was by them also deprived of the wealth
and rank to which they were meant to raise him, and reduced to the small
pension obtained by his former services,--the poverty of the King, then
himself a pensioner of Lewis XIV., forbidding the possibility of added
remuneration. When the minister heard to the last the terrible
confession of the dying penitent, in the awful language ascribed to
Bishop Burnet when consulted by another criminal,--he bid her “almost
despair,” and departed. * * * * * * *

“Elinor has retired, with the helpless object of her unfading love and
unceasing care, to her cottage in Yorkshire. There, in the language of
that divine and blind old man, the fame of whose poetry has not yet
reached this country, it is

    “Her delight to see him sitting in the house,”

and watch, like the father of the Jewish champion, the growth of that
“God-given strength,” that intellectual power, which, unlike Samson’s,
will never return.

“After an interval of two years, during which she had expended a large
part of the capital of her fortune in obtaining the first medical advice
for the patient, and “suffered many things of many physicians,” she gave
up all hope,--and, reflecting that the interest of her fortune thus
diminished would be but sufficient to procure the comforts of life for
herself and him whom she has resolved never to forsake, she sat down in
patient misery with her melancholy companion, and added one more to the
many proofs of woman’s heart, “unwearied in well-doing,” without the
intoxication of passion, the excitement of applause, or even the
gratitude of the unconscious object.

“Were this a life of calm privation, and pulseless apathy, her efforts
would scarce have merit, and her sufferings hardly demand compassion;
but it is one of pain incessant and immitigable. The first-born of her
heart lies dead within it; but that heart is still alive with all its
keenest sensibilities, its most vivid hopes, and its most exquisite
sense of grief. * * * * * * *

“She sits beside him all day--she watches that eye whose light was life,
and sees it fixed on her in glassy and unmeaning complacency--she dreams
of that smile which burst on her soul like the morning sun over a
landscape in spring, and sees that smile of vacancy which tries to
convey satisfaction, but cannot give it the language of expression.
Averting her head, she thinks of other days. A vision passes before
her.--Lovely and glorious things, the hues of whose colouring are not of
this world, and whose web is too fine to be woven in the loom of
life,--rise to her eye like the illusions of enchantment. A strain of
rich remembered music floats in her hearing--she dreams of the hero, the
lover, the beloved,--him in whom were united all that could dazzle the
eye, inebriate the imagination, and melt the heart. She sees him as he
first appeared to her,--and the mirage of the desert present not a
vision more delicious and deceptive--she bends to drink of that false
fountain, and the stream disappears--she starts from her reverie, and
hears the weak laugh of the sufferer, as he moves a little water in a
shell, and imagines he sees the ocean in a storm! * * * * * * * * *

“She has one consolation. When a short interval of recollection
returns,--when his speech becomes articulate,--he utters _her_ name, not
that of Margaret, and a beam of early hope dances on her heart as she
hears it, but fades away as fast as the rare and wandering ray of
intellect from the lost mind of the sufferer! * * * * * *

“Unceasingly attentive to his health and his comforts, she walked out
with him every evening, but led him through the most sequestered paths,
to avoid those whose mockful persecution, or whose vacant pity, might be
equally torturing to her feelings, or harassing to her still gentle and
smiling companion.

“It was at this period,” said the stranger to Aliaga, “I first became
acquainted with---- I mean--at this time a stranger, who had taken up
his abode near the hamlet where Elinor resided, was seen to watch the
two figures as they passed slowly on their retired walk. Evening after
evening he watched them. He knew the history of these two unhappy
beings, and prepared himself to take advantage of it. It was impossible,
considering their secluded mode of existence, to obtain an introduction.
He tried to recommend himself by his occasional attentions to the
invalid--he sometimes picked up the flowers that an unconscious hand
flung into the stream, and listened, with a gracious smile, to the
indistinct sounds in which the sufferer, who still retained all the
graciousness of his perished mind, attempted to thank him.

“Elinor felt grateful for these occasional attentions; but she was
somewhat alarmed at the assiduity with which the stranger attended their
melancholy walk every evening,--and, whether encouraged, neglected, or
even repelled, still found the means of insinuating himself into
companionship. Even the mournful dignity of Elinor’s demeanour,--her
deep dejection,--her bows or brief replies,--were unavailing against the
gentle but indefatigable importunity of the intruder.

“By degrees he ventured to speak to her of her misfortunes,--and that
topic is a sure key to the confidence of the unhappy. Elinor began to
listen to him;--and, though somewhat amazed at the knowledge he
displayed of every circumstance of her life, she could not but feel
soothed by the tone of sympathy in which he spoke, and excited by the
mysterious hints of hope which he sometimes suffered to escape him as if
involuntarily. It was observed soon by the inmates of the hamlet, whom
idleness and the want of any object of excitement had made curious, that
Elinor and the stranger were inseparable in their evening walks. * * * *
* * *

“It was about a fortnight after this observation was first made, that
Elinor, unattended, drenched with rain, and her head uncovered, loudly
and eagerly demanded admittance, at a late hour, at the house of a
neighbouring clergyman. She was admitted,--and the surprise of her
reverend host at this visit, equally unseasonable and unexpected, was
exchanged for a deeper feeling of wonder and terror as she related the
cause of it. He at first imagined (knowing her unhappy situation) that
the constant presence of an insane person might have a contagious effect
on the intellects of one so perseveringly exposed to that presence.

“As Elinor, however, proceeded to disclose the awful proposal, and the
scarcely less awful name of the unholy intruder, the clergyman betrayed
considerable emotion; and, after a long pause, desired permission to
accompany her on their next meeting. This was to be the following
evening, for the stranger was unremitting in his attendance on her
lonely walks.

“It is necessary to mention, that this clergyman had been for some years
abroad--that events had occurred to him in foreign countries, of which
strange reports were spread, but on the subject of which he had been
always profoundly silent--and that having but lately fixed his residence
in the neighbourhood, he was equally a stranger to Elinor, and to the
circumstances of her past life, and of her present situation. * * * * *
* * * *

“It was now autumn,--the evenings were growing short,--and the brief
twilight was rapidly succeeded by night. On the dubious verge of both,
the clergyman quitted his house, and went in the direction where Elinor
told him she was accustomed to meet the stranger.

“They were there before him; and in the shuddering and averted form of
Elinor, and the stern but calm importunity of her companion, he read the
terrible secret of their conference. Suddenly he advanced and stood
before the stranger. They immediately recognised each other. An
expression that was never before beheld there--an expression of
fear--wandered over the features of the stranger! He paused for a
moment, and then departed without uttering a word--nor was Elinor ever
again molested by his presence. * * * * *

“It was some days before the clergyman recovered from the shock of this
singular encounter sufficiently to see Elinor, and explain to her the
cause of his deep and painful agitation.

“He sent to announce to her when he was able to receive her, and
appointed the night for the time of meeting, for he knew that during the
day she never forsook the helpless object of her unalienated heart. The
night arrived--imagine them seated in the antique study of the
clergyman, whose shelves were filled with the ponderous volumes of
ancient learning--the embers of a peat fire shed a dim and fitful light
through the room, and the single candle that burned on a distant oaken
stand, seemed to shed its light on that alone--not a ray fell on the
figures of Elinor and her companion, as they sat in their massive chairs
of carved-like figures in the richly-wrought nitches of some Catholic
place of worship----”

“That is a most profane and abominable comparison,” said Aliaga,
starting from the doze in which he had frequently indulged during this
long narrative.

“But hear the result,” said the pertinacious narrator. “The clergyman
confessed to Elinor that he had been acquainted with an Irishman of the
name of Melmoth, whose various erudition, profound intellect, and
intense appetency for information, had interested him so deeply as to
lead to a perfect intimacy between them. At the breaking out of the
troubles in England, the clergyman had been compelled, with his father’s
family, to seek refuge in Holland. There again he met Melmoth, who
proposed to him a journey to Poland--the offer was accepted, and to
Poland they went. The clergyman here told many extraordinary tales of Dr
Dee, and of Albert Alasco, the Polish adventurer, who were their
companions both in England and Poland--and he added, that he felt his
companion Melmoth was irrevocably attached to the study of that art
which is held in just abomination by all “who name the name of Christ.”
The power of the intellectual vessel was too great for the narrow seas
where it was coasting--it longed to set out on a voyage of discovery--in
other words, Melmoth attached himself to those impostors, or worse, who
promised him the knowledge and the power of the future world--on
conditions that are unutterable.” A strange expression crossed his face
as he spoke. He recovered himself, and added, “From that hour our
intercourse ceased. I conceived of him as of one given up to diabolical
delusions--to the power of the enemy.

“I had not seen Melmoth for some years. I was preparing to quit Germany,
when, on the eve of my departure, I received a message from a person who
announced himself as my friend, and who, believing himself dying, wished
for the attendance of a Protestant minister. We were then in the
territories of a Catholic electoral bishop. I lost no time in attending
the sick person. As I entered his room, conducted by a servant, who
immediately closed the door and retired, I was astonished to see the
room filled with an astrological apparatus, books and implements of a
science I did not understand; in a corner there was a bed, near which
there was neither priest or physician, relative or friend--on it lay
extended the form of Melmoth. I approached, and attempted to address to
him some words of consolation. He waved his hand to me to be silent--and
I was so. The recollection of his former habits and pursuits, and the
view of his present situation, had an effect that appalled more than it
amazed me. “Come near,” said Melmoth, speaking very faintly--“nearer. I
am dying--how my life has been passed you know but too well. Mine was
the great angelic sin--pride and intellectual glorying! It was the first
mortal sin--a boundless aspiration after forbidden knowledge! I am now
dying. I ask for no forms of religion--I wish not to hear words that
have to me no meaning, or that I wish had none! Spare your look of
horror. I sent for you to exact your solemn promise that you will
conceal from every human being the fact of my death--let no man know
that I died, or when, or where.”

“He spoke with a distinctness of tone, and energy of manner, that
convinced me he could not be in the state he described himself to be,
and I said, “But I cannot believe you are dying--your intellects are
clear, your voice is strong, your language is coherent, and but for the
paleness of your face, and your lying extended on that bed, I could not
even imagine you were ill.” He answered, “Have you patience and courage
to abide by the proof that what I say is true?” I replied, that I
doubtless had patience, and for the courage, I looked to that Being for
whose name I had too much reverence to utter in his hearing. He
acknowledged my forbearance by a ghastly smile which I understood too
well, and pointed to a clock that stood at the foot of his bed.
“Observe,” said he, “the hour-hand is on eleven, and I am now sane,
clear of speech, and apparently healthful--tarry but an hour, and you
yourself will behold me dead!”

“I remained by his bed-side--the eyes of both were fixed intently on the
slow motion of the clock. From time to time he spoke, but his strength
now appeared obviously declining. He repeatedly urged on me the
necessity of profound secresy, its importance to myself, and yet he
hinted at the possibility of our future meeting. I asked why he thought
proper to confide to me a secret whose divulgement was so perilous, and
which might have been so easily concealed? Unknowing whether he existed,
or where, I must have been equally ignorant of the mode and place of his
death. To this he returned no answer. As the hand of the clock
approached the hour of twelve, his countenance changed--his eyes became
dim--his speech inarticulate--his jaw dropped--his respiration ceased. I
applied a glass to his lips--but there was not a breath to stain it. I
felt his wrist--but there was no pulse. I placed my hand on his
heart--there was not the slightest vibration. In a few minutes the body
was perfectly cold. I did not quit the room till nearly an hour
after--the body gave no signs of returning animation.

“Unhappy circumstances detained me long abroad. I was in various parts
of the Continent, and every where I was haunted with the report of
Melmoth being still alive. To these reports I gave no credit, and
returned to England in the full conviction of his being dead. _Yet it
was Melmoth who walked and spoke with you the last night of our
meeting._ My eyes never more faithfully attested the presence of living
being. It was Melmoth himself, such as I beheld him many years ago, when
my hairs were dark and my steps were firm. I am changed, but he is the
same--time seems to have forborne to touch him from terror. By what
means or power he is thus enabled to continue his posthumous and
preternatural existence, it is impossible to conceive, unless the
fearful report that every where followed his steps on the Continent, be
indeed true.”

“Elinor, impelled by terror and wild curiosity, inquired into that
report which dreadful experience had anticipated the meaning of. “Seek
no farther,” said the minister, “you know already more than should ever
have reached the human ear, or entered into the conception of the human
mind. Enough that you have been enabled by Divine Power to repel the
assaults of the evil one--the trial was terrible, but the result will be
glorious. Should the foe persevere in his attempts, remember that he has
been already repelled amid the horrors of the dungeon and of the
scaffold, the screams of Bedlam and the flames of the Inquisition--he is
yet to be subdued by a foe that he deemed of all others the least
invincible--the withered energies of a broken heart. He has traversed
the earth in search of victims, “Seeking whom he might devour,”--and has
found no prey, even where he might seek for it with all the cupidity of
infernal expectation. Let it be your glory and crown of rejoicing, that
even the feeblest of his adversaries has repulsed him with a power that
will always annihilate his.” * * * * * * * *

“Who is that faded form that supports with difficulty an emaciated
invalid, and seems at every step to need the support she gives?--It is
still Elinor tending John. Their path is the same, but the season is
changed--and that change seems to her to have passed alike on the mental
and physical world. It is a dreary evening in Autumn--the stream flows
dark and turbid beside their path--the blast is groaning among the
trees, and the dry discoloured leaves are sounding under their
feet--their walk is uncheered by human converse, for one of them no
longer thinks, and seldom speaks!

“Suddenly he gives a sign that he wishes to be seated--it is complied
with, and she sits beside him on the felled trunk of a tree. He declines
his head on her bosom, and she feels with delighted amazement, a few
tears streaming on it for the first time for years--a soft but conscious
pressure of her hand, seems to her like the signal of reviving
intelligence--with breathless hope she watches him as he slowly raises
his head, and fixes his eyes--God of all consolation, there is
intelligence in his glance! He thanks her with an unutterable look for
all her care, her long and painful labour of love! His lips are open,
but long unaccustomed to utter human sounds, the effort is made with
difficulty--again that effort is repeated and fails--his strength is
exhausted--his eyes close--his last gentle sigh is breathed on the bosom
of faith and love--and Elinor soon after said to those who surrounded
her bed, that she died happy, since he knew her once more! She gave one
parting awful sign to the minister, which was understood and answered!




CHAPTER XXXIII.

    Cum mihi non tantum furesque feræque suëtæ,
    Hunc vexare locum, curæ sunt atque labori;
    Quantum carminibus quæ versant atque venenis,
    Humanos animos.

    HORACE.


“It is inconceivable to me,” said Don Aliaga to himself, as he pursued
his journey the next day--“it is inconceivable to me how this person
forces himself on my company, harasses me with tales that have no more
application to me than the legend of the Cid, and may be as apocryphal
as the ballad of Roncesvalles--and now he has ridden by my side all day,
and, as if to make amends for his former uninvited and unwelcome
communicativeness, he has never once opened his lips.”

“Senhor,” said the stranger, then speaking for the first time, as if he
read Aliaga’s thoughts--“I acknowledge myself in error for relating to
you a narrative in which you must have felt there was little to interest
you. Permit me to atone for it, by recounting to you a very brief one,
in which I flatter myself you will be disposed to feel a very peculiar
interest.”--“You assure me it will be brief,” said Aliaga. “Not only so,
but the last I shall obtrude on your patience,” replied the stranger.
“On that condition,” said Aliaga, “in God’s name, brother, proceed. And
look you handle the matter discreetly, as you have said.”

“There was,” said the stranger, “a certain Spanish merchant, who set out
prosperously in business; but, after a few years, finding his affairs
assume an unfavourable aspect, and being tempted by an offer of
partnership with a relative who was settled in the East Indies, had
embarked for those countries with his wife and son, leaving behind him
an infant daughter in Spain.”--“That was exactly my case,” said Aliaga,
wholly unsuspicious of the tendency of this tale.

“Two years of successful occupation restored him to opulence, and to the
hope of vast and future accumulation. Thus encouraged, our Spanish
merchant entertained ideas of settling in the East Indies, and sent over
for his young daughter with her nurse, who embarked for the East Indies
with the first opportunity, which was then very rare.”--“This reminds me
exactly of what occurred to myself,” said Aliaga, whose faculties were
somewhat obtuse.

“The nurse and infant were supposed to have perished in a storm which
wrecked the vessel on an isle near the mouth of a river, and in which
the crew and passengers perished. It was said that the nurse and child
alone escaped; that by some extraordinary chance they arrived at this
isle, where the nurse died from fatigue and want of nourishment, and the
child survived, and grew up a wild and beautiful daughter of nature,
feeding on fruits,--and sleeping amid roses,--and drinking the pure
element,--and inhaling the harmonies of heaven,--and repeating to
herself the few Christian words her nurse had taught her, in answer to
the melody of the birds that sung to her, and of the stream whose waves
murmured in accordance to the pure and holy music of her unearthly
heart.”--“I never heard a word of this before,” muttered Aliaga to
himself. The stranger went on.

“It was said that some vessel in distress arrived at the isle,--that the
captain had rescued this lovely lonely being from the brutality of the
sailors,--and, discovering from some remains of the Spanish tongue which
she still spoke, and which he supposed must have been cultivated during
the visits of some other wanderer to the isle, he undertook, like a man
of honour, to conduct her to her parents, whose names she could tell,
though not their residence, so acute and tenacious is the memory of
infancy. He fulfilled his promise, and the pure and innocent being was
restored to her family, who were then residing in the city of Benares.”
Aliaga, at these words, stared with a look of intelligence somewhat
ghastly. He could not interrupt the stranger--he drew in his breath, and
closed his teeth.

“I have since heard,” said the stranger, “that the family has returned
to Spain,--that the beautiful inhabitant of the foreign isle is become
the idol of your cavaliers of Madrid,--your loungers of the Prado,--your
_sacravienses_,--your--by what other name of contempt shall I call them?
But listen to me,--there is an eye fixed on her, and its fascination is
more deadly than that fabled of the snake!--There is an arm extended to
seize her, in whose grasp humanity withers!--That arm even now relaxes
for a moment,--its fibres thrill with pity and horror,--it releases the
victim for a moment,--it even beckons her father to her aid!--Don
Francisco, do you understand me now?--Has this tale interest or
application for you?”

“He paused, but Aliaga, chilled with horror, was unable to answer him
but by a feeble exclamation. “If it has,” resumed the stranger, “lose
not a moment to save your daughter!” and, clapping spurs to his mule, he
disappeared through a narrow passage among the rocks, apparently never
intended to be trod by earthly traveller. Aliaga was not a man
susceptible of strong impressions from nature; but, if he had been, the
scene amid which this mysterious warning was uttered would have
powerfully ministered to its effect. The time was evening,--a grey and
misty twilight hung over every object;--the way lay through a rocky
road, that wound among mountains, or rather stony hills, bleak and bare
as those which the weary traveller through the (11)western isle sees
rising amid the moors, to which they form a contrast without giving a
relief. Heavy rains had made deep gullies amid the hills, and here and
there a mountain-stream brawled amid its stony channel, like a proud and
noisy upstart, while the vast chasms that had been the beds of torrents
which once swept through them in thunder, now stood gaping and ghastly
like the deserted abodes of ruined nobility. Not a sound broke on the
stillness, except the monotonous echo of the hoofs of the mules answered
from the hollows of the hill, and the screams of the birds, which, after
a few short circles in the damp and cloudy air, fled back to their
retreats amid the cliffs. * * * * * * * * *

  (11) Ireland,--forsan.

“It is almost incredible, that after this warning, enforced as it was by
the perfect acquaintance which the stranger displayed of Aliaga’s former
life and family-circumstances, it should not have had the effect of
making him hurry homewards immediately, particularly as it seems he
thought it of sufficient importance to make it the subject of
correspondence with his wife. So it was however.

“At the moment of the stranger’s departure, it was his resolution not to
lose a moment in hastening homewards; but at the next stage he arrived
at, there were letters of business awaiting him. A mercantile
correspondent gave him the information of the probable failure of a
house in a distant part of Spain, where his speedy presence might be of
vital consequence. There were also letters from Montilla, his intended
son-in-law, informing him that the state of his father’s health was so
precarious, it was impossible to leave him till his fate was decided. As
the decisions of fate involved equally the wealth of the son, and the
life of the father, Aliaga could not help thinking there was as much
prudence as affection in this resolution.

“After reading these letters, Aliaga’s mind began to flow in its usual
channel. There is no breaking through the inveterate habitudes of a
thorough-paced mercantile mind, “though one rose from the dead.”
Besides, by this time the mysterious image of the stranger’s presence
and communications were fading fast from a mind not at all habituated to
visionary impressions. He shook off the terrors of this visitation by
the aid of time, and gave his courage the credit due to that aid. Thus
we all deal with the illusions of the imagination,--with this difference
only, that the impassioned recal them with the tear of regret, and the
unimaginative with the blush of shame. Aliaga set out for the distant
part of Spain where his presence was to save this tottering house in
which he had an extensive concern, and wrote to Donna Clara, that it
might be some months before he returned to the neighbourhood of Madrid.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

    Husband, husband, I’ve the ring
      Thou gavest to-day to me;
    And thou to me art ever wed,
      As I am wed to thee!

    LITTLE’S POEMS.


“The remainder of that dreadful night when Isidora disappeared, had been
passed almost in despair by Donna Clara, who, amid all her rigour and
chilling mediocrity, had still the feelings of a mother--and by Fra
Jose, who, with all his selfish luxury and love of domination, had a
heart where distress never knocked for admittance, that she did not find
pity ready to open the door.

“The distress of Donna Clara was aggravated by her fear of her husband,
of whom she stood in great awe, and who, she dreaded, might reproach her
with unpardonable negligence of her maternal authority.

“In this night of distress, she was often tempted to call on her son for
advice and assistance; but the recollection of his violent passions
deterred her, and she sat in passive despair till day. Then, with an
unaccountable impulse, she rose from her seat, and hurried to her
daughter’s apartment, as if she imagined that the events of the
preceding night were only a fearful and false illusion that would be
dispersed by the approach of day.

“It seemed, indeed, as if they were, for on the bed lay Isidora in a
profound sleep, with the same pure and placid smile as when she was
lulled into slumber by the melodies of nature, and the sound was
prolonged in her dream by the whispered songs of the spirits of the
Indian Ocean. Donna Clara uttered a shriek of surprise, that had the
singular effect of rousing Fra Jose from a deep sleep into which he had
fallen at the approach of day. Starting at the sound, the good-natured,
pampered priest, tottered into the room, and saw, with incredulity that
slowly yielded to frequent application to his obstinate and adhesive
eye-lids, the form of Isidora extended in profound slumber.

“Oh what an exquisite enjoyment!” said the yawning priest, as he looked
on the sleeping beauty without another emotion than that of the delight
of an uninterrupted repose.--“Pray, don’t disturb her,” he said, yawning
himself out of the room--“after such a night as we all have had, sleep
must be a very refreshing and laudable exercise; and so I commend you to
the protection of the holy saints!”--“Oh reverend Father!--Oh holy
Father!” cried Donna Clara clinging to him, “desert me not in this
extremity--this has been the work of magic--of infernal spirits. See how
profoundly she sleeps, though we are speaking, and it is now
day-light.”--“Daughter, you are much mistaken,” answered the drowsy
priest; “people can sleep soundly even in the day-time; and for proof
send me, as I am now retiring to rest, a bottle of Foncarral or
Valdepenas--not that I value the richest vintage of Spain from the
Chacoli of Biscay to the Mataro of Catalonia,(12) but I would never have
it said that I slept in the day-time, but for sufficient
reason.”----“Holy Father!” answered Donna Clara, “do you not think my
daughter’s disappearance and intense slumber are the result of
preternatural causes?”--“Daughter,” answered the priest, contracting his
brows, “let me have some wine to slake the intolerable thirst caused by
my anxiety for the welfare of your family, and let me meditate some
hours afterwards on the measures best to be adopted, and then--when I
awake, I will give you my opinion.”----“Holy Father, you shall judge for
me in every thing.”--“It were not amiss, daughter,” said the priest
retiring, “if a few slices of ham, or some poignant sausages,
accompanied the wine--it might, as it were, abate the deleterious
effects of that abominable liquor, which I never drink but on
emergencies like these.”--“Holy Father, they shall be ordered,” said the
anxious mother--“but do you not think my daughter’s sleep is
supernatural?”--“Follow me to mine apartment, daughter,” answered the
priest, exchanging his cowl for a night-cap, which one of the numerous
household obsequiously presented him, “and you will soon see that sleep
is a natural effect of a natural cause. Your daughter has doubtless
passed a very fatiguing night, and so have you, and so have I, though
perhaps from very different causes; but all those causes dispose us to a
profound repose.--I have no doubt of mine--fetch up the wine and
sausages--I am very weary--Oh I am weak and worn with fasts and
watching, and the labours of exhortation. My tongue cleaves to the roof
of my mouth, and my jaws cling together,--perhaps a draught or two might
dissolve their parching adhesion. But I do so hate wine----why the devil
don’t you fetch up the bottle?”

  (12) Vide Dillon’s travels through Spain.

“The attendant domestic, terrified by the tone of wrath in which the
last words were uttered, hurried on with submissive expedition, and Fra
Jose sat down at length in his apartment to ruminate on the calamities
and perplexities of the family, till he was actually overcome by the
subject, and exclaimed in a tone of despair, “Both bottles empty! Then
it is useless to meditate further on this subject.” * * * * *

“He was roused at an earlier hour than he wished, by a message from
Donna Clara, who, in the distress of a weak mind, accustomed always to
factitious and external support, now felt as if every step she took
without it, must lead to actual and instant perdition. Her fear of her
husband, next to her superstitious fears, held the strongest power over
her mind, and that morning she called Fra Jose to an early consultation
of terror and inquietude.--Her great object was to conceal, if possible,
the absence of her daughter on that eventful night; and finding that
none of the domestics appeared conscious of it, and that amid the
numerous household, only _one aged servant was absent_, of whose absence
no one took notice amid the superfluous multitude of a Spanish
establishment, her courage began to revive. It was raised still higher
by a letter from Aliaga, announcing the necessity of his visiting a
distant part of Spain, and of the marriage of his daughter with Montilla
being deferred for some months----this sounded like reprieve in the ears
of Donna Clara--she consulted with the priest, who answered in words of
comfort, that if Donna Isidora’s short absence were known, it was but a
slight evil, and if it were not known, it was none at all,--and he
recommended to her, to ensure the secresy of the servants by means that
he swore by his habit were infallible, as he had known them operate
effectively among the servants of a far more powerful and extensive
establishment.--“Reverend Father,” said Donna Clara, “I know of no
establishment among the grandees of Spain more splendid than
ours.”--“But I do, daughter,” said the priest, “and the head of that
establishment is--the Pope;--but go now, and awake your daughter, who
deserves to sleep till dooms-day, as she seems totally to have forgotten
the hour of breakfast. It is not for myself I speak, daughter, but I
cannot bear to see the regularity of a magnificent household thus
interrupted; for myself, a basin of chocolate, and a cluster of grapes,
will be sufficient; and to allay the crudity of the grapes, a glass of
Malaga.--Your glasses, by the bye, are the shallowest I ever drank out
of--could you not find some means to get from Ildefonso(13) glasses of
the right make, with short shanks and ample bodies? Yours resemble those
of Quichotte, all limbs and no trunk. I like one that resembles his
squire, a spacious body and a shank that may be measured by my little
finger.”--“I will send to St Ildefonso this day,” answered Donna
Clara.--“Go and awake your daughter first,” said the priest.

  (13) The celebrated manufactory for glass in Spain.

“As he spoke, Isidora entered the room--the mother and the priest both
stood amazed. Her countenance was as serene, her step as equal, and her
mein as composed, as if she were totally unconscious of the terror and
distress her disappearance the preceding night had caused. To the first
short silence of amazement, succeeded a storm of interrogations from
Donna Clara and Fra Jose in concert--why--where--wherefore--and what,
and with whom and how--that was all they could articulate. They might as
well have spared themselves the trouble, for neither that day nor many
following, could the remonstrances, intreaties, or menaces of her
mother, aided by the spiritual authority and more powerful anxiety of
the priest, extort from her a word of explanation on the cause of her
absence that awful night. When closely and sternly pressed, Isidora’s
mind seemed to assume something of the wild but potent spirit of
independence, which her early habits and feelings might have
communicated to her. She had been her own teacher and mistress for
seventeen years, and though naturally gentle and tractable, when
imperious mediocrity attempted to tyrannize over her, she felt a sense
of disdain which she expressed only by profound silence.

“Fra Jose, incensed at her obstinacy, and trembling for the loss of his
power over the family, threatened to exclude her from confession, unless
she disclosed to him the secret of that night--“Then I will confess to
God!” said Isidora. Her mother’s importunity she found it more difficult
to resist, for her feminine heart loved all that was feminine even in
its most unattractive shape, and the persecution from that quarter was
alike monotonous and unremitting.

“There was a weak but harassing tenacity about Donna Clara, that is the
general adjunct to the female character when it combines intellectual
mediocrity with rigid principle. When she laid siege to a secret, the
garrison might as well capitulate at once.--What she wanted in vigour
and ability, she supplied by a minute and gnawing assiduity. She never
ventured to carry the fort by storm, but her obstinacy blockaded it till
it was forced to surrender. But here even _her_ importunity
failed.--Isidora remained respectfully, but resolutely silent; finding
matters thus desperate, Donna Clara, who had a fine talent for keeping
as well as discovering a secret, agreed with Fra Jose not to utter a
syllable of the business to her father and brother.--“We will show,”
said Donna Clara, with a sagacious and self-approving nod, “that we can
keep a secret as well as she.”--“Right, daughter,” said Fra Jose,
“imitate her in the only point in which you can flatter yourself with
the hope of resemblance. * * * * * * * *

“The secret was, however, soon disclosed. Some months had elapsed, and
the visits of her husband began to give an habitual calm and confidence
to the mind of Isidora. He imperceptibly was exchanging his ferocious
misanthropy for a kind of pensive gloom.--It was like the dark, cold,
but unterrific and comparatively soothing night, that succeeds to a day
of storm and earthquake. The sufferers remember the terrors of the day,
and the still darkness of the night feels to them like a shelter.
Isidora gazed on her espoused with delight, when she saw no longer his
withering frown, or more withering smile; and she felt the hope that the
calm purity of female hearts always suggests, that its influence will
one day float over the formless and the void, like the spirit that moved
upon the face of the waters; and that the unbelieving husband may yet be
saved by the believing wife.

“These thoughts were her comfort, and it was well she had thoughts to
comfort her, for facts are miserable allies when imagination fights its
battle with despair. On one of those nights that she expected Melmoth,
he found her employed in her usual hymn to the Virgin, which she
accompanied on her lute. “Is it not rather late to sing your vesper hymn
to the Virgin after midnight?” said Melmoth with a ghastly smile. “Her
ear is open at all times, I have been told,” answered Isidora.--“If it
is, then, love,” said Melmoth, vaulting as usual through the casement,
“add a stanza to your hymn in favour of me.”--“Alas!” said Isidora,
dropping her lute, “you do not believe, love, in what the Holy Church
requires.”--“Yes, I do believe, when I listen to you.”--“And only
then?”--“Sing again your hymn to the Virgin.”

“Isidora complied, and watched the effect on the listener. He seemed
affected--he motioned to her to repeat it. “My love,” said Isidora,
“is not this more like the repetition of a theatrical song called
for by an audience, than a hymn which he who listens to loves his
wife better for, because she loves her God.”--“It is a shrewd
question,” said Melmoth, “but why am I in your imagination excluded
from the love of God?”--“Do you ever visit the church,” answered the
anxious Isidora. A profound silence.--“Do you ever receive the Holy
Sacrament?”--Melmoth did not utter a word.--“Have you ever, at my
earnest solicitation, enabled me to announce to my anxious family the
tie that united us?”--No answer.--“And now--that--perhaps--I dare not
utter what I feel! Oh! how shall I appear before eyes that watch me
even now so closely?--what shall I say?--a wife without a husband--a
mother without a father for her child, or one whom a fearful oath has
bound her never to declare! Oh! Melmoth, pity me,--deliver me from this
life of constraint, falsehood, and dissimulation. Claim me as your
wedded wife in the face of my family, and in the face of ruin your
wedded wife will follow--will cling to--will perish with you!” Her
arms clung round him, her cold but heart-wrung tears fell fast on his
cheek, and the imploring arms of woman supplicating for deliverance
in her hour of shame and terror, seldom are twined round us in vain.
Melmoth felt the appeal--it was but for a moment. He caught the white
arms extended towards him--he fixed an eager and fearful look of
inquiry on his victim-consort, as he asked--“And is it so?” The pale
and shuddering wife shrunk from his arms at the question--her silence
answered him. The agonies of nature throbbed audibly in his heart. He
said to himself--it is mine--the fruit of affection--the first-born
of the heart and of nature--mine--mine,--and whatever becomes of me,
there shall yet be a human being on earth who traces me in its external
form, and who will be taught to pray for its father, even when its
prayer falls parched and hissing on the fires that burn for ever, like
a wandering drop of dew on the burning sands of the desert! * * * * * *
* * *

“From the period of this communication, Melmoth’s tenderness for his
wife visibly increased.

“Heaven only knows the source of that wild fondness with which he
contemplated her, and in which was still mingled something of ferocity.
His warm look seemed like the glow of a sultry summer day, whose heat
announces a storm, and compels us by its burning oppression, to look to
the storm almost for relief.

“It is not impossible that he looked to some future object of his
fearful experiment--and a being so perfectly in his power as his own
child, might have appeared to him fatally fitted for his purpose--the
quantum of misery, too, necessary to qualify the probationer, it was
always in his own power to inflict. Whatever was his motive, he assumed
as much tenderness as it was possible for him to assume, and spoke of
the approaching event with the anxious interest of a human father.

“Soothed by his altered manner, Isidora bore with silent sufferance the
burden of her situation, with all its painful accompaniments of
indisposition and dejection, aggravated by hourly fear and mysterious
secresy. She hoped he would at length reward her by an open and
honourable declaration, but this hope was expressed only in her patient
smiles. The hour approached fast, and fearful and indefinite
apprehensions began to overshadow her mind, relative to the fate of the
infant about to be born under circumstances so mysterious.

“At his next nightly visit, Melmoth found her in tears.

“Alas!” said she in answer to his abrupt inquiry, and brief attempt at
consolation, “How many causes have I for tears--and how few have I shed?
If you would have them wiped away, be assured it is only your hand can
do it. I feel,” she added, “that this event will be fatal to me--I know
I shall not live to see my child--I demand from you the only promise
that can support me even under this conviction”--Melmoth interrupted her
by the assurance, that these apprehensions were the inseparable
concomitants of her situation, and that many mothers, surrounded by a
numerous offspring, smiled as they recollected their fears that the
birth of each would be fatal to them.

“Isidora shook her head. “The presages,” said she, “that visit me, are
such as never visited mortality in vain. I have always believed, that as
we approach the invisible world, its voice becomes more audible to us,
and grief and pain are very eloquent interpreters between us and
eternity--quite distinct from all corporeal suffering, even from all
mental terror, is that deep and unutterable impression which is alike
incommunicable and ineffaceable--it is as if heaven spoke to us alone,
and told us to keep its secret, or divulge it on the condition of never
being believed. Oh! Melmoth, do not give that fearful smile when I speak
of heaven--soon I may be your only intercessor there.” “My dear saint,”
said Melmoth, laughing and kneeling to her in mockery, “let me make
early interest for your mediation--how many ducats will it cost me to
get you canonized?--you will furnish me, I hope, with an authentic
account of legitimate miracles--one is ashamed of the nonsense that is
sent monthly to the Vatican.” “_Let your conversion be the first miracle
on the list_,” said Isidora, with an energy that made Melmoth
tremble--it was dark--but she felt that he trembled--she pursued her
imagined triumph--“Melmoth,” she exclaimed, “I have a right to demand
one promise from you--for you I have sacrificed every thing--never was
woman more devoted--never did woman give proofs of devotion like mine. I
might have been the noble, honoured wife of one who would have laid his
wealth and titles at my feet. In this my hour of danger and suffering,
the first families in Spain would have been waiting round my door.
Alone, unaided, unsustained, unconsoled, I must undergo the terrible
struggle of nature--terrible to those whose beds are smoothed by the
hands of affection, whose agonies are soothed by the presence of a
mother--who hears the first feeble cry of her infant echoed by the joy
of exulting noble relatives. Oh Melmoth! what must be mine! I must
suffer in secresy and in silence! I must see my babe torn from me before
I have even kissed it,--and the chrism-mantle will be one of that
mysterious darkness which your fingers have woven! Yet grant me one
thing--one thing!” continued the suppliant, growing earnest in her
prayer even to agony; “swear to me that my child shall be baptised
according to the forms of the Catholic church,--that it shall be a
Christian as far as those forms can make it,--and I shall feel that, if
all my fearful presages are fulfilled, I shall leave behind me one who
will pray for his father, and whose prayer may be accepted. Promise
me,--swear to me,” she added, in intenser agony, “that my child shall be
a Christian! Alas! if my voice be not worthy to be heard in heaven, that
of a cherub may! Christ himself suffered children to come unto him while
on earth, and will he repel them in heaven?--Oh! no,--no! he will not
repel _yours_!”

“Melmoth listened to her with feelings that it is better to suppress
than explain or expatiate on. Thus solemnly adjured, however, he
promised that the child should be baptised; and added, with an
expression which Isidora’s delight at this concession did not give her
time to understand, that it should be a Christian as far as the rites
and ceremonies of the Catholic church could make it one. While he added
many a bitter hint of the inefficacy of any external rites--and the
impotentiality of any hierarchy--and of the deadly and desperate
impositions of priests under every dispensation--and exposed them with a
spirit at once ludicrous and Satanic,--a spirit that mingled ridicule
with horror, and seemed like a Harlequin in the infernal regions,
flirting with the furies, Isidora still repeated her solemn request that
her child, if it survived her, should be baptised. To this he assented;
and added, with a sarcastic and appalling levity,--“And a Mahometan, if
you should change your mind,--or any other mythology you please to
adopt;--only send me word,--priests are easily obtained, and ceremonies
cheaply purchased! Only let me know your future intentions,--when you
know them yourself.”--“I shall not be here to tell you,” said Isidora,
replying with profound conviction to this withering levity, like a cold
winter day to the glow of a capricious summer one, that blends the
sunshine and the lightning;--“Melmoth, I shall not be here then!” And
this energy of despair in a creature so young, so inexperienced, except
in the vicissitudes of the heart, formed a strong contrast to the stony
apathy of one who had traversed life from Dan to Beersheba, and found
all barren, or--made it so.

“At this moment, while Isidora wept the cold tears of despair, without
daring to ask the hand of him she loved to dry them, the bells of a
neighbouring convent, where they were performing a mass for the soul of
a departed brother, suddenly rung out. Isidora seized that moment, when
the very air was eloquent with the voice of religion, to impress its
power on that mysterious being whose presence inspired her equally with
terror and with love. “Listen,--listen!” she cried. The sounds came
slowly and stilly on, as if it was an involuntary expression of that
profound sentiment that night always inspires,--the reverberating
watch-word from sentinel to sentinel, when wakeful and reflecting minds
have become the “watchers of the night(14).” The effect of these sounds
was increased, by their catching from time to time the deep and
thrilling chorus of the voices,--these voices more than harmonized, they
were coincident with the toll of the bell, and seemed like them set in
involuntary motion,--music played by invisible hands.

  (14) He called unto me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the
  night?--Watchman, what of the night?----ISAIAH.

“Listen,” repeated Isidora, “is there no truth in the voice that speaks
to you in tones like these? Alas! if there be no truth in religion,
there is none on earth! Passion itself evanishes into an illusion,
unless it is hallowed by the consciousness of a God and of futurity.
That sterility of the heart that forbids the growth of divine feeling,
must be hostile also to every tender and generous sentiment. _He who is
without a God must be without a heart!_ Oh, my love, will you not, as
you bend over my grave, wish my last slumbers to have been soothed by
sounds like these,--wish that they may whisper peace to your own?
Promise me, at least, that you will lead your child to my
tomb-stone,--that you will suffer it to read the inscription that tells
I died in the faith of Christ, and the hope of immortality. Its tears
will be powerful pleaders to you not to deny it the consolation that
faith has given me in hours of suffering, and the hopes with which it
will illuminate my parting hour. Oh promise me this at least, that you
will suffer your child to visit my grave--that is all. Do not interrupt
or distract the impression by sophistry or levity, or by that wild and
withering eloquence that flashes from your lips, not to enlighten but to
blast. You will not weep, but you will be silent,--leave Heaven and
nature free to their work. The voice of God will speak to its heart, and
my spirit, as it witnesses the conflict, will tremble though in
paradise,--and, even in heaven, will feel an added joy, when it beholds
the victory won. Promise me, then,--swear to me!” she added, with
agonizing energy of tone and gesture. “Your child shall be a Christian!”
said Melmoth.




CHAPTER XXXV.

    --------------Oh, spare me, Grimbald!
    I will tempt hermits for thee in their cells,
    And virgins in their dreams.

    DRYDEN’S KING ARTHUR.


It is a singular, but well-attested fact, that women who are compelled
to undergo all the inconveniences and uneasiness of clandestine
pregnancy, often fare better than those whose situation is watched over
by tender and anxious relatives; and that concealed or illegitimate
births are actually attended with less danger and suffering than those
which have all the aid that skill and affection can give. So it appeared
likely to fare with Isidora. The retirement in which her family
lived--the temper of Donna Clara, as slow to suspect from want of
penetration, as she was eager in pursuing an object once discovered,
from the natural cupidity of a vacant mind--these circumstances,
combined with the dress of the day, the enormous and enveloping
fardingale, gave safety to her secret, at least till the arrival of its
crisis. As this crisis approached, one may easily imagine the secret and
trembling preparation--the important nurse, proud of the trust reposed
in her--the confidential maid--the faithful and discreet medical
attendant--to obtain all these Melmoth supplied her amply with money--a
circumstance that would have surprised Isidora, as his appearance was
always remarkably plain and private, if, at this moment of anxiety, any
thought but that of _the hour_ could have found room in her mind. * * *
* * * *

“On the evening supposed to be that preceding the dreaded event, Melmoth
had thrown an unusual degree of tenderness into his manner--he gazed on
her frequently with anxious and silent fondness--he seemed to have
something to communicate which he had not courage to disclose. Isidora,
well versed in the language of the countenance, which is often, more
than that of words, the language of the heart, intreated him to tell her
what he _looked_. “Your father is returning,” said Melmoth reluctantly.
“He will certainly be here in a few days, perhaps in a few hours.”
Isidora heard him in silent horror. “My father!” she cried--“I have
never seen my father.--Oh, how shall I meet him now! And is my mother
ignorant of this?--would she not have apprized me?”--“She is ignorant at
present; but she will not long be so.”--“And from whence could _you_
have obtained intelligence that she is ignorant of?” Melmoth paused some
time,--his features assumed a more contracted and gloomy character than
they had done laterally--he answered with slow and stern
reluctance--“Never again ask me that question--the intelligence that I
can give you must be of more importance to you than the means by which I
obtain it--enough for you that it is true.”--“Pardon me, love,” said
Isidora; “it is probable that I may never again offend you--will you
not, then, forgive my _last_ offence?”

“Melmoth seemed too intently occupied with his own thoughts to answer
even her tears. He added, after a short and sullen pause, “Your
betrothed bridegroom is coming with your father--Montilla’s father is
dead--the arrangements are all concluded for your nuptials--your
bridegroom is coming to wed the wife of another--with him comes your
fiery, foolish brother, who has set out to meet his father and his
future relative. There will be a feast prepared in the house on the
occasion of your future nuptials--you may hear of a strange guest
appearing at your festival--I will be there!”

“Isidora stood stupified with horror. “Festival!” she repeated--“a
bridal festival!--and I already wedded to you, and about to become a
mother!”

* * * * *

“At this moment the trampling of many horsemen was heard as they
approached the villa--the tumult of the domestics hurrying to admit and
receive them, resounded through the apartments--and Melmoth, with a
gesture that seemed to Isidora rather like a menace than a farewell,
instantly disappeared; and within an hour, Isidora knelt to the father
she had never till then beheld--suffered herself to be saluted by
Montilla--and accepted the embrace of her brother, who, in the petulance
of his spirit, half rejected the chill and altered form that advanced to
greet him.

* * * * *

“Every thing at the family meeting was conducted in true Spanish
formality. Aliaga kissed the cold hand of his withered wife--the
numerous domestics exhibited a grave joy at the return of their
master--Fra Jose assumed increased importance, and called for dinner in
a louder tone. Montilla, the lover, a cold and quiet character, took
things as they occurred.

“Every thing lay hushed under a brief and treacherous calm. Isidora, who
trembled at the approaching danger, felt her terrors on a sudden
suspended. It was not so very near as she apprehended--and she bore with
tolerable patience the daily mention of her approaching nuptials, while
she was momently harassed by her confidential servants with hints of the
impossibility of the event of which they were in expectation, being much
longer delayed. Isidora heard, felt, endured all with courage--the grave
congratulation of her father and mother--the self-complacent attentions
of Montilla, sure of the bride and of her dower--the sullen compliance
of the brother, who, unable to refuse his consent, was for ever hinting
that _his_ sister might have formed a higher connection. All these
passed over her mind like a dream--the reality of her existence seemed
internal, and she said to herself,--“Were I at the altar, were my hand
locked in that of Montilla, Melmoth would rend me from him.” A wild but
deeply-fixed conviction--a wandering image of preternatural power,
overshadowed her mind while she thought of Melmoth;--and this image,
which had caused her so much terror and inquietude in her early hours of
love, now formed her only resource against the hour of inconceivable
suffering; as those unfortunate females in the Eastern Tales, whose
beauty has attracted the fearful passion of some evil genie, are
supposed to depend, at their nuptial hour, on the presence of the
seducing spirit, to tear from the arms of the agonised parent, and the
distracted bridegroom, the victim whom he has reserved for himself, and
whose wild devotion to him gives a dignity to the union so unhallowed
and unnatural(15). * * * * * *

  (15) Vide the beautiful tale of Auheta the Princess of Egypt, and
  Maugraby the Sorcerer, in the Arabian Tales.

“Aliaga’s heart expanded amid the approaching completion of the
felicitous plans he had formed, and with his heart, his purse, which was
its depositary, opened also, and he resolved to give a splendid fete in
honour of his daughter’s nuptials. Isidora remembered Melmoth’s
prediction of a fatal festival; and his words, “I will be there,” gave
her for a time a kind of trembling confidence. But as the preparations
were carried on under her very eye,--as she was hourly consulted about
the disposal of the ornaments, and the decorations of the
apartments,--her resolution failed, and while she uttered a few
incoherent words, her eye was glazed with horror.

“The entertainment was to be a masked ball; and Isidora, who imagined
that this might suggest to Melmoth some auspicious expedient for her
escape, watched in vain for some hint of hope,--some allusion to the
probability of this event facilitating her extrication from those snares
of death that seemed compassing her about. He never uttered a word, and
her dependence on him was at one moment confirmed, at another shaken to
its foundation, by this terrible silence. In one of these latter
moments, the anguish of which was increased beyond expression by a
conviction that her hour of danger was not far distant, she exclaimed to
Melmoth--“Take me--take me from this place! My existence is nothing--it
is a vapour that soon must be exhaled--but my reason is threatened every
moment! I cannot sustain the horrors to which I am exposed! All this day
I have been dragged through rooms decorated for my impossible
nuptials!--Oh, Melmoth, if you no longer love me, at least commiserate
me! Save me from a situation of horror unspeakable!--have mercy on your
child, if not on me! I have hung on your looks,--I have watched for a
word of hope--you have not uttered a sound--you have not cast a glance
of hope on me! I am wild!--I am reckless of all but the imminent and
_present_ horrors of to-morrow--you have talked of your power to
approach, to enter these walls without suspicion or discovery--you
boasted of that cloud of mystery in which you could envelope yourself.
Oh! in this last moment of my extremity, wrap me in its tremendous
folds, and let me escape in them, though they prove my shroud!--Think of
the terrible night of our marriage! I followed you then in fear and
confidence--your touch dissolved every earthly barrier--your steps trod
an unknown path, yet I followed you!--Oh! If you really possess that
mysterious and inscrutable power, which I dare not either question or
believe, exert it for me in this terrible emergency--aid my escape--and
though I feel I shall never live to thank you, the _silent suppliant_
will remind you by its smiles of the tears that I now shed; and if they
are shed in vain, its smile will have a bitter eloquence as it plays
with the flowers on its mother’s grave!”

“Melmoth, as she spoke, was profoundly silent, and deeply attentive. He
said at last, “Do you then resign yourself to me?”--“Alas! have I
not?”--“A question is not an answer. Will you, renouncing all other
engagements, all other hopes, depend on me solely for your extrication
from this fearful emergency?”--“I will--I do!”--“Will you promise, that
if I render you the service you require, if I employ the power you say I
have alluded to, you will be _mine_?”--“_Yours!_--Alas! am I not yours
already?”--“You embrace _my_ protection, then? You voluntarily seek the
shelter of that power which I can promise? You yourself will me to
employ that power in effecting your escape?--Speak--do I interpret your
sentiments aright?--I am unable to exercise those powers you invest me
with, unless you yourself require me to do so. I have waited--I have
watched for the demand--it has been made--would that it never had!” An
expression of the fiercest agony corrugated his stern features as he
spoke.--“But it may yet be withdrawn--reflect!”--“And you will not then
save me from shame and danger? Is this the proof of your love--is this
the boast of your power?” said Isidora, half frantic at this delay. “If
I adjure you to pause--if I myself hesitate and tremble--it is to give
time for the salutary whisper of your better angel.”--“Oh! save me, and
you shall be my angel!” said Isidora, falling at his feet. Melmoth shook
through his whole frame as he heard these words. He raised and soothed
her, however, with promises of safety, though in a voice that seemed to
announce despair--and then turning from her, burst into a passionate
soliloquy.--“Immortal Heaven! what is man?--A being with the ignorance,
but not the instinct, of the feeblest animals!--They are like
birds--when thy hand, O Thou whom I dare not call Father, is on them,
they scream and quiver, though the gentle pressure is intended only to
convey the wanderer back to his cage--while, to shun the light fear that
scares their senses, they rush into the snare that is spread in their
sight, and where their captivity is hopeless!” As he spoke, hastily
traversing the room, his foot struck against a chair on which a gorgeous
dress was spread. “What is this?” he exclaimed--“What ideot trumpery,
what May-queen foolery is this?”--“It is the habit I am to wear at the
feast to-night,” said Isidora--“My attendants are coming--I hear them at
the door--oh, with what a throbbing heart I shall put on this glittering
mockery!--But you will not desert me then?” she added, with wild and
breathless anxiety. “Fear not,” said Melmoth, solemnly--“You have
demanded my aid, and it shall be accorded. May your heart tremble no
more when you throw off that habit, than now when you are about to put
it on!”

“The hour approached, and the guests were arriving. Isidora, arrayed in
a splendid and fanciful garb, and rejoicing in the shelter which her
mask afforded to the expression of her pale features, mingled among the
groupe. She walked one measure with Montilla, and then declined dancing
on the pretence of assisting her mother in receiving and entertaining
her guests.

“After a sumptuous banquet, dancing was renewed in the spacious hall,
and Isidora followed the company thither with a beating heart. Twelve
was the hour at which Melmoth had promised to meet her, and by the
clock, which was placed over the door of the hall, she saw it wanted but
a quarter to twelve. The hand moved on--it arrived at the hour--the
clock struck! Isidora, whose eyes had been rivetted on its movements,
now withdrew them in despair. At that moment she felt her arm gently
touched, and one of the maskers, bending towards her, whispered, “I am
here!” and he added the sign which Melmoth and she had agreed on as the
signal of their meeting. Isidora, unable to reply, could only return the
sign. “Make haste,” he added--“All is arranged for your flight--there is
not a moment to be lost--I will leave you now, but meet me in a few
moments in the western portico--the lamps are extinguished there, and
the servants have neglected to relight them--be silent and be swift!” He
disappeared as he spoke, and Isidora, after a few moments, followed him.
Though the portico was dark, a faint gleam from the splendidly
illuminated rooms disclosed to her the figure of Melmoth. He drew her
arm under his in silence, and proceeded to hurry her from the spot.
“Stop, villain, stop!” exclaimed the voice of her brother, who, followed
by Montilla, sprung from the balcony--“Where do you drag my sister?--and
you, degraded wretch, where are you about to fly, and with whom?”
Melmoth attempted to pass him, supporting Isidora with one arm, while
the other was extended to repel his approach; but Fernan, drawing his
sword, placed himself directly in their way, at the same time calling on
Montilla to raise the household, and tear Isidora from his arms. “Off,
fool--off!” exclaimed Melmoth--“Rush not on destruction!--I seek not
your life--one victim of your house is enough--let us pass ere you
perish!”--“Boaster, prove your words!” said Fernan, making a desperate
thrust at him, which Melmoth coolly put by with his hand. “Draw,
coward!” cried Fernan, rendered furious by this action--“My next will be
more successful!” Melmoth slowly drew his sword. “Boy!” said he in an
awful voice--“If I turn this point against you, your life is not worth a
moment’s purchase--be wise and let us pass.” Fernan made no answer but
by a fierce attack, which was instantly met by his antagonist.

“The shrieks of Isidora had now reached the ears of the revellers, who
rushed in crowds to the garden--the servants followed them with
flambeaux snatched from the walls adorned for this ill-omened festival,
and the scene of the combat was in a moment as light as day, and
surrounded by a hundred spectators.

“Part them--part them--save them!” shrieked Isidora, writhing at the
feet of her father and mother, who, with the rest, were gazing in stupid
horror at the scene--“Save my brother--save my husband!” The whole
dreadful truth rushed on Donna Clara’s mind at these words, and casting
a conscious look at the terrified priest, she fell to the ground. The
combat was short as it was unequal,--in two moments Melmoth passed his
sword twice through the body of Fernan, who sunk beside Isidora, and
expired! There was a universal pause of horror for some moments--at
length a cry of--“Seize the murderer!” burst from every lip, and the
crowd began to close around Melmoth. He attempted no defence. He
retreated a few paces, and sheathing his sword, waved them back only
with his arm; and this movement, that seemed to announce an internal
power above all physical force, had the effect of nailing every
spectator to the spot where he stood.

“The light of the torches, which the trembling servants held up to gaze
on him, fell full on his countenance, and the voices of a few shuddering
speakers exclaimed, “MELMOTH THE WANDERER!”--“I am--I am!” said that
unfortunate being--“and who now will oppose my passing--who will become
my companion?--I seek not to injure now--but I will not be detained.
Would that breathless fool had yielded to my bidding, not to my
sword--there was but one human chord that vibrated in my heart--it is
broken to-night, and for ever! I will never tempt woman more! Why should
the whirlwind, that can shake mountains, and overwhelm cities with its
breath, descend to scatter the leaves of the rose-bud?” As he spoke, his
eyes fell on the form of Isidora, which lay at his feet extended beside
that of Fernan. He bent over it for a moment--a pulsation like returning
life agitated her frame. He bent nearer--he whispered, unheard by the
rest,--“Isidora, will you fly with me--this is the moment--every arm is
paralyzed--every mind is frozen to its centre!--Isidora, rise and fly
with me--this is your hour of safety!” Isidora, who recognized the voice
but not the speaker, raised herself for a moment--looked on
Melmoth--cast a glance on the bleeding bosom of Fernan, and fell on it
dyed in that blood. Melmoth started up--there was a slight movement of
hostility among some of the guests--he turned one brief and withering
glance on them--they stood every man his hand on his sword, without the
power to draw them, and the very domestics held up the torches in their
trembling hands, as if with involuntary awe they were lighting him out.
So he passed on unmolested amid the groupe, till he reached the spot
where Aliaga, stupified with horror, stood beside the bodies of his son
and daughter. “Wretched old man!” he exclaimed, looking on him as the
unhappy father strained his glazing and dilated eyes to see who spoke to
him, and at length with difficulty recognized the form of _the
stranger_--the companion of his fearful journey some months
past--“Wretched old man--you were warned--but you neglected the
warning--I adjured you to save your daughter--_I best_ knew her
danger--you saved your gold--now estimate the value of the dross you
grasped, and the precious ore you dropt! _I stood between myself and
her_--I warned--I menaced--it was not for me to intreat. Wretched old
man--see the result!”--and he turned slowly to depart. An involuntary
sound of execration and horror, half a howl and half a hiss, pursued his
parting steps, and the priest, with a dignity that more became his
profession than his character, exclaimed aloud, “Depart accursed, and
trouble us not--go, cursing and to curse.”--“I go conquering and to
conquer,” answered Melmoth with wild and fierce triumph--“wretches! your
vices, your passions, and your weaknesses, make you my victims. Upbraid
yourselves, and not me. Heroes in your guilt, but cowards in your
despair, you would kneel at my feet for the terrible immunity with which
I pass through you at this moment.--I go accursed of every human heart,
yet untouched by one human hand!”--As he retired slowly, the murmur of
suppressed but instinctive and irrepressible horror and hatred burst
from the groupe. He past on scowling at them like a lion on a pack of
bayed hounds, and departed unmolested--unassayed--no weapon was
drawn--no arm was lifted--the mark was on his brow,--and those who could
read it knew that all human power was alike forceless and needless,--and
those who could not succumbed in passive horror. Every sword was in its
sheath as Melmoth quitted the garden. “Leave him to God!”--was the
universal exclamation. “You could not leave him in worse hands,”
exclaimed Fra Jose--“He will certainly be damned--and--that is some
comfort to this afflicted family.”




CHAPTER XXXVI.

    Nunc animum pietas, et materna nomina frangunt.


“In less than half an hour, the superb apartments, the illuminated
gardens of Aliaga, did not echo a footstep; all were gone, except a few
who lingered, some from curiosity, some from humanity, to witness or
condole with the sufferings of the wretched parents. The sumptuously
decorated garden now presented a sight horrid from the contrasted
figures and scenery. The domestics stood like statues, holding the
torches still in their hands--Isidora lay beside the bloody corse of her
brother, till an attempt was made to remove it, and then she clung to it
with a strength that required strength to tear her from it--Aliaga, who
had not uttered a word, and scarcely drawn a breath, sunk on his knees
to curse his half-lifeless daughter--Donna Clara, who still retained a
woman’s heart, lost all fear of her husband in this dreadful emergency,
and, kneeling beside him, held his uplifted hands, and struggled hard
for the suspension of the malediction--Fra Jose, the only one of the
groupe who appeared to possess any power of recollection or of mental
sanity, addressed repeatedly to Isidora the question, “Are you
married,--and married to that fearful being?”--“I am married!” answered
the victim, rising from beside the corse of her brother. “I am married!”
she added, glancing a look at her splendid habit, and displaying it with
a frantic laugh. A loud knocking at the garden gate was heard at this
moment. “I _am_ married!” shrieked Isidora, “and here comes the witness
of my nuptials!”

“As she spoke, some peasants from the neighbourhood, assisted by the
domestics of Don Aliaga, brought in a corse, so altered from the fearful
change that passes on the mortal frame, that the nearest relative could
not have known it. Isidora recognized it in a moment for the body of the
old domestic who had disappeared so mysteriously on the night of her
frightful nuptials. The body had been discovered but that evening by the
peasants; it was lacerated as by a fall from rocks, and so disfigured
and decayed as to retain no resemblance to humanity. It was recognizable
only by the livery of Aliaga, which, though much defaced, was still
distinguishable by some peculiarities in the dress, that announced that
those defaced garments covered the mortal remains of the old domestic.
“There!” cried Isidora with delirious energy--“There is the witness of
my fatal marriage!”

“Fra Jose hung over the illegible fragments of that whereon nature had
once written--‘This is a human being,’ and, turning his eyes on Isidora,
with involuntary horror he exclaimed, “Your witness is dumb!” As the
wretched Isidora was dragged away by those who surrounded her, she felt
the first throes of maternal suffering, and exclaimed, “Oh! there will
be a living witness--if you permit it to live!” Her words were soon
realized; she was conveyed to her apartment, and in a few hours after,
scarcely assisted and wholly unpitied by her attendants, gave birth to a
daughter.

“This event excited a sentiment in the family at once ludicrous and
horrible. Aliaga, who had remained in a state of stupefaction since his
son’s death, uttered but one exclamation--“Let the wife of the sorcerer,
and their accursed offspring, be delivered into the hands of the
merciful and holy tribunal, the Inquisition.” He afterwards muttered
something about his property being confiscated, but to this nobody paid
attention. Donna Clara was almost distracted between compassion for her
wretched daughter, and being grandmother to an infant demon, for such
she deemed the child of “Melmoth the Wanderer” must be--and Fra Jose,
while he baptized the infant with trembling hands, almost expected a
fearful sponsor to appear and blast the rite with his horrible negative
to the appeal made in the name of all that is holy among Christians. The
baptismal ceremony was performed, however, with an omission which the
good-natured priest overlooked--there was no sponsor--the lowest
domestic in the house declined with horror the proposal of being sponsor
for the child of that terrible union. The wretched mother heard them
from her bed of pain, and loved her infant better for its utter
destitution. * * * * * *

“A few hours put an end to the consternation of the family, on the score
of religion at least. The officers of the Inquisition arrived, armed
with all the powers of their tribunal, and strongly excited by the
report, that the Wanderer of whom they had been long in search, had
lately perpetrated an act that brought him within the sphere of their
jurisdiction, by involving the life of the only being his solitary
existence held alliance with. “We hold him by the cords of a man,” said
the chief inquisitor, speaking more from what he read than what he
felt--“if he burst these cords he is more than man. He has a wife and
child, and if there be human elements in him, if there be any thing
mortal clinging to his heart, we shall wind round the roots of it, and
extract it.” * * * * *

“It was not till after some weeks, that Isidora recovered her perfect
recollection. When she did, she was in a prison, a pallet of straw was
her bed, a crucifix and a death’s head the only furniture of her cell;
the light struggled through a narrow grate, and struggled in vain, to
cast one gleam on the squalid apartment that it visited and shrunk from.
Isidora looked round her--she had light enough to see her child--she
clasped it to her bosom, from which it had unconsciously drawn its
feverish nourishment, and wept in extasy. “It is my own,” she sobbed,
“and only mine! It has no father--he is at the ends of the earth--he has
left me alone--but I am not alone while you are left to me!”

“She was left in solitary confinement for many days, undisturbed and
unvisited. The persons in whose hands she was had strong reasons for
this mode of treatment. They were desirous that she should recover
perfect sanity of intellect previous to her examination, and they also
wished to give her time to form that profound attachment to the innocent
companion of her solitude, that might be a powerful engine in their
hands in discovering those circumstances relative to Melmoth that had
hitherto baffled all the power and penetration of the Inquisition
itself. All reports agreed that the Wanderer had never before been known
to make a woman the object of his temptation, or to entrust her with the
terrible secret of his destiny(16); and the Inquisitors were heard to
say to each other, “Now that we have got the Delilah in our hands, we
shall soon have the Sampson.”

  (16) From this it should seem that they were unacquainted with the
  story of Elinor Mortimer.

“It was on the night previous to her examination, (of which she was
unapprized), that Isidora saw the door of her cell opened, and a figure
appear at it, whom, amid the dreary obscurity that surrounded her, she
recognized in a moment,--it was Fra Jose. After a long pause of mutual
horror, she knelt in silence to receive his benediction, which he gave
with feeling solemnity; and then the good monk, whose propensities,
though somewhat “earthly and sensual,” were never “devilish,” after
vainly drawing his cowl over his face to stifle his sobs, lifted up his
voice and “wept bitterly.”

“Isidora was silent, but her silence was not that of sullen apathy, or
of conscience-seared impenitence. At length Fra Jose seated himself on
the foot of the pallet, at some distance from the prisoner, who was also
sitting, and bending her cheek, down which a cold tear slowly flowed,
over her infant. “Daughter,” said the monk, collecting himself, “it is
to the indulgence of the holy office I owe this permission to visit
you.”--“I thank them,” said Isidora, and her tears flowed fast and
relievingly. “I am permitted also to tell you that your examination will
take place to-morrow,--to adjure you to prepare for it,--and, if there
be any thing which”---- “My examination!” repeated Isidora with
surprise, but evidently without terror, “on what subject am I then to be
examined?”--“On that of your inconceivable union with a being devoted
and accursed.” His voice was choaked with horror, and he added,
“Daughter, are you then indeed the wife of--of--that being, whose name
makes the flesh creep, and the hair stand on end?”--“I am.”--“Who were
the witnesses of your marriage, and what hand dared to bind yours with
that unholy and unnatural bond?”--“There were no witnesses--we were
wedded in darkness. I saw no form, but I thought I heard words
uttered--I know I felt a hand place mine in Melmoth’s--its touch was as
cold as that of the dead.”--“Oh complicated and mysterious horror!” said
the priest, turning pale, and crossing himself with marks of unfeigned
terror; he bowed his head on his arm for some time, and remained silent
from unutterable emotion. “Father,” said Isidora at length, “you knew
the hermit who lived amid the ruins of the monastery near our house,--he
was a priest also,--he was a holy man, it was he who united us!” Her
voice trembled.---- “Wretched victim!” groaned the priest, without
raising his head, “you know not what you utter--that holy man is known
to have died the very night preceding that of your dreadful union.”

“Another pause of mute horror followed, which the priest at length
broke.--“Unhappy daughter,” said he in a composed and solemn voice, “I
am indulged with permission to give you the benefit of the sacrament of
confession, previous to your examination. I adjure you to unburden your
soul to me,--will you?”--“I will, my father.”--“Will you answer me, as
you would answer at the tribunal of God?”--“Yes,--as I would answer at
the tribunal of God.” As she spake, she prostrated herself before the
priest in the attitude of confession. * * * * * * *

“And you have now disclosed the whole burden of your spirit?”--“I have,
my father.” The priest sat thoughtfully for a considerable time. He then
put to her several singular questions relative to Melmoth, which she was
wholly unable to answer. They seemed chiefly the result of those
impressions of supernatural power and terror, which were every where
associated with his image. “My father,” said Isidora, when he had
ceased, in a faultering voice, “My father, may I inquire about my
unhappy parents?” The priest shook his head, and remained silent. At
length, affected by the agony with which she urged her inquiry, he
reluctantly said she might guess the effect which the death of their
son, and the imprisonment of their daughter in the Inquisition, must
have on parents, who were no less eminent for their zeal for the
Catholic faith, than for their parental affection. “Are they alive?”
said Isidora.--“Spare yourself the pain of further inquiries, daughter,”
said the priest, “and be assured, that if the answer was such as could
give you comfort, it would not be withheld.”

“At this moment a bell was heard to sound in a distant part of the
structure. “That bell,” said the priest, “announces that the hour of
your examination approaches--farewell, and may the saints be with
you.”--“Stay, father,--stay one moment,--but one moment!” cried Isidora,
rushing franticly between him and the door. Fra Jose paused. Isidora
sunk before him, and, hiding her face with her hands, exclaimed in a
voice choaked with agony, “Father, do you think--that I am--lost for
ever?”--“Daughter,” said the priest in heavy accents, and in a troubled
and doubting spirit, “Daughter,--I have given you what comfort I
could--press for no more, lest what I have given (with many struggles of
conscience) may be withdrawn. Perhaps you are in a state on which I can
form no judgment, and pronounce no sentence. May God be merciful to you,
and may the holy tribunal judge you in its mercy also.”--“Yet stay,
father--stay one moment--only one moment--only one question more.” As
she spoke, she caught her pale and innocent companion from the pallet
where it slept, and held it up to the priest. “Father, tell me, _can_
this be the child of a demon?--can it be, this creature that smiles on
me--that smiles on you, while you are mustering curses against it?--Oh,
holy drops have sprinkled it from your own hand!--Father, you have spoke
holy words over it. Father, let them tear me with their pincers, let
them roast me on their flames, but will not my child escape--my innocent
child, that smiles on you?--Holy father, dear father, look back on my
child.” And she crawled after him on her knees, holding up the miserable
infant in her arms, whose weak cry and wasted frame, pleaded against the
dungeon-life to which its infancy had been doomed.

“Fra Jose melted at the appeal, and he was about to bestow many a kiss
and many a prayer on the wretched babe, when the bell again was sounded,
and hasting away, he had but time to exclaim, “My daughter, may God
protect you!”--“God protect me,” said Isidora, clasping her infant to
her bosom. The bell sounded again, and Isidora knew that the hour of her
trial approached.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

    Fear not now the fever’s fire,
      Fear not now the death-bed groan;
    Pangs that torture, pains that tire
      Bed-rid age with feeble moan.

    MASON.


“The first examination of Isidora was conducted with the circumspective
formality that has always been known to mark the proceedings of that
tribunal. The second and the third were alike strict, penetrating and
inoperative, and the holy office began to feel its highest functionaries
were no match for the extraordinary prisoner who stood before them, who,
combining the extremes of simplicity and magnanimity, uttered every
thing that might criminate herself, but evaded with skill that baffled
all the arts of inquisitorial examination, every question that referred
to Melmoth.

“In the course of the first examination, they hinted at the torture.
Isidora, with something of the free and nature-taught dignity of her
early existence, smiled as they spoke of it. An official whispered one
of the inquisitors, as he observed the peculiar expression of her
countenance, and the torture was mentioned no more.

“A second--a third examination followed at long intervals--but it was
observed, that every time the mode of examination was less severe, and
the treatment of the prisoner more and more indulgent--her youth, her
beauty, her profound simplicity of character and language, developed
strongly on this singular emergency, and the affecting circumstance of
her always appearing with her child in her arms, whose feeble cries she
tried to hush, while she bent forward to hear and answer the questions
addressed to her--all these seemed to have wrought powerfully on the
minds of men not accustomed to yield to external impressions. There was
also a docility, a submission, about this beautiful and unfortunate
being--a contrite and bending spirit--a sense of wretchedness for the
misfortunes of her family--a consciousness of her own, that touched the
hearts even of inquisitors.

“After repeated examinations, when nothing could be extorted from the
prisoner, a skilful and profound artist in the school of mental anatomy,
whispered to the inquisitor something about the infant whom she held in
her arms. “She has defied the rack,” was the answer. “Try her on _that
rack_,” was rejoined, and the hint was taken.

“After the usual formalities were gone through, Isidora’s sentence was
read to her. She was condemned, as a suspected heretic, to perpetual
confinement in the prison of the Inquisition--her child was to be taken
from her, and brought up in a convent, in order to----

“Here the reading of the sentence was interrupted by the prisoner, who,
uttering one dreadful shriek of maternal agony, louder than any other
mode of torture had ever before extorted, fell prostrate on the floor.
When she was restored to sensation, no authority or terror of the place
or the judges, could prevent her pouring forth those wild and piercing
supplications, which, from the energy with which they are uttered,
appear to the speaker himself like commands,--that the latter part of
her sentence might be remitted--the former appeared to make not the
least impression on her--eternal solitude, passed in eternal darkness,
seemed to give her neither fear or pain, but she wept, and pleaded, and
raved, that she might not be separated from her infant.

“The judges listened with fortified hearts, and in unbroken silence.
When she found all was over, she rose from her posture of humiliation
and agony--and there was something even of dignity about her as she
demanded, in a calm and altered voice, that her child might not be
removed from her till the following day. She had also self-possession
enough to enforce her petition by the remark, that its life might be the
sacrifice if it was too suddenly deprived of the nourishment it was
accustomed to receive from her. To this request the judges acceded, and
she was remanded to her cell. * * * * * * *

“The time elapsed. The person who brought her food departed without
uttering a word; nor did she utter a word to him. It was about midnight
that the door of her cell was unlocked, and two persons in official
habits appeared at it. They seemed to pause, like the heralds at the
tent of Achilles, and then, like them, forced themselves to enter. These
men had haggard and livid faces--their attitudes were perfectly stony
and automaton-like--their movements appeared the result of mere
mechanism--yet these men were touched. The miserable light within hardly
shewed the pallet on which the prisoner was seated; but a strong red
light from the torch the attendant held, flared broadly on the arch of
the door under which the figures appeared. They approached with a motion
that seemed simultaneous and involuntary--and uttered together, in
accents that seemed to issue from one mouth, “Deliver your child to us.”
In a voice as hoarse, dry, and natureless, the prisoner answered, “Take
it!”

“The men looked about the cell--it seemed as if they knew not where to
find the offspring of humanity amid the cells of the Inquisition. The
prisoner was silent and motionless during their search. It was not
long--the narrow apartment, the scanty furniture, afforded little room
for the investigation. When it was concluded, however, the prisoner,
bursting into a wild laugh, exclaimed, “Where would you search for a
child but in its mother’s bosom? Here--here it is--take it--take it!”
And she put it into their hands. “Oh what fools ye were to seek my child
any where but on its mother’s bosom! It is your’s now!” she shrieked in
a voice that froze the officials.--“Take it--take it from me!”

“The agents of the holy office advanced; and the technicality of their
movements was somewhat suspended when Isidora placed in their hands the
corse of her infant daughter. Around the throat of the miserable infant,
born amid agony, and nursed in a dungeon, there was a black mark, which
the officials made their use of in representing this extraordinary
circumstance to the holy office. By some it was deemed as the sign
impressed by the evil one at its birth--by others as the fearful effect
of maternal despair.

“It was determined that the prisoner should appear before them within
four-and-twenty hours, and account for the death of her child. * * * * *
* * *

“Within less than half that number of hours, a mightier arm than that of
the Inquisition was dealing with the prisoner--an arm that seemed to
menace, but was indeed stretched out to save, and before whose touch the
barriers of the dreaded Inquisition itself were as frail as the fortress
of the spider who hung her web on its walls. Isidora was dying of a
disease not the less mortal because it makes no appearance in an
obituary--she was dying of that internal and incurable wound--a broken
heart.

“When the inquisitors were at last convinced that there was nothing more
to be obtained by torture, bodily or mental torture, they suffered her
to die unmolested, and granted her last request, that Fra Jose might be
permitted to visit her. * * * * * *

“It was midnight, but its approach was unknown in that place, where day
and night are the same. A dim lamp was substituted for that weak and
struggling beam that counterfeited day-light. The penitent was stretched
on her bed of rest--the humane priest sat beside her; and if his
presence gave no dignity to the scene, it at least softened it by the
touches of humanity. * * * * * * * *

“My father,” said the dying Isidora, “you pronounced me
forgiven.”--“Yes, my daughter,” said the priest, “you have assured me
you are innocent of the death of your infant.”--“You never could have
believed me guilty,” said Isidora, raising herself on her pallet at the
appeal--“the consciousness of _its_ existence alone would have kept me
alive, even in my prison. Oh, my father, how was it possible it could
live, buried with me in this dreadful place almost as soon as it
respired? Even the morbid nourishment it received from me was dried up
when my sentence was read. It moaned all night--towards morning its
moans grew fainter, and I was glad--at last they ceased, and I was
very--happy!” But, as she talked of this fearful happiness, she wept.

“My daughter, is your heart disengaged from that awful and disastrous
tie that bound it to misfortune here, and to perdition hereafter?” It
was long before she could answer; at length she said in a broken voice,
“My father, I have not now strength to search or to struggle with my
heart. Death must very soon break every tie that was twined with it, and
it is useless to anticipate my liberation; the effort would be
agony--fruitless agony, for, while I live, I must love my destroyer!
Alas! in being the enemy of mankind, was not his hostility to me
inevitable and fatal? In rejecting his last terrible temptation--in
resigning him to his destiny, and preferring submission to my own, I
feel my triumph complete, and my salvation assured.”--“Daughter, I do
not comprehend you.”--“Melmoth,” said Isidora, with a strong effort,
“Melmoth was here last night--within the walls of the Inquisition--within
this very cell!” The priest crossed himself with marks of
the profoundest horror, and, as the wind swept hollowly through
the long passage, almost expected the shaken door would burst open, and
disclose the figure of the Wanderer. * * * * * * *

“My father, I have had many dreams,” answered the penitent, shaking her
head at a suggestion of the priest’s, “many--many wanderings, but this
was no dream. I have dreamed of the garden-land where I beheld him
first--I have dreamed of the nights when he stood at my casement, and
trembled in sleep at the sound of my mother’s step--and I have had holy
and hopeful visions, in which celestial forms appeared to me, and
promised me his conversion--but this was no dream--I saw him last night.
Father, he was here the whole night--he promised--he assured me--he
adjured me to accept of liberation and safety, of life and of felicity.
He told me, nor could I doubt him, that, by whatever means he effected
his entrance, he could also effect my escape. He offered to live with me
in that Indian isle--that paradise of ocean, far from human resort or
human persecution. He offered to love me alone, and for ever--and then I
listened to him. Oh, my father, I am very young, and life and love
sounded sweetly in my ears, when I looked at my dungeon, and thought of
dying on this floor of stone! But--when he whispered the terrible
condition on which the fulfilment of his promise depended--when he told
me that”----

“Her voice failed with her failing strength, and she could utter no
more. “Daughter,” said the priest, bending over her bed, “daughter, I
adjure you, by the image represented on this cross I hold to your dying
lips--by your hopes of that salvation which depends on the truth you
utter to me, your priest and your friend--the conditions proposed by
your tempter!” “Promise me absolution for repeating the words, for I
should wish that my last breath might not be exhaled in uttering--what I
must.”--“_Te absolvo_,” &c. said the priest, and bent his ear to catch
the sounds. The moment they were uttered, he started as from the sting
of a serpent, and, seating himself at the extremity of the cell, rocked
in dumb horror. “My father, you promised me absolution,” said the
penitent. “_Jam tibi dedi, moribunda_,” answered the priest, in the
confusion of thoughts using the language appropriated to the service of
religion. “Moribunda indeed!” said the sufferer, falling back on her
pallet, “Father, let me feel a human hand in mine as I part!”--“Call
upon God, daughter!” said the priest, applying the crucifix to her cold
lips. “I loved his religion,” said the penitent, kissing it devoutly, “I
loved it before I knew it, and God must have been my teacher, for I had
no other! Oh!” she exclaimed, with that deep conviction that must thrill
every dying heart, and whose echo (would God) might pierce every living
one--“Oh that I had loved none but God--how profound would have been my
peace--how glorious my departure--_now_--_his_ image pursues me even to
the brink of the grave, into which I plunge to escape it!”

“My daughter,” said the priest, while the tears rolled fast down his
cheeks--“my daughter, you are passing to bliss--the conflict was fierce
and short, but the victory is sure--harps are tuned to a new song, even
a song of welcome, and wreaths of palm are weaving for you in paradise!”

“Paradise!” uttered Isidora, with her last breath--“_Will he be there!_”




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

    Loud tolled the bell, the priests prayed well,
      The tapers they all burned bright,
    The monk her son, and her daughter the nun,
      They told their beads all night!

    * * * * *

    The second night------

    * * * * *

    The monk and the nun they told their beads
      As fast as they could tell,
    And aye the louder grew the noise,
      The faster went the bell!

    * * * * *

    The third night came------

    * * * * *

    The monk and the nun forgot their beads,
      They fell to the ground dismayed,
    There was not a single saint in heaven
      Whom they did not call to their aid!

    SOUTHEY.


Monçada here concluded the tale of the Indian,--the victim of Melmoth’s
passion, no less than of his destiny, both alike unhallowed and
unutterable. And he announced his intention of disclosing to him the
fates of the other victims, whose skeletons were preserved in the vault
of the Jew Adonijah in Madrid. He added, that the circumstances relating
to them, were of a character still darker and more awful than those he
had recited, as they were the result of impressions made on masculine
minds, without any excitement but that of looking into futurity. He
mentioned, too, that the circumstances of his residence in the house of
the Jew, his escape from it, and the reasons of his subsequent arrival
in Ireland, were scarcely less extraordinary than any thing he had
hitherto related. Young Melmoth, (whose name perhaps the reader has
forgot), did “seriously incline” to the purpose of having his dangerous
curiosity further gratified, nor was he perhaps altogether without the
wild hope of seeing the original of that portrait he had destroyed,
burst from the walls and take up the fearful tale himself.

The narrative of the Spaniard had occupied many days; at their
termination, young Melmoth signified to his guest that he was prepared
to hear the sequel.

A night was fixed for the continuation of the recital. Young Melmoth and
his guest met in the usual apartment--it was a dreary, stormy night--the
rain that had fallen all day, seemed now to have yielded to the wind,
that came in strong and sudden bursts, suddenly hushed, as if collecting
strength for the tempest of the night. Monçada and Melmoth drew their
chairs closer to the fire, looking at each other with the aspect of men
who wish to inspire each other with courage to listen, and to tell, and
are the more eager to inspire it, because neither feels it himself.

At length Monçada collected his voice and resolution to proceed, but as
he went on, he perceived he could not fix his hearer’s attention, and he
paused.

“I thought,” said Melmoth, answering his silence, “I thought I heard a
noise--as of a person walking in the passage.” “Hush! and listen,” said
Monçada, “I would not wish to be overheard.” They paused and held their
breath--the sound was renewed--it was evidently that of steps
approaching the door, and then retiring from it. “We are watched,” said
Melmoth, half-rising from his chair, but at that moment the door opened,
and a figure appeared at it, which Monçada recognized for the subject of
his narrative, and his mysterious visitor in the prison of the
Inquisition, and Melmoth for the original of the picture, and the being
whose unaccountable appearance had filled him with consternation, as he
sat beside his dying uncle’s bed.

The figure stood at the door for some time, and then advancing slowly
till it gained the centre of the room, it remained there fixed for some
time, but without looking at them. It then approached the table where
they sat, in a slow but distinctly heard step, and stood before them as
a living being. The profound horror that was equally felt by both, was
differently expressed by each. Monçada crossed himself repeatedly, and
attempted to utter many prayers. Melmoth, nailed to his chair, fixed his
sightless eyes on the form that stood before him--it was indeed Melmoth
the Wanderer--the same as he was in the past century--the same as he may
be in centuries to come, should the fearful terms of his existence be
renewed. His “natural force was not abated,” but “his eye was
dim,”--that appalling and supernatural lustre of the visual organ, that
beacon lit by an infernal fire, to tempt or to warn the adventurers of
despair from that coast on which many struck, and some sunk--that
portentous light was no longer visible--the form and figure were those
of a living man, of the age indicated in the portrait which the young
Melmoth had destroyed, but the eyes were as the eyes of the dead. * * *
* * *

As the Wanderer advanced still nearer till his figure touched the table,
Monçada and Melmoth started up in irrepressible horror, and stood in
attitudes of defence, though conscious at the moment that all defence
was hopeless against a being that withered and mocked at human power.
The Wanderer waved his arm with an action that spoke defiance without
hostility--and the strange and solemn accents of the only human voice
that had respired mortal air beyond the period of mortal life, and never
spoken but to the ear of guilt or suffering, and never uttered to that
ear aught but despair, rolled slowly on their hearing like a peal of
distant thunder.

“Mortals--you are here to talk of my destiny, and of the events which it
has involved. That destiny is accomplished, I believe, and with it
terminate those events that have stimulated your wild and wretched
curiosity. I am here to tell you of both!--I--I--of whom you speak, am
here!--Who can tell so well of Melmoth the Wanderer as himself, now that
he is about to resign that existence which has been the object of terror
and wonder to the world?--Melmoth, you behold your ancestor--the being
on whose portrait is inscribed the date of a century and a half, is
before you.--Monçada, you see an acquaintance of a later date.”--(A grim
smile of recognition wandered over his features as he spoke).--“Fear
nothing,” he added, observing the agony and terror of his involuntary
hearers--“What have you to fear?” he continued, while a flash of
derisive malignity once more lit up the sockets of his dead eyes--“You,
Senhor, are armed with your beads--and you, Melmoth, are fortified by
that vain and desperate inquisitiveness, which might, at a former
period, have made you my victim,”--(and his features underwent a short
but horrible convulsion)--“but now makes you only my mockery.

* * * * *

“Have you aught to quench my thirst?” he added, seating himself. The
senses of Monçada and his companion reeled in delirious terror, and the
former, in a kind of wild confidence, filled a glass of water, and
offered it to the Wanderer with a hand as steady, but somewhat colder,
as he would have presented it to one who sat beside him in human
companionship. The Wanderer raised it to his lips, and tasted a few
drops, then replacing it on the table, said with a laugh, wild indeed,
but no longer ferocious--“Have you seen,” said he to Monçada and
Melmoth, who gazed with dim and troubled sight on this vision, and wist
not what to think--“Have you seen the fate of Don Juan, not as he is
pantomimed on your paltry stage, but as he is represented in the real
horrors of his destiny by the Spanish writer(17)? There the spectre
returns the hospitality of his inviter, and summons him in turn to a
feast.--The banquet-hall is a church--he arrives--it is illuminated with
a mysterious light--invisible hands hold lamps fed by no earthly
substance, to light the apostate to his doom!--He enters the church, and
is greeted by a numerous company--the spirits of those whom he has
wronged and murdered, uprisen from their charnel, and swathed in
shrouds, stand there to welcome him!--As he passes among them, they call
on him in hollow sounds to pledge them in goblets of blood which they
present to him--and beneath the altar, by which stands the spirit of him
whom the parricide has murdered, the gulph of perdition is yawning to
receive him!---- Through such a band I must soon prepare to
pass!--Isidora! thy form will be the last I must encounter--and--the
most terrible! Now for the last drop I must taste of earth’s
produce--the last that shall wet my mortal lips!” He slowly finished the
draught of water. Neither of his companions had the power to speak. He
sat down in a posture of heavy musing, and neither ventured to interrupt
him.

  (17) Vide the original play, of which there is a curious and very
  obsolete translation.

They kept silence till the morning was dawning, and a faint light
streamed through the closed shutters. Then the Wanderer raised his heavy
eyes, and fixed them on Melmoth. “Your ancestor has come home,” he said;
“his wanderings are over!--What has been told or believed of me is now
of light avail to me. The secret of my destiny rests with myself. If all
that fear has invented, and credulity believed of me be true, to what
does it amount? That if my crimes have exceeded those of mortality, so
will my punishment. I have been on earth a terror, but not an evil to
its inhabitants. None can participate in my destiny but with his own
consent--_none have consented_--none can be involved in its tremendous
penalties, but by participation. I alone must sustain the penalty. If I
have put forth my hand, and eaten of the fruit of the interdicted tree,
am I not driven from the presence of God and the region of paradise, and
sent to wander amid worlds of barrenness and curse for ever and ever?

“It has been reported of me, that I obtained from the enemy of souls a
range of existence beyond the period allotted to mortality--a power to
pass over space without disturbance or delay, and visit remote regions
with the swiftness of thought--to encounter tempests without the _hope_
of their blasting me, and penetrate into dungeons, whose bolts were as
flax and tow at my touch. It has been said that this power was accorded
to me, that I might be enabled to tempt wretches in their fearful hour
of extremity, with the promise of deliverance and immunity, on condition
of their exchanging situations with me. If this be true, it bears
attestation to a truth uttered by the lips of one I may not name, and
echoed by every human heart in the habitable world.

“No one has ever exchanged destinies with Melmoth the Wanderer. _I have
traversed the world in the search, and no one, to gain that world, would
lose his own soul!_--Not Stanton in his cell--nor you, Monçada, in the
prison of the Inquisition--nor Walberg, who saw his children perishing
with want--nor--another”--

He paused, and though on the verge of his dark and doubtful voyage, he
seemed to cast one look of bitter and retrospective anguish on the
receding shore of life, and see, through the mists of memory, one form
that stood there to bid him farewell. He rose--“Let me, if possible,
obtain an hour’s repose. Aye, repose--sleep!” he repeated, answering the
silent astonishment of his hearers’ looks, “my existence is still
human!”--and a ghastly and derisive smile wandered over his features for
the last time, as he spoke. How often had that smile frozen the blood of
his victims! Melmoth and Monçada quitted the apartment; and the
Wanderer, sinking back in his chair, slept profoundly. He slept, but
what were the visions of his last earthly slumber?




The Wanderer’s Dream.


He dreamed that he stood on the summit of a precipice, whose downward
height no eye could have measured, but for the fearful waves of a fiery
ocean that lashed, and blazed, and roared at its bottom, sending its
burning spray far up, so as to drench the dreamer with its sulphurous
rain. The whole glowing ocean below was alive--every billow bore an
agonizing soul, that rose like a wreck or a putrid corse on the waves of
earth’s oceans--uttered a shriek as it burst against that adamantine
precipice--sunk--and rose again to repeat the tremendous experiment!
Every billow of fire was thus instinct with immortal and agonizing
existence,--each was freighted with a soul, that rose on the burning
wave in torturing hope, burst on the rock in despair, added its eternal
shriek to the roar of that fiery ocean, and sunk to rise again--in vain,
and--for ever!

Suddenly the Wanderer felt himself flung half-way down the precipice. He
stood, in his dream, tottering on a crag midway down the precipice--he
looked upward, but the upper air (for there was no heaven) showed only
blackness unshadowed and impenetrable--but, blacker than that blackness,
he could distinguish a gigantic outstretched arm, that held him as in
sport on the ridge of that infernal precipice, while another, that
seemed in its motions to hold fearful and invisible conjunction with the
arm that grasped him, as if both belonged to some being too vast and
horrible even for the imagery of a dream to shape, pointed upwards to a
dial-plate fixed on the top of that precipice, and which the flashes of
that ocean of fire made fearfully conspicuous. He saw the mysterious
single hand revolve--he saw it reach the appointed period of 150
years--(for in this mystic plate centuries were marked, not hours)--he
shrieked in his dream, and, with that strong impulse often felt in
sleep, burst from the arm that held him, to arrest the motion of the
hand.

In the effort he fell, and falling grasped at aught that might save
him. His fall seemed perpendicular--there was nought to save him--the
rock was as smooth as ice--the ocean of fire broke at its foot!
Suddenly a groupe of figures appeared, ascending as he fell. He
grasped at them successively;--first Stanton--then Walberg--Elinor
Mortimer--Isidora--Monçada--all passed him,--to each he seemed in his
slumber to cling in order to break his fall--all ascended the precipice.
He caught at each in his downward flight, but all forsook him and
ascended.

His last despairing reverted glance was fixed on the clock of
eternity--the upraised black arm seemed to push forward the hand--it
arrived at its period--he fell--he sunk--he blazed--he shrieked! The
burning waves boomed over his sinking head, and the clock of eternity
rung out its awful chime--“Room for the soul of the Wanderer!”--and the
waves of the burning ocean answered, as they lashed the adamantine
rock--“There is room for more!”----The Wanderer awoke.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

    And in he came with eyes of flame,
    The fiend to fetch the dead.

    SOUTHEY’S _Old Woman of Berkeley_.


Melmoth and Monçada did not dare to approach the door till about noon.
They then knocked gently at the door, and finding the summons
unanswered, they entered slowly and irresolutely. The apartment was in
the same state in which they had left it the preceding night, or rather
morning; it was dusky and silent, the shutters had not been opened, and
the Wanderer still seemed sleeping in his chair.

At the sound of their approach he half-started up, and demanded what was
the hour. They told him. “My hour is come,” said the Wanderer, “it is an
hour you must neither partake or witness--the clock of eternity is about
to strike, but its knell must be unheard by mortal ears!” As he spoke
they approached nearer, and saw with horror the change the last few
hours had wrought on him. The fearful lustre of his eyes had been
deadened before their late interview, but now the lines of extreme age
were visible in every feature. His hairs were as white as snow, his
mouth had fallen in, the muscles of his face were relaxed and
withered--he was the very image of hoary decrepid debility. He started
himself at the impression which his appearance visibly made on the
intruders. “You see what I feel,” he exclaimed, “the hour then is come.
I am summoned, and I must obey the summons--my master has other work for
me! When a meteor blazes in your atmosphere--when a comet pursues its
burning path towards the sun--look up, and perhaps you may think of the
spirit condemned to guide the blazing and erratic orb.”

The spirits, that had risen to a kind of wild elation, as suddenly
subsided, and he added, “Leave me, I must be alone for the few last
hours of my mortal existence--if indeed they are to be the last.” He
spoke this with an inward shuddering, that was felt by his hearers. “In
this apartment,” he continued, “I first drew breath, in this I must
perhaps resign it,--would--would I had never been born! * * * * * *

“Men--retire--leave me alone. Whatever noises you hear in the course of
the awful night that is approaching, come not near this apartment, at
peril of your lives. Remember,” raising his voice, which still retained
all its powers, “remember your lives will be the forfeit of your
desperate curiosity. For the same stake I risked more than life--and
lost it!--Be warned--retire!”

They retired, and passed the remainder of that day without even thinking
of food, from that intense and burning anxiety that seemed to prey on
their very vitals. At night they retired, and though each lay down, it
was without a thought of repose. Repose indeed would have been
impossible. The sounds that soon after midnight began to issue from the
apartment of the Wanderer, were at first of a description not to alarm,
but they were soon exchanged for others of such indescribable horror,
that Melmoth, though he had taken the precaution of dismissing the
servants to sleep in the adjacent offices, began to fear that those
sounds might reach them, and, restless himself from insupportable
inquietude, rose and walked up and down the passage that led to that
room of horror. As he was thus occupied, he thought he saw a figure at
the lower end of the passage. So disturbed was his vision, that he did
not at first recognize Monçada. Neither asked the other the reason of
his being there--they walked up and down together silently.

In a short time the sounds became so terrible, that scarcely had the
awful warning of the Wanderer power to withhold them from attempting to
burst into the room. These noises were of the most mixed and
indescribable kind. They could not distinguish whether they were the
shrieks of supplication, or the yell of blasphemy--they hoped inwardly
they might be the former.

Towards morning the sounds suddenly ceased--they were stilled as in a
moment. The silence that succeeded seemed to them for a few moments more
terrible than all that preceded. After consulting each other by a
glance, they hastened together to the apartment. They entered--it was
empty--not a vestige of its last inhabitant was to be traced within.

After looking around in fruitless amazement, they perceived a small door
opposite to that by which they had entered. It communicated with a back
staircase, and was open. As they approached it, they discovered the
traces of footsteps that appeared to be those of a person who had been
walking in damp sand or clay. These traces were exceedingly plain--they
followed them to a door that opened on the garden--that door was open
also. They traced the foot-marks distinctly through the narrow gravel
walk, which was terminated by a broken fence, and opened on a heathy
field which spread half-way up a rock whose summit overlooked the sea.
The weather had been rainy, and they could trace the steps distinctly
through that heathy field. They ascended the rock together.

Early as it was, the cottagers, who were poor fishermen residing on the
shore, were all up, and assuring Melmoth and his companion that they had
been disturbed and terrified the preceding night by sounds which they
could not describe. It was singular that these men, accustomed by nature
and habit alike to exaggeration and superstition, used not the language
of either on this occasion.

There is an overwhelming mass of conviction that falls on the mind, that
annihilates idiom and peculiarities, and crushes out truth from the
heart. Melmoth waved back all who offered to accompany him to the
precipice which over-hung the sea. Monçada alone followed him.

Through the furze that clothed this rock, almost to its summit, there
was a kind of tract as if a person had dragged, or been dragged, his way
through it--a down-trodden track, over which no footsteps but those of
one impelled by force had ever passed. Melmoth and Monçada gained at
last the summit of the rock. The ocean was beneath--the wide, waste,
engulphing ocean! On a crag beneath them, something hung as floating to
the blast. Melmoth clambered down and caught it. It was the handkerchief
which the Wanderer had worn about his neck the preceding night--that was
the last trace of the Wanderer!

Melmoth and Monçada exchanged looks of silent and unutterable horror,
and returned slowly home.

FINIS.




JOHN PILLANS, Printer, Edinburgh.




    Transcriber’s Note:

    The following is a list of corrections made to the original.
    The first line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

  CHAPTER XXI.
  CHAPTER XXIII.

  thus Pliny writeth, “_Apparebat eidolon senex, macie et senie
  thus Pliny writeth, “_Apparebat eidolon senex, macie et senio

  CHAPTER XXII.
  CHAPTER XXIV.

  steps she heard the sound of steps pursuing her.”
  steps she heard the sound of steps pursuing her.

  As they approached, in spite of the darkness of the night, the ruin
  “As they approached, in spite of the darkness of the night, the ruin

  behind a cloud, and every thing was enveloped in darknesss so profound,
  behind a cloud, and every thing was enveloped in darkness so profound,

  another person,--she tried to catch certain words, but she knew nor what
  another person,--she tried to catch certain words, but she knew not what

  CHAPTER XXIII.
  CHAPTER XXV.

  Τηλε μἐιργουσι ψυχαι, ειδοωλα καμοντων.
  Τηλε μ’ ειργουσι ψυχαι, ειδωλα καμοντων.

  We have now to retrace a short period of our narrative to the night on
  “We have now to retrace a short period of our narrative to the night on

  not aviod giving him his confidence at sight, though he forbore any
  not avoid giving him his confidence at sight, though he forbore any

  within my certain knowledge.
  within my certain knowledge.”

  CHAPTER XXIV.
  CHAPTER XXVI.

  This night he perhaps began to feel the prudence of his wife’s
  “This night he perhaps began to feel the prudence of his wife’s

  The weather was gloomy and cold that evening,--it was unlike a night in
  “The weather was gloomy and cold that evening,--it was unlike a night in

  with an emphatic smile. “Father,” said Walberg, is not Everhard grown
  with an emphatic smile. “Father,” said Walberg, “is not Everhard grown

  CHAPTER XXV.
  CHAPTER XXVII.

  The priest was as good as his word,--the ablest advocates in Seville
  “The priest was as good as his word,--the ablest advocates in Seville

  CHAPTER XXVI.
  CHAPTER XXVIII.

  was neither speech nor language, but voices were heard among them--“_and
  was neither speech nor language, but voices were heard among them--_and

  The mother, with the forced smile of a sickening heart, said she
  “The mother, with the forced smile of a sickening heart, said she

  believe,’ said Ines, involuntarily yielding to the dreadful conviction
  believe,” said Ines, involuntarily yielding to the dreadful conviction

  this seat--you must drag me from it yourselves.
  this seat--you must drag me from it yourselves.”

  CHAPTER XXVII.
  CHAPTER XXIX.

  Χαλεπον δέ το φιλησαι·
  Χαλεπον δε το φιλησαι·

  and their echo from the rocks of granite made the rider tremble, les he
  and their echo from the rocks of granite made the rider tremble, lest he

  Shropshire, (“I have had dealings with Shewsbury merchants,” said
  Shropshire, (“I have had dealings with Shrewsbury merchants,” said

  --“Thou-art-not-worthy-to-unloose-the-latchets-of-his-shoes,--_Sandal_.
  --“Thou-art-not-worthy-to-unloose-the-latchets-of-his-shoes,--_Sandal_.”

  CHAPTER XXVIII.
  CHAPTER XXX.

  royal guest. When she related that a band of natics, after robbing a
  royal guest. When she related that a band of fanatics, after robbing a

  Such was the state of Elinor, when the arrival of one who had been long
  “Such was the state of Elinor, when the arrival of one who had been long

  in garnishing the wassail bowl, which was doomed by many a thristy eye
  in garnishing the wassail bowl, which was doomed by many a thirsty eye

  a godly conference, where the non-comformist ministers, who had been, in
  a godly conference, where the non-conformist ministers, who had been, in

  On a dim autumnal evening, when Mrs Ann, with fading sight but
  “On a dim autumnal evening, when Mrs Ann, with fading sight but

  CHAPTER XXIX.
  CHAPTER XXXI.

  The increasing decline of Elinor’s health was marked by all the family;
  “The increasing decline of Elinor’s health was marked by all the family;

  CHAPTER XXX.
  CHAPTER XXXII.

  I had not seen Melmoth for some years. I was preparing to quit Germany,
  “I had not seen Melmoth for some years. I was preparing to quit Germany,

  CHAPTER XXXI.
  CHAPTER XXXIII.

  CHAPTER XXXII.
  CHAPTER XXXIV.

  syllable of the business to her father and brother.--“We will show,“
  syllable of the business to her father and brother.--“We will show,”

  ear is open at all simes, I have been told,” answered Isidora.--“If it
  ear is open at all times, I have been told,” answered Isidora.--“If it

  CHAPTER XXXII.
  CHAPTER XXXV.

  CHAPTER XXXIII.
  CHAPTER XXXVI.

  you.”--“Stay, father,--stay one moment,--but one moment!’ cried Isidora,
  you.”--“Stay, father,--stay one moment,--but one moment!” cried Isidora,

  Fra Jose melted at the appeal, and he was about to bestow many a kiss
  “Fra Jose melted at the appeal, and he was about to bestow many a kiss

  CHAPTER XXXIV.
  CHAPTER XXXVII.

  more. “Daughter, said the priest, bending over her bed, “daughter, I
  more. “Daughter,” said the priest, bending over her bed, “daughter, I

  CHAPTER XXXV.
  CHAPTER XXXVIII.

  CHAPTER XXXVI.
  CHAPTER XXXIX.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Melmoth the Wanderer Vol. 4 (of 4), by 
Charles Robert Maturin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MELMOTH THE WANDERER VOL. 4 (OF 4) ***

***** This file should be named 53688-0.txt or 53688-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/6/8/53688/

Produced by David Edwards, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
