 Paradigm From California by Neil Miller et. al.
Copyright © 1984, 1986
Volume II: Letter To A Responsible Party
Part IV: Origins Chapter 11: Schema
    There is a schema by which DNA tends to replicate genes.
This schema is enacted throughout the whole process of biology.
The tendency of DNA to replicate genes and the principles of physics therein contained are as far back as we can trace the 'basic' forces that structure biology, but that tendency is quite far enough back to trace ahead the structure of the biological schema generally and to specifically identify human judgments, emotions, and enactments in relation to the best, the healthiest, the most passionate, the most depthful, and the most survivable workings of individual humans and of that schema.
The schema that DNA has arrived at for genetic replication includes what biologists sometimes call "protean development".
This means that one of the constant processes by which genes continue to be replicated is by forming into increasingly more advanced configurations over time.
One could say that this is a system whereby the ecosystem draws on things that have already been created or built, combines them together adding some new form, and builds something more advanced - all towards the end of
replicating an original pattern, although necessarily as part of increasingly advanced configurations.
An overall biological system that duplicates or perpetuates itself without creating advancement does not survive - never did, never could.
Many gene patterns do survive intact, indeed, some for more than a billion years.
But in order for them to do so, there must be combination, in increasingly higher level form over time.
This "protean replication" system, at the heart of what is sometimes called 'evolution' or 'creation', engendered a continuing advancement of internal hierarchical sophistication from eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr species to later species through a combination of "mutation" and "natural selection".
Over a billion years time, species developed which contained within each member, more and more advanced levels of internal hierarchical arrangement - that is, increasing levels of sophistication, from protein molecules to cells to plants to fish to reptiles to mammals to primates.
Page 1 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 With the emergence of pre-man in the last several million years, and man in the last 100,000, there has obviously been an enormous leap.
After all this time, a species - Homo Sapiens - has emerged, each of whose individual members can do in the world at large and in their own individual lifetime what was previously accomplished mainly through genetic advancement from one species to the next.
This constitutes an entirely new and different level of development for the entire bio- ecosystem, an enormous advancement in a very short time.
Such spectacularity is typical of what happens when an entire level of hierarchical sophistication is properly - that is to say truthfully - organized into something more advanced.
For humans, "protean replication" is manifested not in advancing genetic sophistication but rather in the combining of conscious ideas and physical things external to the organism itself, again creating increasingly higher levels of advancement.
It must be emphasized that what has come before is, in and of itself, never enough to create something more advanced.
The building process must always exceed what has come before.
In genetic terms, this is made possible by the bringing in of something unknown, something
"out of the ordinary", but in a way whereby the overall outcome is well accounted for .
In the overall genetic bio-progression, the "mutation-natural selection" process could be characterized as "calculated chance".
In terms of human "behavior", that is to say in terms of the 'intellectual' and 'emotional' 'behavior' of human beings, this building in excess of what is already available is what is known as "risk".
This three part formula: gathering from what has come before; adding something highly calculated and clearly directed but in some way unknown and always personally costly - something "risky"; and the combining and building of something more advanced, has not changed in the leap from "genetic protean replication" in the eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr progression from species to species, to "intellectual protean replication" within our species.
In short, the process of genetic advancement in eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr species has, in man, been superseded by the process of intellectual advancement - although the function of protean replication can continue to be served as before, albeit with the sort of risks that are in keeping with the new, higher level of development.
For the purposes of showing what one portion of 'hierarchical layering' - structural, range, and adaptive 'hierarchical layering' - within an organism looks like, we'll use the example of the 'structural characteristic' of crying in humans.
Page 2 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Almost every baby cries.
That is a uniform characteristic throughout the species.
Each baby, however, has a different "range" of possible "behavior": one may have a "range of possibility" from A to D#; another from C to F; still another from B to G.
Furthermore, each one finds a particular specific "adaptation" - each baby winds up crying in a specific, unique way - in this case, mainly at a specific note.
One winds up crying at the note C, another at D, another at G.
In the case of this particular range, the adaptation or 'note' that becomes 'uniquely characteristic' of a particular baby is the one that brings protection to the baby in his or her particular situation.
Again, there is what might be called 'uniform structure', present throughout the species, i.e.
every baby, or almost every baby, cries; there are adaptive ranges, the same types of ranges but a different section of the range for each person, in this case, a range of 'notes'; and there are "points of adaptation", a specific sort of crying - consistent within a single person but highly variable from one person to another.
Indeed, especially regarding the combinations of ranges within a person, each person is entirely unique, from one individual to the next.
When discussing the "basic genetic behavioral structure" of Homo Sapiens, it is accurate to say that we all, or almost all, have the same 'structural characteristics', and in that way, we are all, or almost all, the same.
As regards which portion of any of the at least thousands of low level ranges we are born with, it is accurate to say we are all similar but different.
And as regards our adaptations - that is, what we become, what sort of person we are - it is accurate to say that we are each highly unique.
The same structure.
Similar but different parts of ranges to start
with.
And each individual's particular adaptation, that is, the sort of person each individual is, is highly unique.
More important for the purpose of this discussion, there are "hierarchies" of 'ranges' and 'adaptations'.
That is to say, many specific adaptations form together as a new, higher level range, and a specific but different type of adaptation is formed at that higher level.
In each human, the sheer number of these groupings, and especially the number of layers of hierarchy of mental and emotional organization within an individual, is far, far greater than in any other species.
Page 3 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It is this sophisticated, 'many-layered' hierarchical arrangement within each individual that makes up high level "behaviors", i.e.
passion, satisfaction, certainty, intelligence, imagination, honesty, decision, emotion, "brightness" of all sorts, 'depth', thought, judgment, and human enactment.
In our full paradigm we have identified nine specific individual 'inner conditions' that a person may be in, each one consisting of a certain type of thought, and a certain type of feeling.
Furthermore, we have identified about a dozen very high level, specifically human, 'structural characteristics' - very high level ranges and adaptations - alongside a description of how they are formed and the function of the different human adaptations within the species-wide, high level characteristic ranges, as well as in the overall schema.
It must be noted that for people, although early in a person's life some ranges "close down" to the point of adaptation relatively permanently , with other ranges the adaptation can shift back and forth.
Ranges that are used for gathering protection, a baby's main task, and for low level enactments, develop adaptations that are generally more "set" and are often called "personality".
Adaptations within ranges that are used for adding - that is, adaptations that are used for 'risk' - and adaptations that are used for building or 'caretaking', which are an adult's main task, and for high level enactments generally are more flexible and changeable.
It must be borne in mind that while specific adaptations vary widely from person to person and are unique to each specific individual, adaptations must also fall within a specifically survivable structure - that is, they must fit together in a certain way within an individual, and must further fit a certain way - in complementary fashion - among members of tribe and species.
Although there is an overall healthy design for the various human characters, adaptation can fall outside that healthy structure.
In that case, individual and group suffer terribly, and when present on the grand scale, extinction of species and bio-ecosystem lays ahead.
Attempts at articulations delineating survivable and unsurvivable adaptations among humans have long been pursued.
The laws, rules, national constitutions, and moral codes formulated in the course of setting up large societies were generally conceived so as to be based on the best approximation of enactments that would lead to the best health of the society at all levels.
At their inception, such codes were said to be designed to be, or were designed to be, formulations regarding just what sorts of common "behavior" would bring the healthiest and most survivable continuations for societies, individuals, and the species - given both the basic human structure, common to all, as well as the necessary adaptive differences.
Over the eons, various artists, scientists, and scholars have also been hard at work uncovering
Page 4 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 ever more clear and elementary truth regarding the bio-ecosystem in order to determine how various human horrors have come about, so such problems can be solved and "protean advancement" for all can ensue.
The question we address is: "just what are the judgments, emotions, and enactments that the human central nervous system matrix was designed to harbor in terms of the best and deepest of feelings and the survival of individual, tribe, and species.
Indeed, what does the 'overall behavioral system' of a healthy human organism consist of."
The connection between protean development in all biology and human 'inner states', judgments, and enactments is actually rather simple - many of the elements already well known.
Although a clear, well organized, written elucidation of this connection between the overall general biological schema and "human enactment" schema is more than 7,000 years overdue, once seen, it is relatively easily understood by everyone.
The body of each individual Homo Sapiens perceives conditions in the world at large.
Reports of these conditions - "signals" - enter the body through eyes, ears, skin, and so forth.
The particular external condition being reported, in combination with internal processes - including internally controllable, conscious decisions - stimulates a particular gland to emit a particular chemical that in turn stimulates the central nervous system - and we 'feel' a certain
way and think a certain specific category of thought - that is to say, we experience a certain 'inner state'.
In our species, Homo Sapiens, when we perceive the presence of something that already exists, something that has come before, something solid from which to build upon - that is, when a person perceives the presence of what we call "protection" - the central nervous system is signaled to produce 'feelings' or 'inner states' that, as a group, are generally called 'security' feelings.
In human beings, 'protection' comes in the form of the presence of and actions of protective individuals, in the form of useful ideas, in the form of what we call "internal gridwork" - which is built up over a life time - and in the form of physical things.
Conditions calling for decisions as regards that which the organism adds independently , decisions that must be highly calculated and carefully directed but often daring and personally costly - conditions involving such things as pain, tension, passion, hope, heartbreak, courage, romance, fear , and so forth, conditions that we call "risk" - signal the central nervous system to produce one or more of several types of feelings of anxiety.
Finally, the enactment of actual creation or building, what we call "caretaking", constitutes signals that produce various feelings that can be grouped together as 'vitality'.
In Homo Sapiens, 'building', or 'caretaking', takes the form of developing more intellectual advancement among people, increasingly
Page 5 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 depthful passions and high level ideas, and more advanced physical things - all of which later serve as massive, higher level protection to be built upon later in the course of more risk and caretaking.
In short, the old "something present, something added, something built" formulation remains unchanged lo these past billion years, although the structures being built and the means of building them advance to higher levels in spectacular fashion.
This is the biological schema as manifested in the "behavior" of human beings.
In eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr species, almost all enactments operated on a far more 'automatic' system.
In man, and in man alone, an extremely high level thought, emotion, and judgment system developed, one in which each individual organism itself - each person - operates at almost as high a level as the patterns by which DNA itself operates, and as such each person has a certain degree of serious, conscious, controllable, and often decisive decision-making effect on the whole system.
Certain 'inner states' - that is 'emotions' and 'types of thought' - evolved as a kind of 'magnet' toward certain specific sorts of enactments.
Other 'inner states' inform that something is amiss.
The whole package - feelings, thoughts, guidance, decisions, judgment, enactment - was designed alongside a specific adaptive structure
for their best operation and for the best chances for continued genetic replication - albeit in "protean development" form.
When we speak of an 'inner state', we are describing something that is a valuable guidance tool, an important nutrient, as well as a valuable thing in its own right.
As such, we have found it important to choose appropriate sounding words to describe them and in our full paradigm, have done so.
The nine 'inner states' that we have identified are termed by us, "tenors".
In addition, the security and vitality 'inner states' or security and vitality 'tenors' are termed by us "tones".
The term "anxiety" is left to stand in its commonly understood way.
Thus, the human behavioral matrix runs on nine 'inner states', or nine 'tenors' - three different 'types' of security tones, three different 'types' of vitality tones, and three different 'types' of anxieties.
The word "tenor" and the words "tone" and "anxiety" are all used in this way as nouns in this letter .
However, until our full paradigm, with its more explicit definitions, delineations, illustrations, and diagrams becomes available, we find it more convenient to stick with the term "inner states".
Furthermore, when the word 'level' is used here, it does not refer to 'amount'.
Page 6 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 As used here, the word 'level' refers to "type of thing" or "sort of thing" in a hierarchically organized arrangement.
Although this idea of "level" is very specific, is of most crucial importance to Homo Sapiens and, with good explanation, is easy to grasp, lack of resources prevents us from including a comprehensive definition here.
Again, this whole concept is clearly elucidated - mathematically, semantically, artistically, romantically, and anecdotally - in a finely illustrated early chapter of our full paradigm.
Until such time as we have the resources to make that work available, the reader will have to surmise as best as possible from the usage herein contained.
A word or two must be said regarding the linkage between "thoughts" and "emotions".
A particular 'inner state' or 'tenor' is manifested in a person as a particular type of thought process as well as a particular feeling or emotion.
Thus, while we may characterize one particular "type" of thought and feeling - one particular 'inner state' - as "momentary" or "immediate", and another "type" of thought and feeling - another "type" of 'inner state' - as "long range" or "overall", we are not herein elucidating a distinction between 'thoughts' and 'feelings'.
Again, these distinctions are sorted out, illustrated, and clarified in our full paradigm.
As can be seen, 'inner states' or 'tenors' - emotions, thoughts, feelings - evolved as the "human type" of "guidance system" for the "gather-add-build protean replication method".
'Protection is being gathered' is signaled by 'feelings of security'; 'risk is being added' is signaled by 'feelings of anxiety'; and 'caretaking is being built' is signaled by 'feelings of vitality'.
However, much confusion has long resulted from the fact that 'inner states' - thoughts and feelings - are something else besides being guidance for the overall behavioral system.
They are substance as well.
That is to say, they have specific quantity which can be measured, visualized, and clearly identified.
Like any other substance they must be created in some sort of crucible; and they can be held intact, built upon, utilized, transformed, or destroyed.
Furthermore, like physical objects they are constantly being transferred and can be exchanged, counterfeited, traded, stolen, or paid for .
Finally they can be broken or sought after, they can be blinding, and they can be cherished.
'Inner states' or 'tenors' - that is, thoughts, emotions, feelings - are every bit as vital to life, literally, as food and oxygen.
Without them, everything dies immediately.
Page 7 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 The human organism was designed to run on a certain balance of these things.
When crucial 'inner states' are missing, or when a harmful balance is present, or when 'signals' - "inner states" - appear in the absence of the conditions they were designed to signal, then illness, horror, or death ensues.
This analogy regarding a comparison between 'intellectual-emotional' systems which run on 'inner states', and 'physiological systems' which run on things like food and oxygen, like all analogies, cannot be taken much further - but it is accurate as it stands.
Because the major function of 'inner states' in the bio-ecosystem is as guidance for healthy, survivable development for the individual organism and the species at large, major disruptions and interruptions of the production of these 'guidance signals' - the 'inner state' substances - and especially disruptions in the conditions that they are designed to maintain, can, and usually do, lead to an unsurvivable situation.
The function of security is as a signal that protection is present and therefore is also a signal that caretaking is called for.
The function of vitality is as a signal that caretaking is being successfully performed and protection is called for.
The function of anxiety is as a signal that there is not enough protection to perform the present caretaking, "risk" is present in the situation, and in this way anxiety functions as a signal that
carefully considered and risk-filled decisions and enactments are called for .
Later on, we will discuss what happens when these 'inner states' go off altogether, but at this point we will discuss the phenomenon of producing the flow of such 'inner states' in the absence of the conditions that they evolved as guidance for.
Alcohol, for example, turns on some 'medium' or 'high level' security 'inner states'.
Heroin and related drugs seem to raise some of these same sort of security inner states (no doubt related to an important role of protection generally which is as a pain absorber) and heroin in particular, also lowers anxieties as well.
This doubly inaccurate message to the central nervous system engenders an especially dangerous circumstance for all concerned.
The central nervous system gets 'signals' that a circumstance - in this case, protection - is present when in fact it is nowhere to be found.
'Communications techniques' are also designed to counterfeit 'naturally evolved' 'signs' of protections - certain sorts of syntax and other 'audio clues' - and signal the presence of protection when protection itself is not present.
Both the fact that protection in the world generally is not being projected in a survivable direction, and the fact that the individual is being 'pumped' with the 'guidance signals' but without the conditions - actual protection - that these 'inner states' (i.e.
Page 8 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 high level security or low level anxiety, etc.) were designed to be signals for, leads to an extremely pain-producing situation on the small scale, and extinction on the large scale.
"Booster" drugs - 'amphetamines' and others - raise anxieties irrespective of the conditions that such anxieties were designed to be 'signals' for.
As such, the anxiety inner states that are 'stimulated' by such drugs are generally likely to be "spun-out" in a dangerous, harmful, or destructive way, alongside all of the costs and ofttimes permanent losses of such expenditure.
Probably the most famous means of producing some medium level vitality tenors without enacting the conditions that they were designed to be signals for (namely principled caretaking), are cocaine and exercise such as 'jogging'.
When one's caretaking goes generally unprotected, is brutalized, or is destroyed, and when one decides to accept - indeed, maintain and promote - such a life generally, where will the vitality that it takes to get through a demanding day come from.
Alongside 'vacuuming' such 'inner states' from below, jogging and cocaine, it seems, are the 'solution' for a vitality thirsty population whose principled caretaking has been beaten and ridiculed out of existence, and who have made decisions to maintain and perpetuate that circumstance.
It can be seen that while emotions, thoughts, and feelings are the bio-ecosystem's way of guiding the enactment of our species, it is the conditions that produce such emotions - the
conditions that were designed by "evolution" or "creation" to be present alongside such emotions - that actually maintain and build life.
The emotions evolved so as to engender healthy ongoing survival and "protean replication" - in man's case, "intellectual protean replication".
The conditions that produce security - that is, principled caretaking by above persons; the conditions that produce and mitigate anxieties - that is, the dangers present in a situation and the carefully thought out, clearly directed, and always costly risk that a person must enact when "risk" is presented in their situation; and the enactments that produce vitality - that is, one's own principled caretaking, are the conditions that the bio-ecosystem lives on.
Producing the 'guidance signals' - the 'inner states' or 'tenors' - without producing the conditions of nature that they were designed to be guidance for, obviously leads directly to extinction.
The whole subject of 'mind altering' drug use - their sometimes usefulness and benefits, and their more often "fatal-for-all-concerned" dangers - is elucidated in some detail in our full paradigm.
While our work describes, defines, explains, and details many things that are necessary to the formulation of judgments and actions that will lead to a good outcome, it must always be borne in mind that conscious internally controllable decision-making by an individual, and principled, often risky enactments are usually - perhaps always - the decisive factor in whether things go well or go terribly for human beings.
Page 9 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 But it must also be borne in mind that there are circumstances created outside an individual - especially conditions engendered by above parties - that make it more likely or less likely that particular decisions will be made.
Responsibility is everywhere.
Although the substances that we are identifying as 'inner states' are as vital to the life of human beings as food and oxygen in that without them a person dies immediately, we have found that people find them to be even more vital.
It is our experience that people - all people - are more interested in maintaining certain balances of these 'inner state' substances - tones and anxieties - while they are alive than they are interested in even prolonging their own, individual life.
The ridiculous claim is sometimes made that people are more interested in staying alive first, and simply increasing their own supply of security second - these two things above and beyond anything else.
Not only does this make no sense biologically speaking, but as a practical matter, no one operates this way - it is a certain specific sort of combination of various types of vitality, anxiety, and security that people strive to obtain and maintain while they are alive, first and foremost, that constitutes virtually every person's primary goal.
Considerations of amounts of each of these substances must be made in order for any discussion regarding what a person "wants", to usefully proceed.
Unfortunately, to date only one of these nine 'inner state' substances has been quantified in a generally accepted counting system: what we refer to as 'medium level security', and some - but not all - of the conditions that it takes to produce it, has long been measured by various 'monetary systems'.
Obviously, the counting and value-measuring system generally used - money - to quantify some (but not all) of the protections that 'signal' the raising and lowering of medium level security, and to some degree anxiety, is quite useful, but inadequate, in and of itself, as a measuring system for all the other things that create 'inner states'.
Any quantification system that displayed just how much of which sort of 'inner state' 'signals' (how much of the various types of protection conditions, risk enactments, and caretaking enactments that stimulate the various 'inner states') were being created or exchanged would have to include, at the least, two or three other types of measuring scales as well.
A rough sense of the difference involved might be illustrated in the following way: one unit of a high level 'inner state' substance might be a partial equivalent of one hundred units of medium level 'inner state' substance - as well as a partial equivalent of ten thousand units of low level 'inner state'.
However, a singular quantification scale would not be adequate since a different 'level' of 'inner state' is also a different 'type' or sort of 'inner state' altogether.
Different 'types' of scales are needed.
Page 10 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Furthermore we would not suggest that any one inner state, by itself, is more or less 'valuable' than any other inner state.
Each sort of inner state is an entirely different sort of thing and it is a certain balance of all nine and the conditions that the ecosystem evolved to produce them that is required.
Needless to say, in our full paradigm, we have very specifically identified, diagrammed, and illustrated each of nine 'inner states' or 'tenors', including a clear, finely delineated description of each, alongside the ontogeny of the human 'gridwork' that enables their production; those specific circumstances which engender each of them; a variety of mechanisms for the transfer of inner states from one person to the next; and the function of each in the bio-schema.
It must be noted that, in terms of the 'inner states' that human beings run on and the conditions required to produce them, while "physical objects" account for somewhere in the area of five to fifteen percent of what is exchanged between people, and while there are several other important means of exchange, the vast majority of 'inner states' that are transferred between people generally, pass not through the hands but rather through the vocal cords.
That is the primary means of exchange.
One cannot utter a sound within earshot of another person without taking something from them or giving something to them, and the same goes for hearing something spoken by another person.
As an immediate means of exchange (although the effects are very long term) of 'inner states' from one person to the next, and the conditions that produce those 'inner states', there is no force as powerful as the human voice, more particularly, the spoken word.
In this context, we must mention that as regards that which builds inner states (rather than the process by which they are transferred) - reading, writing, physically constructing something, and the various, many forms of "work" are the most important creators and crystallizers of the conditions that produce inner states.
But the spoken word is the primary means of transfer and exchange from one person to another .
Again, speaking can denote either the taking or giving of inner states.
Hearing can also denote either the taking or giving of inner states, from one person to the next.
The matter of whether a statement is truthful or is a deliberate misreport of perception is obviously a major key to the determination of whether it is the teller who is giving or receiving or the listener who is giving or receiving, and what sort of inner state is given or is received.
This sort of dynamic will be clarified in detail in a later section.
It may be a bit unfamiliar for some readers to conceptualize 'thoughts', 'feelings', 'emotions' - that is, 'inner states' - as substances that are created by a process much like any other sort of
Page 11 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 'work' and created, in large part, by some other individual, outside the particular individual who is 'holding', transforming, or spending them.
Furthermore, the transfer of these substances from one person to the next - through principled exchange, theft, or whatever - may also be a phenomenon that some readers have not previously noticed.
In our experience however , when such phenomena are pointed out to any of the scores of professional people with whom we've met, they quickly begin to deliberate misreport of perception about what they understand and, in a somewhat frenzied state, frantically slam the door, forcefully breaking off all further contact with us.
We have concluded that once pointed out, accompanied by even the most rudimentary explanations, virtually everyone understands exactly what we are talking about, although people who have previously noticed this phenomenon, especially 'professional people' in the current situation, seem sociopathically compelled to deliberate misreport of perception about what they understand.
It is for this reason that we place proof of the existence of feelings as creatable, identifiable, quantifiable, transferable, destroyable, valuable (life and death) substance in the "self-evident" category .
Through use of these sorts of understandings, it can be seen that one can articulate a clear structure for the sorts of creation and transfer of these substances - the various types or 'levels' of security, anxiety, and vitality and the conditions
that produce them - that will constitute the healthiest, most passionate, most depthful, most satisfying, and most survivable course for each individual human being, for the entire species, and indeed, for all biology and beyond.
To be even more specific, our work has shown, to an extremely elementary degree of self- evidence, that in order for there to be continuing survival, individuals must transform security into vitality (that is, protection must be transformed into caretaking), and vitality and caretaking must, in the main, be projected in a hierarchically downward direction, while anxiety - risk - must move in a hierarchically upward direction, to be absorbed by those above, combined by them with vitality and transformed into overall, more advanced solution.
In short, when security and vitality moving down the hierarchy meet anxiety moving up the hierarchy, a fundamental, billion year old biological process - protean replication - is in the works, albeit amidst great pain and risk.
The schema of transfer of 'inner state' substances includes, for example, the following: A person garners their security through some protection- seeking towards above parties and from protective things that have already been created.
In the main, however, protection received - that is, security experienced - is the result of some sort of caretaking a person is receiving from above parties at the initiative of those above parties.
Drawing on that store of security (protection) and converting it into vitality and combining it
Page 12 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 with anxiety (pain and risk) absorbed from below, the person themself enacts principled caretaking.
Such caretaking is directed towards below parties and towards creating things that will later serve as protection.
When there is not enough protection available to accomplish the caretaking 'mission', anxieties rise, a signal that 'something added' is called for, namely, carefully thought out, clearly directed, and always personally costly 'risk'.
Thus, adaptable, survivable, depthful, health- producing hierarchical relations, the sort that fits the original, excellent 'protean replication' design that biology - and man - have long run on, involves stress, anxiety, and pain moving up the societal hierarchy until it reaches a party who can, because of their greater protection, and their ability to maintain a good deal of high intensity , high level anxiety , absorb it and transform it into solution.
Obviously, the only health producing, life- advancing, and survivable criteria for assigning protection to an individual, and therefore assigning to them a higher place in any hierarchy, is the person's ability to spend their security by converting it into vitality, absorbing pain and stress from below, and combining it all into more advanced solution for everyone and for all time.
Conversely , a low ability , or an inability to convert security into vitality, that is, protection into caretaking, and a low ability or an inability to combine it with anxiety and risk absorbed from below, naturally goes along with a very low place in a hierarchy.
This, in a nutshell, is what we call "principled hierarchical relations".
'Unprincipled hierarchical relations', by contrast, involve, in the majority, "delivering up" in a hierarchy the security and vitality substances, while projecting 'downwards' anxiety, stress, and pain.
When this sort of transfer of substances is in the majority, the metaphor "cannibalization" is appropriate, and species, tribe, and individual - not to mention the gene patterns' own possibilities for survival, advancement, and therefore replication - plummets towards extinction.
Obviously, those who decide that the absorption from less protected parties, under any circumstances, of anxiety, pain, or stress is some sort of "perverse" and personally unwanted "masochism" must be receiving of the least protection, and reside at the lower reaches of the hierarchy, if anyone is to survive.
Page 13 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Paradigm From California by Neil Miller et. al.
Copyright © 1984, 1986
Volume II: Letter To A Responsible Party
Part IV: Framework Chapter 12: Farming Society
    Unfortunately , about 9,000 years ago, the excellent adaptive design that man's genetic behavioral structure was designed to run alongside was severely derailed.
Endocrinological, electro-neural, literary, genetic, sexual, sociological, mathematical, psychiatric, artistic, biological, emotional, behavioral, and anecdotal explanations regarding this 'derailment' phenomena appear in our full paradigm and although we do not have the room to detail this situation here, we will touch on it.
About twelve thousand years ago, intellectual accumulations of knowledge and language over the previous 50,000 years collected into a "change to a higher level of organization" for Homo Sapiens which produced several environmental changes, including a change in the size of tribes, and the presence, for the first time, of a 'surplus' of physical protections.
Following the emergence of these two extremely positive changes, and in combination with several other factors, a small, tragic, but highly functional behavioral adaptation became a giant and indeed, near fatal factor for our species.
First, as regards size: Up until about 12,000 years ago, the size of human tribes remained relatively stable.
Generally accepted estimates place the size of human tribes at between about twenty and about two hundred persons.
By about 7,000 years ago, we had a world in which there were many tribes, now called kingdoms, civilizations, or nations - that consisted of tens of thousands, even millions of persons.
This is not merely a change to greater number, but a change of scale, a change of 'level', a change to a different type of situation altogether .
Again, this was not a 'genetic' change, but rather a manifestation of intellectual protean development among our species within the already existing genetic structure.
Originally , man's whole behavioral genetic structure developed in a situation whereby there was everyday, face to face, back and forth communication through language and other means between all levels of tribal hierarchy - upper, middle, and lower.
Such everyday communication kept the widely varying adaptations of individual members within the survivable balance; and the faces, voices, passions, ideas, emotions, and actions of each member was well accounted for in the overall
Page 14 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 judgments, decisions, and enactments by which the tribe lived.
It could be said that 'inner state' substances - 'tenors', that is, tones and anxieties - were created, transformed, utilized, crystallized, spent, and exchanged among and between all levels of hierarchy in the balance best suited for survival - one that would have had to have included, if anyone were to survive, the most powerful, high level passions, thoughts, and judgments emanating from, and passing between, every individual member of the tribe.
When societies rapidly advanced to the big scale beginning about 12,000 years ago, the tribe's overall judgment system was worked out quite well in the new situation.
However certain circumstances, which will be briefly elaborated on in part six of this letter, combined in such a way whereby after several thousand years of workability, the new, large- scale, and entirely principled communities were broken up, 'deprinciplized', and 'thrown together' into an unworkable, and an increasingly damage- producing arrangement.
In this entirely unnecessary, never before seen, and highly 'distorted' 'anomaly' sort of situation, a powerful separation between the upper and lower layers of hierarchy came into existence.
Previously, tribe-wide combinations of thoughts, emotions, and actions had made up the everyday decision-making and enactments of the whole tribe.
However, with the onset of a most destructive hierarchical arrangement, such combination was
blocked and broken, especially by persons in the upper, more protected portions of hierarchy.
For tribal leaders - now called advisors, kings, priests, generals, and the like - ways were developed whereby life could be lived and large scale decisions could be made while pretending blindness to crucial portions of the more painful daily life circumstances of huge sectors of the population.
Again, an excellent and workable, new hierarchical arrangement, one to match the new, more advanced societal circumstances, was in effect for several thousand years.
However at some point, among some persons, terrible decisions were deliberately made blocking the rise of anxiety upwards in the hierarchy, while vitality - which should have been used to solve the anxiety-producing and pain-producing problems - was siphoned upwards instead, converted into security and passed upwards again to eventually be consumed, that is, in effect, destroyed.
It must be emphasized that the advent of the destructive hierarchical arrangements came into being several thousand years after the advent of farming society.
Furthermore, a "derailed" hierarchical arrangement never developed exclusively from within a tribe or community, nor exclusively from outside it, but rather developed from some terrible decisions made by some persons within and some persons outside a community so disastrously affected.
Page 15 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 [Some time after this section was written, we decided to write a more advanced elucidation regarding this particular unnecessary and disastrous change in hierarchical relations that first appeared around nine thousand years ago, and included it in later portions of this letter.]
As regards this matter of decisions, given the new, large scale of things, singular decisions as well as groups of decisions, at certain times, came to have vast and powerful influence - as never before.
The growing scope and importance of conscious, internally controllable decisions by each individual member throughout the hierarchy, from top to bottom, was, of course, part and parcel of the continuing advancement of 'levels of development' - individual human decision- making of increasing scope of influence on the whole bio-ecosystem is much in keeping with the "protean development" of the bio-ecosystem's newfound conscious creature, namely Homo Sapiens.
The power to make conscious, internally controllable decisions had always been a constantly used property of Homo Sapiens in particular .
With the advent of huge, tightly organized societies, a situation came into being whereby the individual decisions of individuals throughout all layers of hierarchy, especially those near the top, came to exercise enormous effect - as never before - on individuals, tribe, and planet.
So, we have a relatively sudden group of changes, including change of scale regarding the size of tribes accompanied by a greater distance
between levels of hierarchy, and a change of scale regarding the power and influence of individual decisions by each individual member of the species and the enactments that follow from those decisions.
Both of these changes, in and of themselves, constituted an excellent and entirely workable advance for humans specifically and for the entire bio-ecoschema.
A third factor in all this is an age old 'human behavioral adaptation' which is contained in the repertoire of our species.
We refer to this phenomenon as a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning".
Again, while this phenomenon is fully detailed and diagrammed in our paradigm, there is not space here to more than touch on it.
Obviously, the whole bio-schema works on a "gather-add-build" system.
There must be costly, risky spending of the organism itself, in addition to protection gathered, in order for there to be building and more advanced crystallization, all in excess of what has come before.
In individual humans, this matter, building and creating in excess of what is gathered is what we refer to as "principled behavior".
"Consuming", that is using up more protection than the person creates through risk and caretaking, is what we refer to as "majority protection-seeking", or "unprincipled" behavior.
Page 16 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It must be remembered that the human portion of the bio-ecosystem runs on nine inner states, not just the two or three generally measured by 'money'.
In short, when one caretakes in excess of the protection that they gather , one 'generates' 'inner states' and all the conditions that it takes to produce them.
In such a situation we refer to a person as having a "majority caretaking enactment homeostasis" or a "majority caretaking balance of enactments" - that is to say, such a person engages in a principled balance of enactments and leads a principled life.
Furthermore, principled behavior 'automatically', so to speak, is the most obvious approach to any situation a person may be in when they have a "majority caretaking anxiety tuning", which all human beings are born with and which all human beings are headed for in adulthood.
When one gathers more protection than the caretaking that they do, one "consumes" inner states, and the conditions that it takes to produce them.
We call this having a "majority protection- seeking enactment homeostasis".
The internal guidance system wherein "majority protection-seeking" enactments 'come to mind' 'automatically' (strongly automatically, but, of course, not completely so) is referred to by us as "a majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning".
This unprincipled "anxiety tuning" in an individual is always the outcome of a particular series of
events and a particular set of individual, internal decisions, which will be dealt with in detail later in this letter .
This distinction between principled and unprincipled appdeliberate misreports of perception to every single human being on the planet over the age of twelve, and especially everyone over the age of twenty-one.
We must further note that while certain enactments come to a person 'automatically', and such 'automatics' are an important portion of the judgment system of an individual, the ability to operate on 'manual', that is, the ability to decide and enact outside the constraints of one's 'automatics' is a fundamental property of the central nervous system of every single Homo Sapiens individual.
While in this and later portions of this letter, we are concerned with identifying, specifically, the nature of 'automatics' in the overall human enactment mechanisms, it is never to be forgotten that the ability to 'manually' decide to operate - and to so operate - in a particular way, one's 'automatics' notwithstanding, is virtually the only way that any person can become unprincipled in the first place, and, furthermore, enacting decisions while operating on 'manual' is also the only way that a person can change their 'automatically' unprincipled enactments to 'automatically' principled ones.
In other words, operating on 'manual' can, under certain conditions, shift - or derail - a person's anxiety tuning from principled to unprincipled or from unprincipled to principled.
Page 17 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 An elucidation of this phenomenon is detailed in later sections of this letter.
Thus, while we refer, again and again to a "majority protection-seeking" or an "unprincipled anxiety tuning" and to a "majority caretaking anxiety tuning" or a "principled anxiety tuning", it is the person's entire enactment homeostasis that determines whether they are principled or unprincipled.
Our elucidations regarding "anxiety tuning" specifically refer only to the portion of one's decision and enactment system that 'comes to them' 'automatically'.
Again, these matters of 'automatic' and 'manual' in decision-making and enactments will be elucidated in further detail in part five of this letter .
In the wild, the very rare and temporary sort of "behavioral anxiety tuning", what we call a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning", was designed through evolution for use by a very few tribe members at the lower reaches of the hierarchy in certain rare specialized situations, in the rarest of circumstances of tribal life.
This 'tuning' - or this type of 'automatic' - is manifested by a person gathering more protection than the caretaking that they enact.
For the moment, suffice it to say that the function of this particular "anxiety tuning" was to rigidly maintain an extremely painful circumstance, "unconsciously" so to speak, into the next generations until persons operating within a principled homeostasis can create the
sort of advancement that can solve the overall problem.
Suppose that in a certain area, many tribes have been exposed to the experience whereby tigers kill members of various tribes.
In this sort of case a tribe gets extremely cranky for a generation or two until someone and some people figure out about the habits of tigers, their function in the ecosystem - that is, the nature of their protection, their caretaking, and their risks - about encampment fortifications, seasonal migrations, food supply, and all the other things that go into a permanent solution - in "protean development" fashion.
In the Homo Sapiens situation, simply killing tigers in defense, without overall advancement, solves nothing in the 'scheme of things', is not the way of the ecosystem generally, and certainly has nothing in common with pre-man and Homo Sapiens in the wild.
During the generations-long course of the overall, or 'higher level' solution being created, many individual Homo Sapiens tribe members may be only vaguely aware of what the original problem was, and may be only vaguely aware of what the overall solution that is being created and built is.
But the central nervous system chain of Homo Sapiens does not forget.
If it did, the tigers would return again and again and the tribe would not survive, and would not reproduce.
Page 18 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Among human tribes, to forget the horror of severe loss is to kill and be killed, and in the genetically formative environment - i.e.
pre-12,000 and pre-100,000 years ago - such tribes did not survive, and did not propagate.
Those human tribes that remembered - and remembered in the most accurate and useful ways - survived.
This sort of retention in memory from one generation to the next, over the last 50,000 years or so, through language in particular as well as through various "unconscious" mechanisms such as "character disorders", metaphors, scientific and artistic "compulsions" of many kinds, "schizophrenic visions", and a host of other means, alongside the mental, emotional, and judgmental organization therein created, is the special property of Homo Sapiens.
It is, in large part, this incredible, truthful memory of the horrors of loss that forged the fabulous civilizations out of the crucible of fifty thousand years of nomadic experience.
Its role was as a kind of "pain rigidifier" until "protean solution" could be created and built, and it came on line quite rarely , temporarily , and in the circumstance of an alone, isolated, extremely loss-filled and pain-filled person.
For those so encumbered, it is a shallow, brutal, hollow, and tragic way of life, and in the wild, when such a person would become part of a still surviving, caretaking tribe, the "majority protection-seeking homeostasis" did not and could not last long while the person was part of the tribe if the tribe was to survive at all.
But for the overall tribal "problem-solving" system, and for the species as a whole, as an overall fraction of a one percent factor, in certain special rare circumstances, for certain members, at certain times, and at the lower reaches of a caretaking tribe's hierarchy, it had enormous survival value.
Somewhere in middle farming society times, for reasons herein stated among others, there was an interruption in the usual mechanisms for the bringing of this small factor, the "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" back to "majority caretaking" after its brief, tragic, and necessary appearance.
Back in middle farming society days, the whole change in size, the whole change in scale had to be handled and organized just right, and the vast majority of the time it was handled just right.
Unfortunately, indeed, most tragically, at some point in middle to late farming society days, some thoroughly rotten decisions were made by various individual human beings - decisions that never should have been made and never should
Endocrinological, cultural,
neurological, romantic,
psychiatric dynamics regarding precisely how a part of the effects of "losses" are transmitted from one generation to the next through 'personality', language, and 'inner states', and forged into "protean solution" are detailed, diagrammed, and illustrated in our full paradigm.
The point here is that a necessary - but tiny - factor in all this 'transmitting' was a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning".
mathematical, sequential, and
Page 19 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 have been allowed to be carried through - decisions that set in motion a tragic, indeed, near fatal "strongly-self-perpetuating-but-not- completely-so" "majority protection-seeking" situation.
As regards strongly 'self-perpetuating' patterns, it must be noted that, since the 'protean development', "gather-add-build" system is the fundamental mechanism by which the bio- ecosystem operates, the human manifestation of this overall mechanism, "majority caretaking", is far more strongly self-perpetuating than is "majority protection-seeking", although still not completely so.
A word or two must be said regarding one portion of conscious decision-making.
One very small but essential element of a person's overall judgment system is what might be thought of as a "pool of random and unknown factors".
In order for "protean advancement" to ensue, there must be some element, or some 'shade' or 'tone' of an element that does not essentially come from what has come before - some sort of "random" or "chance" element, something from "out of the blue".
It must have taken a couple of billion years for whatever forces of physics, 'creation', and 'meta' 'physics' that DNA was built from to work out the "random portion" of bio-progression - a little too much "randomness" or too much "out-of-the- blue", and the creature cannot hold stable enough to build anything, and progeny tumble into a dead end - extinction.
A little too little - "no surprises" at all - and the progression rigidifies, again dead-ending into extinction.
Additionally, most "combinations" of "rigidity" and "strangeness" would also kill organism or species - rather a 'higher level' regulatory system had to be worked out before serious protean advancement could really get under way, and indeed, it was.
The billion years or so between the first signs of "protein" and the first mature cells were a kind of "trial and error" period regarding the whole business of how much or how little "out of the homeostasis", how much or how little "out-of- the-blue" to make available within the bio- workings in any given situation.
We would speculate that this small but vital "tiny percentage from 'out-of-the-blue' system", along with that which regulates it (almost, but, of course, not quite perfectly) was mostly worked out at the start of the long march from cells to man more than a billion years ago.
It seems to us that the "randomness" or "out-of- the-blue" portion may be - as an overall average - "in the ballpark of" a one percent portion of the "ecosystem's overall judgment" (probably a good deal less).
In our species, a "reservoir" of "out-of-the- ordinary" factors from which to draw on is contained within each human being's overall judgment system.
Obviously, there are situations in which such "randomness" or "strangeness" must be a one millionth of a percent factor or less.
Page 20 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In other situations it must be a two, three, or even five percent factor.
At any rate, it is, among other things, this small 'pool' of "random" or "out of the blue" factors from which to draw upon which makes it possible for a person to consciously evaluate and make decisions, above and beyond whatever circumstance they might otherwise seem "caught in".
It's a very small portion of the judgment system, but it is part of what makes it possible for a person to think and act "outside", to some degree, "the constraints of a person's immediate situation".
This human ability to pull in and figure factors external to their circumstance is one of the things that makes possible the "human responsibility" and enactment of "risk" that is absolutely essential to "protean solution" - and indeed survival at all - among our species.
It must never be forgotten that amidst all the reasons, structures, history , possibilities, physics, and so forth of any situation, especially any situation involving an outcome on this large scale, conscious, internally controllable, evaluatable decision-making by individual human beings, operating in some very crucial ways alone, is the absolutely decisive factor.
When those internally controllable decisions are good ones, not only are painful situations well understood, but the solution arrived at is such that there is permanent advancement for individuals, groups, and the entire species, indeed, at this time, for the entire three billion year bio-ecosystem.
When those internally controllable decisions are bad ones, pain-creating situations are rigidified, only to reemerge ten times more powerfully than before; rigidification is accompanied by the death of feeling altogether , and individual, group, and species - and in this case, the whole bio-ecosystem - veers towards extinction.
At this time in the three billion year history of the bio-ecosystem, this property - conscious, internally controllable decision-making on the part of individual Homo Sapiens in particular, operating without enough protection to avoid major, carefully directed and always costly risk - is the most relevant, indeed, the decisive life and death factor for everyone.
Alongside the relatively sudden "jump to the big scale" in the size of tribes; along with the 'blocking off' by upper hierarchical levels of the anxiety and pain rising from lower hierarchical levels as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, there came, for the first time in man's history, the relatively sudden presence of a vast 'surplus' of physical protections - often dryly referred to as "technological advance".
Agriculture, for example, was among the most spectacular of the sorts of advances that produced a vastly increased scale of "physical" protections, and the higher level human thought, the technology, and the surpluses therein created, was both an excellent and a likely 'protean progression'.
If all had gone well, such increased protection would have led to a parallel progression in the sort of caretaking produced.
Page 21 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Again, this change - the first time presence of a surplus of vast and stable physical protections - brought with it a certain amount of dangerous - but quite handleable - risk that the human judgment system might veer onto an unsurvivable course.
In the wild, the everyday business of life involved the solving of everyday life threatening problems which included, among many other things, procuring shelter and food and the finding of ongoing "protean" solutions to the various "exposure" difficulties presented by climate and predators.
For pre-man and man in the wild, the solutions did not simply present themselves.
Such is not the way of the ecosystem for Homo Sapiens; never was, is not currently, never will be.
Solutions had to be created - and built - through the deliberate, conscious, risk-filled creation of truthfinding.
Problems presented by the ecosystem were solved not just for the moment, but for future generations as well.
Only in the future would such 'old' solutions be considered 'protection' to be gathered and to be built upon in the course of more caretaking, risk, truthfinding, and solution, albeit at a 'higher level'.
As such, when these difficulties - predators, shelter, transportation requirements, injury, climatic difficulties, food supply, and so forth - were presented, they engendered an acute
awareness that caretaking could go, or was going awry , that is to say , risk was present in the situation.
Awareness of the danger to 'high level' caretaking - that is, danger to tribe, species, and future propagation - and the personal risk therein presented, 'signaled' the production and flow of high level vitality and high level anxiety within the human organism.
These 'endocrines' or 'bio-chemicals' sharply organize the cognition portion of the central nervous system.
Thus, accurate assessment of the external situation - that is, awareness of 'high level' caretaking and 'high level' risk or 'danger' - signaled the production, internally, within the human organism, of the very bio-chemicals - 'high level' anxiety and 'high level' vitality - that are the exact ones needed for high level cognition and the creation of high level truthfinding and solution.
In sum, awareness of caretaking and risk signals vitality and anxiety to flow in the individual's central nervous system.
Vitality and anxiety organizes cognition, which engenders accurate assessments of circumstances and possibilities, and cognition therein engenders the creation and building of overall solution.
Overall solution brings survival and propagation, including protections for future generations.
This is the formula - developed through evolution, 'creation', and the forces of physics -
Page 22 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 that was built in the eons prior to the great change of 12,000 years ago.
In the case of the genetically formative situation for Homo Sapiens, those organisms, and the structures contained therein, which evolved with mechanisms whereby problems were solved - and solved for all time - survived, enabling them to propagate far into the future, while taking risks and enacting caretaking with an ever higher level of protection 'backing them up' over generations.
With the presence of large scale surplus, however , it became possible for individuals, indeed, for large portions of whole communities to live for hours, months, and even years with the smallest amount - or even none at all - of 'high level' 'inner states'.
It is by the intelligence and passions of each Homo Sapiens in particular, operating alone at one level and in combination with one another at another level, that man has forged 50,000 years of experience into the fantastic, high level change of twelve thousand years ago.
And it is intelligence and passion that often 'goes to sleep' when high level risk and high level caretaking is discouraged or destroyed, as it has come to be in large societies, increasingly permeated by the "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" of many individuals.
Again, some terrible, large scale decisions were made (and continue to be made and remade) discouraging the enactment of high level risk and high level caretaking activities in daily personal relationships at all levels of hierarchy, and between all levels of hierarchy, decisions by those who pretend to bedeliberate misreport of
perceptionve the patently ridiculous notion that pain, anxiety, and risk are not supposed to rise to the top of the hierarchy and those directly connected with them.
Such reduction in the 'inner states' and the conditions and activities that it takes for an individual to generate them, as well as a reduction of the general amount of 'high level' 'inner states' available in society altogether , lowers cognitive abilities drastically (and all high level certainties, passions, and satisfactions), and "throws" terribly off track the excellent guidance system originally developed.
Again, it must be remembered that although the strongly 'self-perpetuating' nature of the "majority protection-seeking" - or unprincipled - 'balance' has had enormous, horror-producing effect on our species for the past 9,000 years, a "majority caretaking" - or principled - 'balance', once in place as an overall matter, is vastly more strongly 'self-perpetuating', although even still not completely so.
The principled "gather-add-build" situation is the one that has been in effect well over 99 percent of the time in the three billion years of "protean development" on this planet; obviously, nothing can survive for long without it, including the bio- ecosystem itself.
The "bleed-steal-consume-destroy" - or unprincipled - situation is, in the overall, a very rare, relatively short lived occurrence.
In the several million year history of pre-man and man, the current, 9,000 year "majority protection-seeking" presence at the higher levels of hierarchy is long overdue for a return to its
Page 23 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 placement as a very small factor, under very rare circumstances, at the lower reaches of the hierarchy .
Regarding the 'pool' of "out-of-the-blue" factors, or 'possibilities' that are contained in a reservoir within each individual's intellect, as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr , it is clear that the "pool" is most heavily used during the process of risk-filled, responsible, conscious decision-making in the creating and building of principled caretaking.
This type of decision-making is risk-filled because risk is present when there is not enough available protection and "something added" is required; and such risk-filled decision-making is called 'responsible' because "the enactment of principled caretaking" virtually defines the word 'responsible'.
In a word, the 'pool' of "out-of-the-blue-factors" itself becomes most accessible within the central nervous system of an individual when the highest 'level', or "type" of anxiety is flowing in the greatest quantities, and when backed by a small to medium amount of the very highest 'level' or "type" of security - all in pursuit of the most powerful sorts of vitality, also known as "the deepest of satisfactions" - the sort that characteristically result from successful principled caretaking.
Additionally, it must be borne in mind that in human affairs, when the highest level protections evaporate, when the highest level anxiety goes unanswered, when the highest level caretaking is shredded, burnt up, stolen, killed or otherwise destroyed, that is when access to
the 'pool of possibility' closes down to the tiniest of openings.
It is not surprising therefore, that life is at its most brilliant, most depthful, most imaginative, "thickest", and most passionate during times of relatively sudden, high level change within the whole "protean advancement" system.
Not surprising also that it is at its most horrifying - and finally, at its most "flat" and dead - when such risking and building is 'bled' or "consumed" into destruction or in other ways goes awry.
To summarize, we've mentioned several factors that were and continue to be present alongside the major human 'behavioral derailment' - that is the 'overall judgment' and enactment "derailment" of so many individual human beings.
There were the environmental changes - created by humankind out of the collection of protections, including the most powerful of accurate memories - as well as the consolidation and crystallization of all the caretaking and risk that accumulated over the fifty to one hundred thousand years of nomadic experience.
These man-made environmental changes included a major change of scale in regard to the size of tribes and the presence of major surplus for the first time - both of which were powerful and fully handleable pluses for man in particular and for all biology.
A third factor in the "derailment of judgment" phenomena, in addition to changes of scale regarding size and surplus, was that what was originally designed as a very small factor - the "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" -
Page 24 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 was put out of hand, as a result of individual, internally controllable, thoroughly rotten decisions, by individuals, especially - but not exclusively - the decisions of individuals among the more protected and higher reaches of the hierarchy .
And finally, DNA's age-old "calculated chance" or "controlled 'wild card' mechanism" as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr , has developed, over a period of three billion years time, into the presence within every individual Homo Sapiens, for the first time in any species, of a 'pool' of, for want of a better term, what might be called "calculated randomness" or perhaps, "something from out-of-the-blue" - a little 'pool' within every individual of "little wild cards" so to speak, from which to draw on, as a tiny piece of the sort of judgment needed to make the highly directed, very influential, carefully planned, risky, and always personally costly decisions that are humanity's special "protean development" species survival mechanism.
It might be said that a disadvantage of having such a 'pool' of 'possibility', including the intense personal responsibility for the outcome on the world at large of one's decisions, is that one has the ability to make bad decisions with thoroughly heartbreaking and horrifying consequences.
Without question however, the great advantage of having an internal 'pool' of 'possibility' is that when things are worked out well, as human beings are fully capable of and, over the long haul, highly experienced at doing, when decisions turn out to be sound, turn out to have been grounded in truthfulness, with good
outcome, then the certainties, passions, and satisfactions are spectacular .
The interruption in this sort of depthful and passionate intellectual and emotional life for human beings, every human being, has been far too long - nine thousand years.
The correction is long overdue.
While it is highly useful, indeed often absolutely necessary to understand the circumstances under which such ugly and tragic decisions were made, namely in the case given eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, during a time of swift advance from one level of development - small tribes, no surplus - to an entirely higher level of organization - million person 'nations' and fabulous physical protections - it must never be forgotten that internally controllable, conscious human decisions are the special "protean development" mechanism in Homo Sapiens in particular .
When human beings run entirely on "automatic" so to speak, and deliberate misreport of perception about their decision-making abilities or the decisions that they have made or both, advancement is destroyed and everything dies.
As such, at this time, the identifiable difficulty of the single greatest relevance to the whole matter of the human condition, and indeed, life itself, is the rotten decisions that were made at certain times by certain individuals and that continue to be made and remade to this day.
Different sorts of decisions, namely (by definition) principled ones, would have brought about the 'change to a higher level of
Page 25 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 organization' with an excellent continuation, instead of the extremely painful and obviously derailed mountain of pain and possible extinction that the "majority protection-seeking enactment homeostasis" and "anxiety tuning" maintains and perpetuates (strongly perpetuates, but not completely).
Everyday, daily life decisions by each individual at many, if not all levels of hierarchy, at this time have as profound an influence on overall outcome as they ever have had, or perhaps at this time even more profound an effect than ever .
One way or the other.
The great problem of relevance here is neither size, nor scale, nor technology, nor our ability to make influential decisions, nor even the fact that a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" is part of the overall human behavioral repertoire.
Indeed, when operating in the appropriate combination, these are all magnificent protean development solutions to the great problems that mankind has faced.
The real problem is each individual human's specific decisions as regards the handling of these factors in their daily life enactments and their handling of the most profound effects that their individual enactments have on the whole organization of society, and therefore the sort of life available, the sort of balance of 'inner states' available, the sort of protections that later become available, and the enactments that it takes to create and build the things that make up the sort of life everyone lives.
Although a good many people routinely deliberate misreport of perception about what they think regarding ridiculous notions of "inevitability" in human affairs or a supposedly "satisfactory" state of the human condition currently in force, almost all careful observers have noted that the last nine thousand years hasn't gone so well - the huge amount of torment and horror as well as "hollowness" and "flatness" is quite puzzling since there has been a spectacular increase in the amount and sort of medium level protections - physical things - available to the species as well as an increase in the scale of inner states available to each member of the population at large.
Indeed, it is most obvious, as the result of the last 100,000 years of Homo Sapiens risking and caretaking - and several billion years of building of various kinds before that - that the most powerful of certainties, the most spectacular of passions, the deepest of satisfactions is quite nearby .
It is equally obvious that something - something big - has obviously gone terribly wrong.
Something identifiable and understandable - something correctable.
We have discovered what it is.
Once again, internally controllable, accountable, individual human decision-making carries the balance.
After these several billion years of gathering, risking, creating, and building, God, Mother Nature, and DNA must be shaking in their shoes,
Page 26 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 immobilized with terror, hoping to their own above figures that us kiddies don't blow it.
It must be said that they obviously did very well, indeed magnificently , in spite of whatever caused their (apparently) not anticipating that this previously small factor , this "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" would be put and maintained out of hand, but they must be agonizing (as any responsible above figure does) regarding the outcome.
At any rate, obviously, the next outcome - hopefully not the last - is in our hands now.
The hands of every Homo Sapiens individual over the age of twelve on the planet, personally, and in some important ways, each one alone with the situation.
It is most clear that the current extinction- threatening situation can be solved and in a short generation or two the whole planet, along with each tribe and individual on it, can continue on
to the next stage of human advancement in spectacular fashion.
It is also most clear that the outcome may well be most horrifying for all concerned.
Man's structural cognitive equipment - the structure of intelligence within each individual of the species - is well equipped to cope with the change in size to the big scale and with the presence of spectacular physical protections.
All the better, of course.
Only when, however, the "majority protection- seeking anxiety tuning" along with all the lousy, numbing, murderous decisions that promote it in the population at large, is receded to its rightful place at the lower reaches of the hierarchy as, perhaps, a small, rare factor, is all this risking and building going to actually protect the sort of healthy, passionate, depthful, secure, satisfying, and brilliant life that this particular organism, Homo Sapiens, was specifically designed to run on.
Page 27 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Paradigm From California by Neil Miller et. al.
Copyright © 1984, 1986
Volume II: Letter To A Responsible Party
Part V: Modern Times Chapter 13: Current Professional Homeostasis
    Descriptions of current day manifestations of the mechanisms by which this 'derailed tuning' is maintained must include a description of the external 'points of reference', by which people draw the conclusions that guide their enactment and which were set up by ecosystemic processes such as 'evolution', physics, and 'creation'.
Immediately following that, a brief delineation between the truth, untruths, and deliberate misreports of perception is elucidated.
It is our conclusion that the overall human judgment system is 'tethered' to three points of reference.
One portion of judgment is tethered to that which provides protection - we call this portion of the overall judgment system 'attachment judgment', using the term 'attachment' as it has been used in formal psychiatry, namely as referring to the tie that a below party in a hierarchy has to an above party.
Judgments within this portion of the overall judgment system are likely to be made on the basis of how much protection, and what sort of protection, is likely to be received as the outcome of a course of action.
The second point of reference of a person's overall judgment system is tethered to that
which caretakes, that which builds - we call this "cognition judgment".
While 'attachment judgment' seeks to accommodate above parties in order to receive protection first and foremost, 'cognition judgment' is used for caretaking below parties in a hierarchy and for building; for creating something that did not previously exist.
In man, this is done by employing cognitive processes to identify something truthful that was previously unknown - something elementary - or it is done by creating a specific physical object, which in turn stimulates the production of a certain 'inner state'.
Caretaking, building, is also done by organizing together many truthful things and discovering and building a truthful 'higher level' system from those things.
In a word, while one gathers protection and the 'inner states' or feelings of security that go along with it, one's 'inner eye' is fixed on the judgment of one or more 'above' individuals, while when one enacts caretaking and generates the vitality feelings that go along with it, one's 'inner eye' (although the process is far, far more conscious) focuses on the truth itself, which never changes and is the same for everyone.
Page 28 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 The 'attachment' portion of the overall judgment system "follows" above figures in order to gather protection - the "cognitive" portion of the overall judgment system enacts carefully thought through, costly risk, and creates the finding of the truth itself in order to create building or caretaking.
When the attachment portion of a person's overall judgment system is operating without the other components of the judgment system, a person's judgments follow along behind that of another specific individual or, more likely, other individuals.
When the cognitive portion of a person's overall judgment system is operating by itself, a person is, on one level, operating completely alone, without 'tether' to any specific individual - that is 'tethered' only to the truth itself, which never changes and is the same for everyone - and on another level is operating in tandem with virtually every other single Homo Sapiens that has ever lived or ever will live.
When cognition is on full and to the exclusion of the rest of the judgment system, an individual - every individual - is all alone, externally unprotected in their caretaking, and quite conscious of having much of the fate of the whole world in their hands.
Here, of course, we are not talking about "special" circumstances; we are talking about the most intimate and routine of daily interactions in every person's daily life.
In this connection we note that of all the reference points that a person uses in their judgments and enactments, the truth of a
particular matter is the only one that is precisely the same for everyone, and that reference point is found, using as a decisive portion of judgment, the cognitive portion of a person's mind.
There are, of course, certain rare circumstances in everyone's life when attachment judgment must be used to the exclusion of all else, and there are also times in one's life when cognition judgment must be used to the exclusion of all else.
But each of these judgment systems, present within every individual, was designed as part of the individual's overall judgment system and it is this overall judgment system, with all of its parts in good working order, that constitutes the guides and regulatory functions that allow an individual to forge the sort of enactments and enactment patterns that lead to the best and most survivable way of life for individual humans and for every level of life right up to the entire bio-ecosystem and beyond.
It can be seen, for example, that the sometimes absolutely necessary, at other times psychopathic "us against them" type of mental formulations are characteristic of the sort of figuring that is associated with the attachment system, while overall, permanent, 'high level' advancement at all levels - individual, tribe, species, ecosystem - involves mental formulations that search out the truth itself, which never changes and is the same for everyone, and involves the cognitive portion of the overall judgment system.
Page 29 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Under certain conditions, it must be noted, an "us against them" mental construction may well be absolutely vital to life.
In the course of other sorts of human interactions, and in the course of major, long term decision-making, as well as much everyday decision-making, a "runaway" attachment system, one that is in control of one's entire judgment system, can be and indeed, in this day and age, often is a fatal condition.
Without the truth itself - and cognition - as a major, usually the major 'point of reference', caretaking, vitality, passion - caring - generally goes awry.
In our species and in our species alone, it is the ability of every individual to clearly identify absolute truth down to a greater and greater degree of self-evidence that, in large part, makes it possible for each individual human being to enact, during their life, the "protean development" that was previously the province of species to species progression.
It is, among other things, the risky, painful, passionate, and sometimes personally fatal process of creating truthfinding that creates, adds, and builds.
As can be seen, it is large scale deliberate misreports of perception about the nature of life that siphons vitality upwards, consumes it, and destroys all that it could build, indeed, destroys life itself.
A word or two must be said regarding a third point of reference of a person's overall judgment system, in addition to the judgment of
attachment figures that one seeks out in the gathering of protection and in addition to truth which one seeks out in the performance of building and caretaking.
What we call 'risk judgment' organizes when there is not enough protection present to maintain or accomplish the caretaking at hand.
Internal responses evolved specifically to serve the function of enabling an individual to bring forth the solution to 'danger to caretaking' when principled protection from above parties, or other protection, is not available.
When risk is presented in a situation, pain, fear, passion, excitement, hope, 'striving', terror , heartbreak, courage, or other forms of anxiety are 'signaled' by the situation; and the various anxiety bio-chemicals surge through an individual's central nervous system.
At the 'lower levels', such anxieties can be transformed, "spun-out", utilized, or 'spent' in a variety of ways - or can be "turned off" altogether .
Furthermore, in a generally principled situation, anxiety is likely to be transferred up the hierarchy or towards unprincipled persons while in a generally unprincipled situation, anxiety is likely to be transferred down the hierarchy or towards principled persons.
It is through various sorts of 'low level' and 'medium level' enactments and decisions by an individual, that the internal "risk-anxiety" system serves in its everyday function as a regulator for the other two systems.
Page 30 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 However, when 'high level' risk is present in the situation, or when there is a long term 'buildup' of 'low' and 'medium' level anxiety producing situations, and when such anxieties crystallize mightily within an individual, the 'out-of-the- ordinary' or 'out-of-the-blue' factors mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr become available to conscious portions of the human central nervous system and the possibility for 'protean solution' for the entire situation - some sort of 'high level' overall change, overall advancement type of solution - comes into view.
Although much that is ballyhooed as "new" these days is in fact the stripped down and "deprinciplized" ideas of desperate caretakers several layers below the over-protected presenters of such "newness", it is obvious that the most brilliant originations and most passionate enactments in human history are derived from the densest and most powerful crystallizations of the 'highest level' anxieties, which themselves derive from a situation of the 'highest level' risk to the entire CNS chain.
Although much danger and hope presents itself in a local form, the more severe forms of pain are signals of threats to the larger system, and the more severe crystallizations of anxiety constitute tools for such 'advancement type' solution.
In anxiety's role at the lower levels as the everyday 'regulator' and in its role at the higher levels as a 'protean development' 'catalyst', the risk portion of the overall judgment system is tethered to that which will solve a particular danger to the entire system, as large as is required, and thereby promote its permanent advancement and therefore long term survival.
In a word, while "attachment judgment" is 'tethered' to the judgment of above individuals, and "cognition judgment" is 'tethered' to the truth itself, "risk judgment" is 'tethered' directly to the survival of the whole human species, including the groups and individuals in it.
At the highest level "risk judgment" is 'tethered' to "schematic survival" - "regulation" and "protean replication" - that is, the regulation, advancement, and therefore the survival of the entire human system, bio-ecosystem, and beyond.
A society wherein the grossest and most numbing sorts of supposedly "sexual" expenditure is projected, indeed, even enforced as an everyday insistence, wherein a massive 'numbing' and "killing" of pain is presented as the primary "solution" to pain-producing problems, and wherein anxiety which cannot be "spun-out" - often in the ugdeliberate misreports of perceptiont of ways - "numbed", or "killed" is slammed back down the hierarchy as a matter of common 'acceptability', is a society that is 'flat', 'out of clues', and in the throes of a horrifying and entirely unnecessary destruction.
In the current situation, it is not only the lifetime and passions of individuals or even only the physical survival of whole nations that is at risk.
At this time, the entire three billion year eco- system, along with all that it has created and built and all that it could soon be, is rather insanely, stupidly, and entirely unnecessarily being pushed to extinction.
Page 31 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 As mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, the gathering of protection - in and of itself - adds nothing in the scheme of things; rather, it subtracts from the store of what has been created.
When such protection is combined with risk and caretaking, the building - including the building of greater protections - and survival progression proceeds.
When risk and caretaking are absent or are at a lower ebb than protections received, then protections that have been built are simply 'consumed'.
All that caretaking, or "caring", passed up the hierarchy, broken down into, metaphorically speaking, "sugars", passed up again, and finally consumed and destroyed - high level 'inner states' among the entire population, along with the conditions that produce them, vanishing alongside.
As regards the nature of truth, untruths, and deliberate misreports of perception: special characteristics of the truth include a singular, unchanging, and same for everyone nature.
'Untruths' on the other hand fall into many categories, such as fantasies, stories, dreams, games, jokes, exaggerations, mistakes, experiments, art, music, poetry, thoughts of many kinds, drama, and so forth.
Untruths of all these kinds are often vital components of 'protean replication', and without many of these sorts of untruths nothing can be built, nothing can go on.
Deliberate misreports of perception, however , fall into a special category of untruth.
A deliberate misreport of perception is an untruth that is intended to be bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved as truthful, and wherein such bedeliberate misreport of perceptionf causes pain, destruction, theft, the death of feeling, murder , horror , extinction, and so forth.
In fact, the very word 'deliberate misreport of perception' has strong overtones of anger - this is because anger is a 'high level human behavioral characteristic', designed alongside the genetic structure to be part of an overall solution sequence when pain, destruction, theft, and so forth arises.
When the word "deliberate misreport of perception" is used, the message is projected that not only is something untruthful being told, but also that someone - or some people - are getting hurt or killed as the result of this untruth being bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved to be truthful.
In short, the truth is absolute, singular, and permanent, it never changes and is the same for everyone; untruths are multitudinous, they are sometimes brilliant, delightful, passionate, beneficial, and useful - although they are all too often none of the above; and deliberate misreports of perception in particular hurt, maim, destroy, and kill, and while they engender enormous horror as they swarm, and linger over time, they do tend to dry up and blow away, like so much dust in the wind.
Page 32 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 While many of the losses from such lying are not recoverable, many such losses are recoverable.
Unfortunately , in the contemporary majority protection-seeking age, the vast majority of the losses from such lying that are recoverable have not yet been recovered.
Mathematical, anecdotal, romantic, geometric, semantic, artistic, and psycho-neural aspects of this matter of the truth, untruths, and deliberate misreports of perception, are delineated, detailed, and diagrammed in our full paradigm.
One of the things a person uses deliberate misreports of perception for is the absorption of one or another 'inner state' without acknowledgment of its existence or source and without principled exchange.
When any transfer of the physical protections that stimulate medium level security occurs between people, that is, when we commonly discuss physical objects that are transferred from one person to the next, the nature of the transaction has good definition - we can speak in terms of weight, price, size, value, cost of creating or building, color, use, and so forth.
When the transfer from one person to another of physical objects goes unacknowledged, is misrepresented, or is denied altogether , the word "theft" is commonly used.
When it comes to the other eighty-five percent of what it takes to sustain life, the other eighty- five percent of what is created by people and passed between people besides physical objects, namely the 'inner states' mentioned above and the conditions, decisions, and enactments that
are required to produce them, there is most tragic, extremely inaccurate, and usually dishonest talk of "undefinability".
Large scale untruths regarding the source, cost, value, and nature of the various 'inner states' that are created and exchanged between people, and particularly dishonesties regarding the conditions that engender them, are the most powerful - and deaddeliberate misreports of perceptiont - deliberate misreports of perception of all.
It can be seen that a deliberate misreport of perception can be used as an instrument of unacknowledged and unpaid-for transfer of 'inner states' from one person to another - just as such deceptions are employed for any other more overtly recognized unprincipled transfer, such as the 'theft' of physical objects.
However, deliberate misreports of perception regarding the nature of things altogether also carry a power and influence at a much higher level than merely the immediate theft by one person of that which another has created themselves or has received by principled exchange.
Several pages hence, there is a list of statements that we have heard repeated again and again by various people who are well aware that they deliberate misreport of perception a lot when discussing these things.
Many professionals, in fact, have overtly, smugly, and readily acknowledged to us that as regards these matters, they deliberate misreport of perception about what they think - especially to below parties - as a matter of routine.
Page 33 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Over the years, as high school teachers, in the course of investing tremendous risk, truthfinding, and caretaking in so many young people, we have seen death, and worse, come to young persons as the outcome of their bedeliberate misreport of perceptionving obvious deliberate misreports of perception, told to them (and told to us) by those with professional or institutional backing, deliberate misreports of perception that were known by the tellers to be deliberate misreports of perception, were the sort of deliberate misreports of perception that are known to be deadly if bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved to be truthful - especially by young people - were meant to be bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved as truthful, and were bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved by below parties to be the truth.
It is most obvious that when below parties bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve, and act on a bedeliberate misreport of perceptionf in deliberate misreports of perception told to them by above parties, especially 'high level' deliberate misreports of perception, a "cannibalization" process is being perpetuated by the above parties that do the lying, and pain and destruction is being brutally rendered therein or close by.
Over the past four years, we have engaged in approximately two hundred and fifty face to face conversations with more than fifty licensed professionals in the fields of education, psychiatry , medicine, sociology , psychology , biology, and other scholarly fields, most of whom hold considerable reputation, some prolifically published and at the top of their field.
It has been our most disheartening but repeated experience that after any one of the points on the list nine pages following is placed clearly and overtly at issue in conversations with each of them, no matter how softly, neatly, quietly, sweetly , well dressed, well prepared, well organized, attractively, or intelligently we present ourselves, we are greeted in virtually all cases to date with panic and hostility, with deliberately, knowingly, and smugly told deliberate misreports of perception, with threats, slammed doors, and then later, the stoniest of silences.
We have concluded however, that virtually no one who actually, firmly believes the list of statements nine pages hence, could ever so much as get out of bed in the morning, much less collect and spend the enormous amount of protection that so many who project the sort of deliberate misreports of perception listed have.
We have sorted it out as best we can in the following way: In a situation wherein a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" and enactment homeostasis prevails, truthful things, vitality packed things, are fed into the hierarchy from "majority caretakers" in below positions.
As such, things are reported to employers, professors, supervisors, doctors, therapists, policemen, executives, administrators, parents, dentists, instructors, social workers, lawyers, officers and officials of many kinds, and so forth.
The above party absorbs the "juice" - that is, the vitality "inner state" - and absorbs the truth - that is, the information - while denying the
Page 34 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 value, the truthfulness, even the very existence of what is being transferred upwards.
In short, an unprincipled above party deliberate misreports of perception about what he or she understands, keeping the below party 'on the line' just enough for the below party to keep "pumping out" truth and vitality upwards, or demobilizing and crushing the below party if there is any danger that the below party might reveal the above party to be lying about what the above party understands.
In any case, in a generally unprincipled society, truth and vitality are passed upwards, converted into security and passed upwards again.
Meanwhile, deliberate misreports of perception - and pain - are slammed back down the hierarchy.
At the present time (as well as for much of the last 9,000 years) much 'acceptability' of many kinds - 'professional', social, and personal - is defined by this truth-vitality-security flow upwards in the hierarchy and deliberate misreports of perception-risk-pain slammed back downwards in the hierarchy.
All too much of what is sometimes paraded as "common wisdom" - but is in fact, unwise, untruthful, and horror producing - points in this non-survivable direction.
The group of statements that we have assembled starting on the seventh page following is part of what we call "the-web-of-deliberate misreports of perception-at-the-top-of-the-majority- protection-seeking-judgment-enactment- homeostasis".
They serve as kind of an all-purpose, overall vitality siphon.
Such statements serve not only as a method of unprincipled transfer in the moment, but they also lead one, again and again, to the patently absurd notion that 'attachment judgment' - the exclusive "following" of the judgment of above individuals - is all anyone has to go on, and that 'cognition judgment', that is, the costly, risk- filled 'creation of truthfinding' in the pursuit of solving caretaking difficulties either doesn't exist at all or exists only as some sort of 'attachment' "confidence game" or 'con-game'.
Among Homo Sapiens, it is cognition - intellect in particular - that is our special species survival and "protean replication" mechanism.
To dismiss the majority role of cognition in the overall judgment system of individual humans - and especially to deny the existence of absolute, unchanging truth - is to burn up more gains than are created and to "spin" our unique and special resource, namely our intelligence, as well as our passions, and indeed, ourselves, into extinction.
In a society which is permeated with a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning", those below parties that "learn" the "majority protection- seeking homeostasis" are either hunted and jailed, given low level positions of authority, or given huge protection - financial success and high hierarchical position - depending on their degree of subtlety.
Those who do not "learn" to become "majority protection-seekers", that is, those who remain "majority caretakers", or, far more risk-filled still, become principled again after having
Page 35 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 previously been majority protection-seekers, are bled and exhausted, "institutionalized", or simply crushed and killed depending on their degree of fortitude and understanding.
As will be later discussed in some detail, this phenomenon is an obvious outcome of a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" 'frame of reference' rather than an outcome of any specific "agreement" between individuals, although specific agreements to perpetuate this situation are frequently made.
The reader will note that, in all likelihood, he or she can not think of a single protective figure that would sit still for a discussion to determine the veracity of any several points on the list starting five pages following.
And that may well go for the reader as well, regarding his or her own below figures.
In the generally unprincipled situation which is currently present, either the lower figure allows the higher to deliberate misreport of perception or the higher figure leaves the field, often in a most hostile, and even violent, fashion.
Think about it.
In conversations regarding these sorts of issues, the difference between a principled exchange - generally solving and strengthening - and an unprincipled exchange - generally vacuuming and consuming - must be sorted out.
When relations are principled, in discussions of important or 'high level' matters, the higher figure may well become exhausted - such is often
an immediate result from the principled absorption of pain.
Furthermore, a principled higher figure will generally spend their own protection to protect the lower figure's continued pursuit of the creation of truthfinding - provided, of course, that principled truthfinding is what the below figure is actually engaged in.
In such a situation, a principled above figure, in subsequent conversation at a later time with the same person, will display a higher level of understanding.
When relations are unprincipled, however, that is, when an unprincipled above party is in the presence of a below party - especially a principled below party - the unprincipled above party will avoid any direct approach to a 'high level', important, or life and death issue altogether; but it is in the aftermath of the conversation that the more profound distinction between a principled situation and an unprincipled situation is to be made.
For while unprincipled above parties are notorious for casually spouting the rhetoric of truthfinding that they pick up from caretakers, truthful formulations from below parties are increasingly greeted by unprincipled above parties with overt and well known deliberate misreports of perception, increasingly overt hostility, and threats - often of an undisguised and brutal nature.
We must caution the reader that it is more principled persons generally who are willing to absorb more pain from below in relation to the amount of protection that they have.
Page 36 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Unprincipled above parties often have "techniques" for projecting the appearance of protection without actually providing any, that is, without actually absorbing any pain.
It can be easily seen that in a generally overall unprincipled social or societal situation, a person living a principled life will draw massive amounts of pain from people generally - like a lightning rod - and as such, principled persons in an unprincipled situation are at extremely high risk for getting crushed, broken, and even killed.
It is the more principled parties who are more likely to be more accessible and therefore they are more likely to be the primary "target" of people in pain.
It is unprincipled parties who "screen out" pain and anxiety rising from below through various "siphoning mechanisms" such as deliberate misreports of perception, and various blocking mechanisms such as the pretense of "not understanding", while projecting various extremely dishonest 'clues', through natural language signs and visual images, that create an appearance of protection, and even sometimes, an appearance of principle.
Such an appearance of protective enactments by unprincipled above parties, of course, often turns out to be, upon even minimal (however frightening) reflection, just so much "smooth talk", "communications techniques", "salesmanship" or, more simply put, just so much "hot air".
Without the conditions of nature that the genetic and emotional structure evolved to maintain, that is, principled protection signaling security
rather than "technique" or "hot air" - or alcohol, heroin, or 'tranquilizers' - signaling security, the actual protections that are created wind up getting passed up and consumed - those majority caretakers below who originally created those protections 'dying off' in a hierarchical 'bottom to top to bottom' decaying sequence.
Classical - that is to say, precedential - authors, painters, musicians, and other artists, as well as the best of scientists and scholars have been passionately and diligently working on this problem for several millennia, namely , the problem of principled parties absorbing the enormous pain of an unprincipled society and becoming exhausted, battered, themselves unprincipled, or killed as a result, while unprincipled parties are not approached to absorb pain because they pretend a blind eye to the situation through some method of falsely signaled 'protection' such as "communications techniques" as well as, less subtly, threatening or routinely enacting the most vicious sorts of brutality - disguised or undisguised.
As such, it is no accident that this very matter is perhaps the major theme of the vast majority of all classical literature for the past several thousand years.
It is in this light that we caution the reader that almost any enactment toward another person that one can think of has a vastly different overall effect depending upon whether it is directed at a more principled party, at a less principled party, or at an unprincipled party.
Any evaluation of a situation - or an enactment - by anyone, can only be accurately made while
Page 37 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 bearing this distinction between a more principled person and a less principled person - and particularly between a principled person and an unprincipled person - deeply in mind.
It must be borne in mind that when an unprincipled person does something - enacts something - in order to appear principled, such a person steps into a vastly deeper unprincipled deliberate misreport of perception web than ever .
It is also true that when a principled person enacts something that is in some way damaging, such a person may well engage in all the risks required for solving the 'overall' problem.
We call this latter process "retracing", and it will be dealt with further in a later section.
Certainly it is unwise to break the back - or the heart - of one's most principled protection, simply going on the fact that they are the most accessible as regards the principled absorption of pain.
In fact, it is one of the most important, indeed, decisive, and powerfully self-perpetuating (strongly self-perpetuating, but not completely so) long term or even lifelong errors that a person can make, maintain, and rigidify.
What follows then, is a group of statements that we call part of the "web-of-deliberate misreports of perception-at-the-top-of-the- professional- homeostasis".
When we have raised the truth of the matter regarding the below statements with many of the country's most highly respected professionals,
universally we have been greeted with neither argument nor disagreement; rather our inquiries and suggestions have been greeted with panic, hostility, threats, forceful termination of all further contact, and finally, again, the stoniest of silences.
'Overall' Deliberate misreports of perception: That there is no such thing as absolute truth; That a person's immediate wants are the ultimate measure for right and wrong; That most losses are unpreventable; That most apparent losses are unrecoverable; That things don't ever really change.
Deliberate misreports of perception that project the patently ridiculous notion that ongoing low anxiety levels are either healthy, survivable, constitute "good feeling", or are even wanted very much; Deliberate misreports of perception wherein it is claimed that the incredibly voluminous, complex, grotesque, and brutal assault required to get people to "want" to "turn off" their anxieties, or to say they want to, or act as if they want to, does not exist or has no such effect on them.
Deliberate misreports of perception About "Human Nature": That a person cannot think beyond their immediate protection; That a person cannot step outside their attachment judgment system and change it from the outside; That a person cannot make accurate predictions; That no one is responsible for outcome; That quantifications of responsibility cannot be done; That having large protection or large influence, that is to say, 'power', is what 'corrupts' people; That the current genetic structure of our species is the difficulty that needs changing.
Page 38 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Deliberate misreports of perception About 'Feelings': That feelings, and exchange of feelings, cannot be quantified or measured; That good feeling can be produced without high anxiety, costly risk, and massive building by someone; That revealing painful situations creates pain; That pain and anxiety are to be turned off rather than used to solve the overall problem that created them; That there can be powerful emotions and deep passions at all without powerful, rational, human logical processes emanating from nearby.
Deliberate misreports of perception People Tell About What They Understand: Almost all assertions by a "majority protection-seeker", wherein the person claims to not understand; Any claim to not know what this list - or this letter - is all about.
Miscellaneous Deliberate misreports of perception: That there is no difference between an untruth, a single deliberate misreport of perception, and an overall web of deliberate misreports of perception; That anger directed upwards in a hierarchy regarding unprincipled actions is itself unprincipled.
High level caretaking can never successfully proceed while the deliberate misreports of perception on the above list, or others of that nature are attempted to be used for grounding.
As such, as long as such deliberate misreports of perception continue to be propagated, especially from above parties, individuals increasingly "go flat" and individual, group, and species rumbles - quite unnecessarily - towards horror and extinction.
Principled hierarchical relations can be defined such that it can be immediately and fully grasped - like lightning - by any human being over the age of twelve years old (and to a large degree by those younger as well).
Although enactment of principle - and enactment of that which brings general survivability - is apparently adeliberate misreport of perceptionn to the 'high levels' of the hierarchy at this time, such understanding of principled enactments by every individual human being could well be called "the most natural thing in the world".
It's obvious, really.
In the main, anxiety-pain-risk moves up the hierarchy while protection and principled caretaking moves down.
Security - that is, protection - and vitality move upwards only to the extent that such upward flow of the security is promptly converted into vitality, combined with anxiety also moving up the hierarchy as well as security and vitality already present in the above party - the whole crucible becoming a 'higher level' solution for below parties, for the future, and for all time.
And the creating and building of solution and advancement accomplished in excess of the amount of protection received to begin with.
The "something added" part is made up of carefully calculated, highly directed, very daring, and always personally costly risk-filled decision-making and enactments.
Placement of an individual within a hierarchy depends on the person's own ability to absorb
Page 39 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 pain from below and convert their security and vitality into principled caretaking and solution.
Those who create more caretaking - that is, absorb more pain from below - than the protection that they receive are placed higher in the hierarchy.
Those who "consume" protection or just pass it up for consumption above are situated low in the hierarchy, and, in a principled overall situation are quite rare.
Although this system is obviously not presently in force, it is the system that was in force in the genetically formative situation, it served mankind quite well for all ninety thousand years it was in force among human beings, and it is fully, indeed, excellently compatible with huge, complex societies and 'high level' physical protections or 'surplus' such as is present today.
Furthermore, such principled relationships, when in force, engender certainty, passion, and satisfaction, alongside the whole range of the best in human emotions, thoughts, and enactments, as well as survival and excellent health.
The correction from "unprincipled" as a rule to "principled" as a rule is both an individual, internal, personal matter as well as a matter of general importance, and again, such correction is long overdue, indeed, dangerously so.
While there is no question that "majority protection-seekers" routinely deliberate misreport of perception about what they understand, there is also no question that the
above can be, or is already, well understood by virtually anyone who reads it.
For those with a taste for proverbs (not our strong suit): Whomsoever creates - truthfinding, passion, satisfaction, physical things - is, up to this moment anyway, unsure about who creates what.
Whomsoever steals, "consumes", destroys, and kills - truthfinding, passion, satisfaction, physical things - knows quite well who is creating, is accurate in their ability to identify principled persons, and deliberately and knowingly deliberate misreports of perception in a profuse, sometimes 'convincing', and generally grandiose fashion about what he or she thinks.
A fundamental question that can and must be accurately answered is: "does a person who claims to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve the deliberate misreports of perception listed three, four, and five pages back actually bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve them to be truthful or is the person not only stating things that are deliberate misreports of perception but also lying about what they think the truth to be?" This question, of course, is a decisive question in making any overall accurate assessment regarding principled decision-making.
As best we can surmise, the following is the case: When an unprincipled person - a person operating in a "majority protection-seeking enactment homeostasis" - is away from the presence of a principled person - "majority caretaker" - then the unprincipled person has few clues as to the truth, untruth, or deliberate misreport of perception of anything.
Page 40 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 The high vitality and anxiety 'inner states' which come from high level caretaking and risk, and which are a prerequisite for such cognition, are not present in the unprincipled person.
However , what an unprincipled person thinks when he or she is in the presence of a principled party is another matter entirely, for now the 'inner states' required for the sharp discernment of truth are present, namely exuding from the principled party.
Now the unprincipled person becomes fully aware that all those items on the list four, five, and six pages back are flat deliberate misreports of perception, and he or she deliberate misreports of perception about what they think by claiming to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve any or all of them.
If an unprincipled person does know all of the previously listed statements to be deliberate misreports of perception (even while claiming to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve them to be true) the question arises as to just what they do bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve to be true.
While absolute truth regarding each of the subjects addressed can be figured out by a caretaker , an unprincipled person avoids addressing this question themself.
Rather, a person in an unprincipled homeostasis provokes a below party into creating truthful answers to be vacuumed upwards by the unprincipled person firing down sharper, crisper deliberate misreports of perception, only to later claim that nothing has been created or exchanged.
The very sharpness of the unprincipled above party's deliberate misreports of perception are fueled by the "juice" and "information" of the caretaker's own truthfinding.
The more psychopathic among the professionals apparently entertain the notion that there is, at bottom, no absolute truth, and that all life is, is some sort of "con-game", some sort of unreal hollow fantasy - played out between the 'successful', who have found ways of obtaining some desirable 'inner states' with little risk or pain, and the 'losers' who naively spend their lives "pumping out" truthfinding and principled caretaking while never figuring out that they are merely being taken for fools.
Based on our two hundred and fifty or so face to face interviews with several dozen licensed professionals at all levels of hierarchy, as well as obvious large scale outcomes in the everyday world, we must conclude that, at the current time, the most brutal, stupid, and sociopathic persons that hold this obviously insane view reside at the very highest reaches of most institutions of 'professionalism'.
Apparently, and it is difficult for us to watch this at close hand, truthful things, vitality packed things, are fed up the hierarchy through layer after layer of deliberate misreports of perception coming back down.
As it goes up, the truth and vitality are systematically stripped of their caretaking and anxiety producing content.
The frightened talk of a small boy at a welfare center or the desperation of a young girl at a counseling office, goes to the social worker, to
Page 41 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 the supervisor , to a professor , to a corporate official, and so on up the hierarchy - through layer after layer.
They all live on the massive expenditure of 'inner states' that these kids are projecting and the truthfulness regarding the nature of the difficulty , pain, heartbreak, and hope, expressed, and they all absorb the vitality therein projected, and then deliberate misreport of perception, smirk about the huge dose of 'juice' delivered upwards, smash, deny, and deliberate misreport of perception some more.
Truth and vitality are absorbed upwards - deliberate misreports of perception and pain are slammed back down.
At each layer, deliberate misreports of perception such as those on the list several pages back are repeated for absorption by below parties.
What is oft bandied about as the legendary "'secret' of 'success'" is nothing more than the ability to squeeze truth and vitality out of those below - returning back down only the signs of 'protection', never principled protection - then passing such truth and vitality received from below to those above, and readily accepting the deliberate misreports of perception that above parties tell.
Given the fantastic, high brilliance that mankind has shown over the past one hundred thousand years or so, this is an incredibly ugly, death- dealing, and stupid system which had best be retired forthwith.
The deliberate misreports of perception that come down are mixed with the well sifted truth that is being vacuumed upwards, and as such, the deliberate misreports of perception pick up ever sharper appearance of protection and appearance of truthfulness, using as fodder the truthful information that only a majority caretaker , only a principled person could originally figure out.
Thus, truthful ideas and vitality that originated at the bottom of the hierarchy out of principled and caretaking passions, are vacuumed up the hierarchy, reformulated - turned 'inside out', so to speak - and fired back down the hierarchy, albeit in most grotesque form, destroying the confidence, the passions, indeed, often the very life of the original caretaker or truthfinder.
It must be borne in mind that as regards what creates and maintains life, majority protection- seekers know only what principled persons inform them of, indeed, and a good deal less than that, although majority protection-seekers do "catch on fast", spend like a "mad dog", and deliberate misreport of perception about what they understand.
"Majority protection-seekers" with their diminutive, shrunken cognition system do not even know what to steal or what to kill for until directly informed by a caretaker of what is valuable, what maintains life.
Then they know for a little while - just long enough to bleed it, steal it, vacuum it, deliberate misreport of perception about it, then either steal some more if they can, or starve,
But it gets worse.
Page 42 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 kill, or otherwise destroy the source if they can't.
Albert Einstein was, of course, keenly aware of the existence of and the nature of absolute, singular truth, as well as the power and importance of conscious human decision-making and responsibility.
One can imagine the personal horror he felt at the deliberate misreports of perception that are told attempting to equate "relativity" in physics with deliberate misreports of perception that claim "no absolutes" in everyday life.
It is worthy of note that Freud also repeatedly expressed his heartbreak at the manner in which much of his own theories were stripped of their caretaking content and grotesquely slammed back down the hierarchy as rather brutal deliberate misreports of perception.
What Freud enters into the professional hierarchy as a caretaking 'passion for all humanity', is siphoned, combined with a few 'old standby deliberate misreports of perception', and threateningly spit back down as some sort of sinister 'death wish'.
Einstein had the same sense of horror at the use to which his own work was put regarding the advent of the atomic bomb.
Poets and scientists with a majority-caretaking enactment homeostasis such as Freud, who died as the Nazis vacuumed, consumed, and destroyed the great majority of Europe's intellect and passion while honing Freud's own theories into the most bloodthirsty of weapons, and Einstein, enduring large responsibility for the
availability of atomic weaponry, expressed enormous anguish, in the end, regarding the channels - and the ugly construction - in which their work was played out.
Indeed, Darwin's work was also often put to similar, horrifying use, and even Marx does not rest easily these days.
Each of the four, having performed magnificent caretaking in their lifetimes, explicitly expressed, at one time or another, a large measure of anxiety regarding the overall outcome.
It must be remembered, however, that it is not over yet.
So what do those at the higher reaches of the hierarchy who are "majority protection-seekers" actually think regarding the nature of life, those who are too overtly influential, enamored of too much protection, too high in the hierarchy, to publicly claim that they "just" "go by the experts", or "only follow orders", or other such insults to human integrity , intelligence, and passion? Again, it is hard for us to confidently figure.
It seems imaginable, however, that as one spends the accumulations that have been desperately forged by people at the rate of one hundred to one, or perhaps ten thousand to one, such a person might be inclined to attempt to project the idea that life is some sort of crude, empty, comatose joke.
Recent, most heartbreaking developments in the field of rock 'n roll illustrate the effects of this
Page 43 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 sort of deceptive and ugly projection in most tragic fashion.
Most painful and horrifying images of mid- eighties 'vacuum artists' come to mind.
Classical poets from another age, such as Buddy Holly, Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, and John Lennon maintained an enduring desperation regarding the possibilities for life, and the deliberate misreports of perception and brutality that destroys those possibilities.
Like the "four horsemen of 19th century intellect" mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, like Marilyn, 'Big Bill', Malcolm, and so many billions of others, Buddy, Jimi, Janis, and John also stir restlessly in their grave.
They too, scream, inside, still.
In order for any group of ideas to be beneficial for individual, tribe, species, and bio-ecosystem, the absolute truthfulness - singular truth that never changes - or nontruthfulness of all of the individual ideas and components therein contained have to be accurately ascertained.
In other words in order for 'protean development' to advance, and therefore in order for survival to ensue, the truth or nontruth of all ideas and their combinations at a previous stage has to be accurately assessed and assembled in order to proceed to the next stage.
It is in this light that we note that there is a thick, acknowledged, indeed, smirking, "web of deliberate misreports of perception" permeating the "top-of-the-professional-homeostasis" at this time.
And furthermore, as regards these matters, truth, which is the same for everyone and is constant for all time, is known.
Almost everything published these days about how to write and especially how to heal are instructions, specifically, on how to turn off cognition in other people leaving them perhaps momentarily energetic, but, in the overall, flat, dull, reactive, and uncomplaining "majority protection-seekers", running on an automatic, albeit "tight" and hidden attachment-judgment system.
"How to turn off a person's cognition", and "how to destroy a person's intelligence", seems to be the powerful overriding theme of a vast portion, if not a vast majority of almost all professional literature regarding health, education, and of late, politics.
It says much for the intellect and passion of human beings that such a thick, brutal blanket is required to destroy those qualities.
Our work is specifically designed to turn on cognition, intellect, passion, truthfinding, brilliance, and principle in every individual, in fact turn such things on so powerfully that they can take control of the entire judgment system, including the attachment system, and make some severe changes.
More often than in regard to any other event in this century, the question of principled behavior has been raised more sharply regarding the behavior of the German people fifty years ago.
What was the appropriate "timing" for principled behavior in Germany? When was the "right
Page 44 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 timing" for principled decision making and enactments? 1928? 1933? 1938? 1941? 1946? Never? Always? The question spans all history and the fundamental answer - always - changes not at all - including the current time and place wherever that may be.
All this was explained in other detail in our eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr articles and letters as mentioned in the following section.
Page 45 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Paradigm From California by Neil Miller et. al.
Copyright © 1984, 1986
Volume II: Letter To A Responsible Party
Part V: Modern Times Chapter 14: Reply
    In early March of 1985, we sent one of several letters and, in most cases, one of two articles to each of sixty-six persons, informing of the nature of our work and, most particularly, the effects of a handling of it in a principled and responsible way, the effects of any 'pretense of blindness' decisions and enactments, and the effects of an unprincipled and irresponsible 'vacuuming' of it.
We also, under similar circumstances, placed copies of our full paradigm with the governments of four countries.
This decision, twenty-five months ago, was part of our ongoing work to make our findings generally available, rather than, as would be (and is being) extremely destructive for all, the confining of these materials to a few or a few hundred.
The fewer the number of persons who have direct access to our written work in its original form, the greater the chances that anyone who does will decide to launch themselves into a major , deeper , and more rigidly unprincipled escalation in their life.
The greater the number of persons that have direct access to the original written materials containing our elucidations, the more likely it is that a particular unprincipled individual will make decisions to enact their way back into a
principled homeostasis - albeit, amidst the great risks therein contained.
In those 5,000 pages of articles, letters, and books written by and put out by us to seventy persons two years ago March, we explained in other terms that no truthful perception can ever be independently arrived at when, in one's mind, one conceptualizes their purpose to be the "consumption" of that which is created - it is a physical impossibility of nature.
The endocrines internally secreted within a person, which are necessary for the creation of truthfinding, are only present when there is a principled, high level caretaking conceptualization.
In short, when an unprincipled person says something truthful, they are always using perceptions that they have gained from a principled person through an unprincipled transfer in order to project an appearance of truthfulness and thereby vacuum still more vitality and information from those below.
Thus, virtually anything that anyone figures out in order to bring increased health, passion, and survivability to persons of our species - and to our species at large - will be used by principled persons towards the purposes by which it was originally figured out - principled caretaking - or
Page 46 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 it will be used by unprincipled persons towards the destruction of such.
In our particular case, general lack of widespread availability of our original formulations makes likely a most deceptive and destructive usage; prompt and widespread access to them makes likely a principled usage.
We explained that if our findings, arrived at in the course of figuring out how to engender brilliance, passion, principle, and survivability in the thousand or so public high school students that we taught over seven years time - and in the world at large - were confined to a few persons in a generally "majority protection-seeking" overall societal situation, such findings would be used towards increasingly quickened "consumption" and destruction of the work and passions of individuals, particularly, destructive of individuals at the lower reaches of the various hierarchies.
If, on the other hand, what we have discovered quickly becomes generally known in its original form, and thereby presented alongside the purpose by which and for which it was created, the effect will conform to the purposes by which this schema and its various parts were arrived at in the first place.
These matters are further elaborated elsewhere in this letter.
Our findings were first glimpsed at in the late 1970's, in the course of our teaching five to ten hours a day, five different sorts of classes at a large San Francisco public high school.
During that period, we developed our first, specific conceptualization of a 'paradigm' of education and projected its completion and release for mid-1983, at that time some five to seven years down the road.
However, in January 1983, we underwent a cataclysmic - and partially fatal - setback, one from which we have yet to recover.
The following autumn, another catastrophe - an escalation of the tragic events of eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr that year - further decimated our work, and resulted in a further delay in the completion of our "Paradigm From California" for a year and a half, until the autumn of 1984; a further, almost unbroken string of disasters, continuing to the present moment, has delayed the general release of our work an additional two and a half years, so far.
Although it appeared to us, during the time of the ongoing disasters that we underwent in 1983 that the consequences of a one, two, three, or four year delay could be far worse than it has yet shown itself to be (and the consequences still may well turn out to be increasingly disastrous), the one and a half year delay in the completion of our 'Paradigm', and the (so far) four year delay in the general distribution of our findings, and particularly the essentially uniform decisions of the several hundred people that directly precipitated the near disappearance of them, resulted in the destruction of, at the least, about twenty percent of the overall capabilities that our species possesses, with about thirty percent of that, to date, being unrecoverable, permanent, and entirely unnecessary losses.
Page 47 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 At any rate, in the spring of 1983, accompanied by a major internal disaster, we made our first large scale efforts to make our work widely known outside our local environs and to present it within the going professional and academic homeostasis.
That round of forays involved us seeking out and presenting our work to about a dozen professionals of various kinds, all of those conferences meeting with disaster.
In the late summer of 1983, we initiated a second round of presentations and requests for evaluations, this time spending considerable amounts of money on consultation fees and meeting with only a few persons who held higher positions in their various professional hierarchies.
These meetings resulted in our finding ourselves faced with total destruction and complete loss of our then six year old backbreakingly and heartbreakingly built program.
The losses then included, for several hundred of San Francisco's young people, a separation from - and then the loss of - major "maps" of principle in above figures, as well as a loss to ourselves of the backbone of our research team - and all this at a time when all semblance of principled behavior in above figures was rapidly disappearing from the consciousness of American teenagers, as never before.
Our demise "lifted the pencil point" in that sort of situation and vastly rigidified an increasingly desperate situation in that regard.
In other words, in mid-1983, as we brought our work out of our classroom and attempted to present it publicly, we were, much to our astonishment, promptly and unceremoniously beaten half to death by a variety of low level, medium level, and high level education, psychology, and psychiatry professionals whom we had specifically sought out to evaluate our work.
Virtually all of our then visible efforts were destroyed.
After several months of crushing desperation and one solid year of unmitigated horror, we decided to direct ourselves into a recovery of our work within its principled context, a prospect that, even as we decided and enacted, seemed highly unlikely , indeed, at best, remote.
We made this decision, essentially, not because we expected recovery - most of the time we did not - but rather because we concluded that to direct ourselves in that way was the only thing to do.
Indeed, given our decision to pursue this course - that is, given our decision to operate within a principled context only - that we are able to continue at all remains, to this day, something of a puzzle.
At any rate, in early spring 1984, we set about approaching, in a systemized way, as many persons in positions of responsibility as we could in an effort to determine precisely how we could present our work, and to get some definitive answers regarding its validity as seen by licensed, practicing professionals, that is, as seen by the 'going professional homeostasis'.
Page 48 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 At first, we were quite perplexed by the fact that none of those whom we approached would speak to any issue that we raised, indeed, all of them becoming exceptionally dishonest and forcefully cutting off all further contact once they caught the slightest wind that our work included an ongoing principled basis.
Indeed, we have received more than a few direct indications from a variety of legal, educational, and psychotherapeutic professionals that it is, in large part, because we do not engage in methods that include dishonesty, violence, threats, illegality, or stupidity, that makes them recoil from the idea of affording ourselves or our work the slightest protection.
We have been sternly "advised" by 'educator', administrator, doctor, legal 'advisor', 'therapist', high school principal, and psychiatrist alike that, in order to gain any sort of assistance or "cooperation" from protected persons, we would "have to 'learn to' 'fool' people"; we would have to use personal "threats"; we would have to "get 'something' on 'them'"; we would have to "use 'force'"; or we would have to mindlessly "react" through some sort of low level "strike" or "fight".
Indeed, we were also advised to "get" "them" to "react".
Each of virtually all of these transparently unprincipled, obviously self-defeating, and colorless continuations were explicitly demanded of us by one or another high level official or professional, coupled with the explicit threat that we would "never" get "anywhere" if we did not "learn to" so engage.
We did not so engage, and, indeed, we have not gotten "anywhere".
We continue to regard such advice, alongside the entire frame of reference from which it is proffered, as thoroughly contemptible and absolutely unacceptable.
Our first year of attempts at organized presentation of our findings - 1983 to 1984 - was spent projecting our work to those who were most directly connected to our project, namely, to our immediate administrators and former administrators in the public school system and those foundation officials, psychologists and psychiatrists closest to home.
We prepared several highly detailed, scrupulously and densely footnoted and documented papers containing much original research as well as a variety of short letters and several different types of oral presentations and approaches.
Meeting with nothing but a solid wall of obvious deliberate misreports of perception, slammed doors, ridicule, and unbridled hostility, we collected our extensive findings and our work towards presentation to higher levels of hierarchy in the various fields.
In short, presentation of our work began with the raw materials being collected and assembled by ourselves and the students with whom we worked and being presented in our classes where they were adjusted and expanded among about one thousand public high school students in more than 5,000 hours of formal classroom discussions, and were further presented to parents, and to local teachers.
Page 49 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 At the second stage, collections in research paper form were presented to local school administrators, psychologists, foundation officials, and psychiatrists.
One year after the destruction of our program, we wrote and completed our full paradigm, and looked about for a way to present it wherein it could be seriously examined, evaluated, revised and disseminated, this time at a third level up: publishers, nationally known writers, scientists, and politicians.
In February of 1985, we traveled to east coast cities in an effort to get our full paradigm published and in March of 1985, we sent out by mail letters, articles, and books to the seventy persons referred to later in this section.
(This letter is our sixth and most pointed crystallization of our work, designed to be initially read and digested from a fourth higher level of hierarchy, and will be released as soon as it is completed or eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr .)
In the course of all our eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr 'in person' contacts, some of which we continue to pursue, we met more than two hundred and fifty times with more than forty persons who are in positions of high responsibility.
Much of what we found as a result of those meetings is expounded upon in our full paradigm and there is contained therein, some accounting of the enactments of several dozen of those persons.
In this letter, we direct our attention to those persons whom we decided to contact by mail in our third round of contacts and who, for reference, are summarized at the end of this section.
Of the forty professionals and officials who we approached in our eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, second round of contacts, we have decided to mention here only four; in keeping with our understandings as regards these matters, we summarize with those who hold high hierarchical position and as such, who exert a particularly wide and commanding influence throughout their profession.
All four hold doctorates in various mental health fields - two hold doctorates in medicine in particular .
One is located in Palo Alto, the second in Berkeley, the third is currently located in New Y ork City , and the fourth is from San Francisco.
There can be little doubt that each of these persons were and are fully aware of what we discovered, the nature of the sort of people we are, and the gravity of the overall effect of our ability or inability to publicly present our work in its original form.
In 1983 and 1984, all made specific, conscious, ugly, and death dealing decisions in this regard.
Our experiences along these lines confirmed for us the fact that psychiatric techniques for making a very rapid distinction between principled and unprincipled persons are already well within the capabilities and daily sensibilities of contemporary professionals, and standard
Page 50 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 procedures for "rewarding" and in other ways encouraging unprincipled persons and unprincipled behavior and standard techniques for bleeding, crushing, starving, and destroying principled persons and principled behavior are currently in widespread daily use.
Indeed, the strengthening and rigidifying of unprincipled homeostasises and the bleeding and destroying of principled ones constitutes the standard of acceptability in these fields.
Of the four persons that we are mentioning in this letter out of the fifty or so that we personally approached, all engage in setting, maintaining, and escalating the current unprincipled homeostasis in their fields, and it has been our experience with each that, regarding persons above them as well as regarding persons below them, they make conscious, internally controllable, measurable, fully accountable decisions to bleed and destroy principled homeostasises that may appear while rigidifying and escalating unprincipled ones that they encounter.
Regarding the reactions of these persons to us, at first we thought that they were in some way 'afraid' of us personally - but, upon consideration, that made no sense at all, as all were familiar with our operating basis, some having known us or known of us for years.
In those days, their instant and consistent reactions presented an enormous mystery and it took us quite some time to accurately assess the basis for their quite visible and obvious panic upon contact with our work and our faces.
Our experiences with these persons, and with the other three dozen or so at other levels of hierarchy whom we also approached - many of whom claimed to be "just" 'following along' with these high level attachment figures - cast in sharper redeliberate misreport of perceptionf the enormous fears that these people continually entertain regarding the horrifying overall effects of their enactments of the last few decades and the parallel fears that a person operating within an unprincipled internal homeostasis has regarding any principled continuation that they can conceptualize.
Of the four doctors in particular mentioned above, one bears most direct responsibility for the - to vastly understate the case - "wholesale" "shake down" of the entire teenage population of several Pacific Rim nations; another bears direct responsibility for much the same in this country.
Enormous responsibility for much of the developments in locations on several continents over the last thirty years rests with a third, and responsibility for current - and most deadly - jettisons and escalations among our own local population of young people falls under the direct province of the fourth's decisions, enactments, and responsibility.
Of course, the fact that these particular people are among the fifty that we decided to approach in the first place, and particularly the fact that we got access to them at all is entirely suggestive of the notion that they are probably among the less unprincipled among their level of hierarchy and influence in their fields.
Responsibility, of course, is everywhere.
Page 51 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Whether , as a continuation from this letter , they or anyone whom we have approached, chooses to escalate their viciously unprincipled enactments, or whether they choose to enact in a principled way, is, like all their decisions, entirely internally controllable and within the full realm of consciousness, accountability - internal and external - and responsibility.
Although we work hard to be - and are - quite influential at engendering principled decisions and continuations, as can be easily seen, their personal decision-making, be it principled or unprincipled, rests fully outside the province of what we can - now or ever - do for them or to them.
[We feel compelled to make a note regarding our general decisions on mentioning specific names of persons with whom we have had contact.
We always include such information in our writings with the understanding that such names will be removed by us should their inclusion become less conducive to an overall principled outcome than the exclusion of their names.
Generally, this point is reached when our crystallizations reach a certain stage and when we have consolidated enough intellect wherein we conclude that there is high likelihood that our materials are released retaining their principled context.
Our situation has at this time reached that point (although great risks continue to mount), and as such, we have deleted the names from the copies we have elected to make publicly available.
At an eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr or less crystallized stage, all of the names would have been included - at a still more advanced stage, much of the lower level characterizations that appear herein would be taken to a higher level altogether .
In all cases, virtually all decisions of this nature that we make are made exclusively on the basis of best likelihood of overall principled outcome.]
While our previous local contacts with persons in positions of high responsibility were directed towards reimplementing our public school program after its appalling interruption in 1983, we made a sharp 'jump' in January, 1985, and abruptly decided to gather whatever money we could towards getting ourselves to the east coast in order to have our freshly completed book - our full 700 page paradigm, including its 50 pages of charts, diagrams, and illustrations - published.
We, at that time, were prepared to effect a major reediting according to what we might find to be acceptable within the homeostasis of the publishing and professional world - a prospect that seems thoroughly ridiculous now, twenty- five months later.
(We have since learned that a structural reediting of our work would be about the last thing in the world anyone would respect, despite any absurdly and transparently dishonest protestations to the contrary that we may encounter.) While in the east in February 1985, we managed to arrange about two dozen interviews, meeting with individuals representing the lower, the middle, and the highest reaches of twelve different influential hierarchies, and
Page 52 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 'pumped out', verbally , visually , and in writing, a good deal of our work.
These persons included one psychiatrist, one art administrator , one politician, one scientist, one doctor, one social worker, one large family, one major publisher , one secondary public education administrator , one "radical" publisher , one university professor , and one congressional legal counsel.
Two or three knew us well, as a result of some old personal relationships; the rest showed every sign of understanding what sort of persons we are and just what we are engaged in, despite the rather transparent protestations to the contrary that we have seen repeated so often.
During those five weeks in New York City and Washington DC, in early 1985, the reaction to our presentations, in every case, conformed in nature to that which we received in our local area over the past several years, except, perhaps, with an added degree of hostility, viciousness, and venom.
Our experience in this regard acutely brought to our attention a basic fact of life; namely, that in the human central nervous system configuration, it is below figures that 'attach' to an above figure in particular, as a matter of genetic structure and adaptation, but an above figure does not 'attach' to a below figure in particular in that way .
While "focus on a figure" is a basic portion of the attachment - and protection-seeking - structure, the entire caretaking structure of an above party does not contain the same sort of 'imprinting' type of attachment to a specific below figure,
certainly not once the below figure passes twenty-one, or twelve, and sometimes not at all.
Rather, the above figure's tie to the below figure is based on - in a principled situation, the enactments that make up a majority caretaking homeostasis in an above party, including a 'focus' on the truth, and in an unprincipled situation, is based on whatever tones can be vacuumed upwards in the moment.
For a principled person in a principled homeostasis, the only protection from an above person that can ever be counted on is the protection of principled behavior , absolutely regardless of any previous familiarity.
As regards the tie within a below party towards a specific above figure, there can be no question that there is a neuronally structured phenomenon, something like the "imprinting" phenomenon seen in other species, within the central nervous system of every Homo Sapiens and which begins adapting to their particular situation from the first or second day of life.
As regards the tie from within an above party to a specific below figure, within Homo Sapiens, there is no such 'imprinting' type of tie.
In individual humans, those ranges that are used for caretaking below parties and for creating and building that which did not previously exist readapt and readapt again to meet new and more advanced caretaking situations; ranges that are used for seeking protection from above parties and for gathering from that which has already been created - that is, those ranges that constitute what is generally known as
Page 53 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 "personality" - mostly retain their original adaptation.
Thus, in all cases, above figures provide protection for below figures either because they are principled, and are, internally, in a majority caretaking homeostasis or because they vacuum far more from below than the protection that they offer - an unprincipled, metaphorically speaking, 'cannibalistic' relationship.
As regards the tie from a below figure to an above figure, there is an 'imprinting' type 'loyalty' within the below figure; as regards the tie from an above figure to a below figure, there is either principle or there is vacuuming - there is no other 'loyalty' within the above figure.
This matter is elucidated in some detail in our full paradigm.
After five weeks in the east, being without money, and finding ourselves facing a uniform wall of uncontrollably terrified, vicious, and moronically reactive persons, we decided to send off some sort of intact version of what we were presenting to several score persons with whom we previously had had no contact of any kind - in order to leave some accurate, unmistakable sign of exactly what we were doing - before returning home.
In that mailing in early March of 1985, we sent one of five letters (2 to 8 pages) along with one of two articles (16 or 19 pages) to 66 persons, 64 of whom we'd never had any contact with before - the other two of whom we had engaged in a ten minute phone call in one case and a half hour interview in another.
These letters and articles explained in other wording much of the material here, as well as explaining just who we are and our general situation in some detail.
Except for a few of the book publishers and one individual, all were sent, in addition to a letter, an article entitled "Anxiety Tunings".
Thus, most of the 70 recipients received 25 to 30 pages of material, essentially an eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr and more condensed version of this letter .
Additionally, we placed one bound, fully illustrated copy of our full paradigm with the Library of Congress of the United States and one with the Norwegian Government.
Two copies of our book were received by the Swedish Government, one containing a note requesting that it be delivered to their King and the other containing another note requesting that it be delivered to the Hermitage Museum in The Soviet Union.
We wrote and sent out our mailing for the same reason we had eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr (and since) met with the various members of the professional community: namely, to ensure the general availability of our findings so that they could be used to create increased health, passion, brilliance, and survivability in individuals and for the world at large in which we live.
It is also our purpose to prevent the use of our work as better tools with which to vacuum, consume, and, metaphorically speaking,
Page 54 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 'cannibalize' the species at large and the individuals in it.
As such, in our letters and articles, we made certain that recipients understood who we are, what we have found, and particularly the dangers present in the unprincipled 'bleeding' of our work, especially over time.
After having completed seven years of research, and after having printed, bound and covered several copies of our full, seven hundred page paradigm, entitled "Paradigm From California: A Public Education Paradigm", complete with charts, diagrams, about fifty full color and black and white illustrations, titles, table of contents, and an additional seven hundred pages of well organized and highly readable supporting appendixes, our letters were designed to make it possible for us to make our original, completed, written work generally available through full scale publication by an established publisher and by our gathering the few thousand dollars required to print and distribute a large number of copies ourselves.
Unfortunately, we never were very good at gathering protection.
Principled caretaking is our forte, and protection for such, in the current situation, doesn't seem to come.
The reaction to our postal communications conformed closely to our hundreds of face to face contacts with persons in positions of responsibility elsewhere - the primary difference being that the lack of face to face contact gives the person approached by mail increased opportunity for hiddenness, deception, theft,
and the much favored "pretense of blindness" vacuuming technique mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr.
In the twenty-five months since that mailing, we have heard almost nothing in the way of a response.
Seven of the ten publishers sent negative notes in one or two line wording, the implications of which seemed to be an insultingly smug attempt to convince us that they'd never really caught the hang of reading and aren't much interested in it - books, our letter, or anything else.
The other three publishers sent nothing at all.
These basically empty repdeliberate misreports of perception, as well as others received as a result of other forms of approach we have made to other publishers, have shown most clearly that neither large amounts of money, nor 'popularity', nor principle, nor excitement, nor scholarship, nor high technical quality, nor artistic, scientific, or literary excellence or innovation interests America's publishers any more than it does those at the top of the professional homeostasis in psychiatry, education, science, or medicine.
Indeed, our face to face experience with large Eastern publishers rivals the grotesque and brutal stupidity of even some of those in our local health and education institutions, no mean feat.
All such alleged "motivations" as are usually bandied about as "publishability criteria" such as profitability , excellence and so forth are considered in the major publishing circles as a silly joke or a "vacuuming tool", perhaps best characterized as "popular mythology".
Page 55 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Rather , vitality vacuumed upwards and that which will 'eliminate' high anxiety levels - in other words a clear "majority protection-seeking" framework (all the better if it is couched in the rhetoric of what is perversely called "radicalism") - are the only criteria for first screening of anything to be considered for publication.
We further learned that no knowledgeable person, in or out of the field, disagrees with this assessment, although on some occasions many will deliberate misreport of perception about what they think by claiming to disagree.
We have long since learned that in the publishing world, much like the world of academia, medicine, the foundations and other related institutions, approximately five percent of all monies are spent on healing, educating, improving, or actually creating truthfinding and presenting something healthy, new, accurate, or useful.
Ninety-five percent of the monies, of course, is spent making sure that any principled caretaking content is stripped away, pumped upwards, and consumed, never to see the light of day.
Like in so many other situations we have encountered, the clear message: 'we'll pay anything for good vacuuming and protection- seeking (whether couched in the rhetoric of principle or not), but not a penny for principled caretaking', seems to be the "prevailing homeostasis" of the moment, also known as the "prevailing winds".
Our sense of the situation is that such 'prevalence' is not only a phenomenon of the last
five or ten or fifteen years but also of much of the last nine thousand.
As it turns out, the reaction to our work from other quarters conformed closely to what we had eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr found among persons near the top of the hierarchy in psychiatry , education, psychology , and publishing.
Aside from the dazed, one line messages from the seven book publishers mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr - a few failed to venture even this - we received a few 'repdeliberate misreports of perception' of an essentially similar nature from other quarters.
From the twenty-two news organizations, not a peep, except for a pre-fabricated one line insult from one of them, that one being the one we had sent three separate copies to.
The other twenty-one members of the news media maintained a virtual silence.
We did, of course, notice the 'columns' of some of the newspapers to whom we had sent letters and articles verily bursting, for a while, with the 'juice' and information that we had sent, although of course, in grotesquely stripped down and most destructive form.
What we presented was apparently immediately spent quickly and sloppily by the recipients on some momentary 'boost' for their "appearance of principle".
In the end, of course, such enactments engender a more 'flat', more bloodthirsty, and more
Page 56 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 reactive situation than ever for all concerned, as all are by now ever more keenly aware.
Indeed, we would estimate that the "vacuum, 'deprinciplize', consume, 'slam-down'" manner in which our work has been handled has accelerated the vacuuming via assault and murder of several hundred million persons on several continents, most particularly in our own country, over the last two or three years.
We are aware that prompt and full public dissemination of our original written work - this letter, our paradigm, and so forth - would interrupt and reverse these ugly effects.
The same situation as in the print media ensued regarding the various television figures whom we contacted.
From television "personalities" we received, from one person, a one line printed card informing us of the incompetence and unprincipled nature of the recipient of our work.
Although we have maintained, for many years, virtually no access to a television set in any form and therefore have not directly seen our work bled across the tube, television events as reported in the newspapers in the past two years or so have shown obvious, grotesque, and extremely destructive and death-dealing projections whose 'kernel' of 'juice' - albeit turned to the ugdeliberate misreports of perceptiont of patterns - could have originated from nowhere but here.
As for the fourteen writers, academics, scientists, historians, and print artists who received our articles and letters, virtually none
ventured to - or dared to - volunteer an acknowledgment to us of any kind in any way.
We did receive an extremely kind letter of acknowledgment from the widow of the scholar whom we held in the highest regard, and who, unbeknownst to us, had died several years ago.
Regarding the fifteen politicians and performing artists, a few had their offices send the usual one or two line inanities.
One had an aide send a nondescript, one line sentence of acknowledgment, and one had an aide call to gather some more quick juice in the days before a coming election.
One somewhat cryptic reply was received.
This, from an elected public official, was most peculiar: It arrived some six months after our mailing and while it made no reference to the material we had sent him, it was written as if it were a reply to a proposal that we had submitted to a large foundation and our local school board some five years eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr .
His letter essentially used some of our own language of that document in classic "'pump up' truth and vitality - 'slam down' deliberate misreports of perception and pain" fashion.
(That he had somehow gotten that obscure document at all, after all these years, presented something of a mystery to us - particularly since both the school board and the foundation in question have long maintained an impressive "you don't exist" stonewall as regards our consistent approaches and continuing presence.)
Page 57 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 To us, the 'reply' that we received from the politician (and, no doubt, his staff) presented an image of its writer as that of a previously principled below figure ordered to enact the thinly disguised "pretense of blindness" of an unprincipled above figure - and accepting the assignment.
We were not amused.
One pair of repdeliberate misreports of perception arriving at about the same time from a different politician and from a billionaire artist seemed to juxtapose one another.
The politician remarked that he was not interested in our project because he was not concerned with the conduct of individuals but rather with groups; while the billionaire artist repdeliberate misreported perception he was not interested in our work because he was not concerned with the conduct of groups but rather with individuals.
These two repdeliberate misreports of perception could have easily been reversed, changing not at all the nature of the deception therein contained.
We must note that of the four elected public office holders serving our local district to whom we had sent letters and articles, virtually none returned any reply or acknowledgment to us of any kind at all.
What little we did receive from public officials came from across the bay, across the state, and across the country - all four San Franciscans however, maintained a rigid silence.
Of the sixty-two persons who received the letters and articles, only two went so far as to actually acknowledge - however thinly - anything that we wrote, and in the case of one of those, a public office holder, their first note was quickly followed by a second, essentially disavowing their previous acknowledgment.
We also had one set of phone calls from people identifying themselves as 'aides of congressmen'.
Our questions regarding the purpose of the calls and the identity of the callers was greeted by obviously untruthful repdeliberate misreports of perception.
In the end the callers, whoever they were, told us not to send 'them' any more letters, although we had little idea as to just who "them" was, and we had no way of knowing if those particular callers were actually persons to whom we had sent materials or their representatives.
Finally, the person whom we'd previously figured to be the most principled (and apparently we were correct), sent us what was by far the most substantial response of all.
Unfortunately, it amounted to a four sentence message of disillusionment.
We must note that as regards this last mentioned party, when we received the reply - among the very first that we received - we were stunned, furious, and profoundly and dangerously disheartened.
As the months passed however, it became apparent that, true to our original figuring, he was virtually the only one of the seventy persons
Page 58 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 to whom we sent our materials to risk "sticking his neck out" at all, saying something directly to us, even in this most unfortunate way.
For this reason, we salute our own original judgment in the matter.
All in all, we sent out seventy-three letters and sixty-seven articles to seventy-three different destinations including sixty-five different persons.
Four did not reach the intended person and one person had died several years eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr.
In short, sixty-two persons received our letters and articles, and additionally, four, full 700 page paradigms were received by governments.
Of these sixty-six who received the materials, fifty-one sent back not the slightest word of acknowledgment to us of any kind, and eleven sent back short, shallow, insults.
Of the four recipients that went so far as to volunteer that they had actually seen the materials, two mentioned an item in them and none acknowledged having read any of it.
In sum, in that third round of contacts of March of 1985 - this time exclusively by mail rather than 'in person' which had been a feature of our eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr contacts - we put one thousand five hundred pages of our work (in addition to four, seven-hundred page paradigms) into circulation to sixty-six persons and institutions and received back a cumulative, grand total of just under two remarkably uniform and hollow pages, few repdeliberate misreports
of perception being longer than a single, repetitive, pre-fabricated line.
In short, we received every indication that the pretense of being in a deep coma is all the rage among those in positions of high responsibility - indeed, that the homeostasis in that regard is of a tightness surpassed in industrial countries in recent centuries only rarely, the Germany of the 1930's being another example.
While a few sent insults and one or two sent murmurs, the vast majority remained stone silent, putting on a grotesquely transparent appearance of deafness, dumbness, and blindness.
We received not the slightest offer of assistance of any kind from anyone anywhere.
Not a word, not a penny. Absolutely nothing. Nothing.
Rather, a couple of insults, a few thinly guised grabs for more 'juice', a hollow echo of disillusion, and the usual deafening, suffocating sense of pumping into a sometimes seemingly endless vacuum.
After these past four years, including some two hundred and fifty 'in person' meetings with more than fifty grossly irresponsible and unabashedly bloodthirsty professionals in positions of high responsibility, and after one hundred letters and articles of clear explanations to others in a similar position whom we've never met, having had almost all of our famideliberate misreports
Page 59 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 of perception and friends turn on us with an astounding uniformity and implacable hostility, we remain, each of us, alone with the situation.
Although there are, by this time, more than a thousand persons who are well informed as to the nature and gravity of our elucidation of the biological schema herein contained, we do not know if this letter will reach so much as one single person in a position of some protection who will handle it - or us - with the slightest integrity, any more than our previous hundreds of attempts to make our work generally available in its original written form.
As we said in our eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr letter , in the general world situation, there are points past which "threats of losses" become 'irretrievable losses', and past which 'losses' turn to a brutal, brittle, and embittered 'rigidification' - such 'points', have, for more than a billion persons, come and gone many times in the past couple of years at an ever more accelerated rate, and continue to pass, leaving a vastly more difficult situation with ever increasing risks ensuing from any decision to recover a principled homeostasis.
Our own writing style, for an example, has become, with a depressing regularity, less presuming of any above figure's sincerity, and far sharper and less conciliatory from the first
On the following page appears a lyrical tale, a metaphor, in the form of an old ballad.
While metaphors are sometimes useful ways of conveying certain sorts of large scale ideas in a
formal, written elucidation of our work seven years ago, to this letter, our fifth and gnardeliberate misreports of perceptiont attempt at hard, sharp crystallization.
In fact, our original elucidations were presented in the context of our profound respect for what we found in the course of teaching about a hundred and fifty students a day at a large city high school.
It has been the source of the bitterest disappointment that we wound up having to present our work several years later than originally projected, and with such presentation being in the context of our being subject to a three year, vicious, withering and most gruesome assault by the entire current professional homeostasis.
We do not know how long the current situation can maintain - either ours personally, or that of the world at large.
The outcome obviously remains very much in doubt.
Of course, among Homo Sapiens, individual, personal, accountable, internally controllable decisions carries the balance - always has, does currently, and always will.
condensed form, they only approximate an overall situation.
While parallels between a metaphor - or a story from another place - and an actual, current
Page 60 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 situation are sometimes useful, mind-engaging tools, the "match-up" is never complete.
In short, while a metaphor - or an anecdote or a "symbol" - may help in understanding the truth, it is never to be mistaken for the truth itself.
As regards the situation a metaphor is called upon to aid in identifying and grasping, it is most helpful, and indeed, a most essential and wonderful thing.
However, when a metaphor, anecdote, or symbol is bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved to be itself the truth of the situation that it is "symbolizing", then it is a deliberate misreport of perception.
Metaphors are wonderful, brilliant, powerful things when meant to aid a reader in the grasping of a situation.
They are the ugdeliberate misreports of perceptiont of killers when used to destroy a person's ability to delineate the truth itself.
The following then, is a story from the high seas, taken from the age of majority protection- seeking, circa 9,000 years ago to the current time.
We can't help but mention that the cabin boy drowned, but the poet, in this rare case anyway, lived to tell the tale, albeit amidst the greatest of risks.
------------------------------------------------------------
Page 61 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 AN OLD ONE:
 There was a lofty ship, And she put out to sea.
The name of this ship was The Golden Vanity.
As she sailed upon the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o w,
As she sailed upon the lonesome sea.
Well they had not been out but two weeks or three, 'Till she was overtaken by a Turkish Reveille.
As she sailed upon the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow, As she sailed upon the lonesome sea.
Then up spake our little cabin boy,
Sayin' what will you give me if I will them destroy,
If I'll sink 'em in the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow, If I sink 'em in the lonesome sea.
The man that them destroys,
Our Captain then repdeliberate misreported perception,
Five thousand pounds and my daughter for his bride,
If he sinks 'em in the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow,
If he sinks 'em in the lonesome sea.
Well the boy smote his breast, And down jumped he.
He swum 'till he come to that Turkish Reveille.
As she sailed upon the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow,
As she sailed upon the lonesome sea.
He had a little tool that was made for the use, He bored nine holes in her hull all at once.
And he sunk her in the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow, And he sunk 'er in the lonesome sea.
Then he swung back to his ship, He beat upon the side,
Cried Captain pick me up for I'm wearied with the tide, And I'm sinkin' in the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow,
I am sinkin' in the lonesome sea.
No I will not pick you up,
The Captain then repdeliberate misreported perception.
I'll shoot you, I'll drown you, I'll sink you in the tide.
I will sink you in the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow,
I will sink you in the lonesome sea.
If it was not for the lo o o o ve, That I bear for your men,
I would do unto you as I did unto them,
I would sink you in the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow,
I would sink you in the lonesome sea.
Then the boy bowed his head, And down sunk he.
Farewell, farewell, to The Golden Vanity.
As she sailed upon the lo o o ow, and lonesome lo o ow,
As she sailed upon the lonesome sea. 'And they sunk him.'
'Golden Vanity,' sung by Pete Seeger, recorded 1975
Page 62 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 ------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------
Summary of Persons and Groups to Whom Were Sent the 'March Mailings' (1985).
Three National
Journalists
Ten Book
Three Television Publishing Newsmen and Houses "Personalities"
Eleven Authors, Six Large Scholars, and Newspapers and Scientists Four Journals
Nine Elected
Government Eleven Overseas Officials News
Publications
Six Musicians, Actors, and * Four Artists National Governments Three Graphic Artists
All individuals and organizations to whom we sent articles or letters are well known in their fields, and about half are publicly well known as well.
While our materials were sent primarily to persons within this country, overseas recipients included the eleven news publications and three of the governments mentioned above as well as two musicians, one psychiatrist, and one historian.
* A full paradigm was placed with the governments of each of four nations.
Reply Volume II; Part V; Chapter Fourteen - Paradigm from California, 1983 to 1992 Page 2
- 1 -
Page 63 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Paradigm From California by Neil Miller et. al.
Copyright © 1984, 1986
Volume II: Letter To A Responsible Party
Part V: Modern Times Chapter 15: Jettison Sequence
    Since the bio-ecosystem generally works on a 'gather-add-build' system, manifested in human beings by what we call a "majority caretaking anxiety tuning", the maintenance of a general "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" ("vacuum-consume-burn up") in individuals and in society at large is no small matter.
Eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr in this letter we mentioned the general biological schema by which life is developed.
There is, in our species, a basic structure of 'behavior' which is by and large the same for everyone.
Furthermore, in the same evolutionary process through which that structure was developed there also further developed widely varying adaptations within the mostly uniform structure.
The basic genetic structure for our species is mostly uniform from person to person and changes very little.
The adaptations within that structure vary widely .
although adaptations must vary, there is a survivable structure for them too.
Variations outside of that survivable structure result in destruction on the small scale and extinction on the large scale.
While we have eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr described some of the features of a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" and "enactment homeostasis" such as a projection of various large-scale deliberate misreports of perception for the purposes of theft and a propensity to, in the majority, funnel vitality and security upwards while slamming anxiety back down the hierarchy, the next part of the letter looks at the actual mechanism by which a person's anxiety tuning is "thrown" onto a "majority protection-seeking track" - and maintained on that track - with particular emphasis on the decisions the person themself makes.
Virtually every individual is born headed for a "majority caretaking anxiety tuning" in adulthood, and everyone who becomes a "majority protection-seeker" - an unprincipled person - becomes that way because they severely and forcefully become jolted onto a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning" track in which majority protection-seeking enactments may
However ,
widely from one person to the next, must fall within certain boundaries - that is to say that,
the adaptations,
although
varying
Page 64 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 seem to be somewhat 'automatic', again strongly automatic but not completely so.
Destruction-producing, pain-producing, and extinction-producing 'behavioral' adaptations are the result of "geometric progression" type 'sequences' that wrestle persons onto an unprincipled track and maintain them there.
Thus, a person makes decisions, and is influenced to make decisions, that lead to a creating of, a changing of, a maintaining of, or a rigidifying of this sort of "anxiety tuning" adaptation and enactment system.
As such, the 'sequence' that "knocks" individual members of our species off of their principled and survivable track, and the sequences that maintain and, indeed, deepen an unprincipled derailment in the current day situation are worthy of mention.
To begin with, a distinction must be drawn between the situation of a principled person who enters the sort of "sequence" described here and becomes derailed from a majority caretaking anxiety tuning track onto a majority protection- seeking anxiety tuning track, and a person who is already engaged in a generally unprincipled life who is merely deepened into that homeostasis.
Much of this section is written about the process of being derailed from a principled balance of decisions and enactments to an unprincipled one.
However, although we describe this phenomenon in some detail, the more relevant question at this time concerns the phenomenon of an already unprincipled person engaging in a "sequence"
that vastly deepens their majority protection- seeking tuning, and the accompanying matter of how such a person regains a principled tuning and enactment homeostasis.
As such, the reader must bear in mind that many of the dynamics of first becoming unprincipled are connected to a lack of understanding of long term consequences of such derailment; once a person becomes unprincipled, the "sequences" that they engage in that deepen their unprincipled tuning and enactments are entered into with good knowledge of such consequences.
This must be borne in mind when considering the individual's own knowing complicity in their own unprincipled "sequential" engagements.
As will be seen, unprincipled persons are far more aware of the disastrous consequences of the escalating nature of this sort of situation than are principled persons and, as such, unprincipled persons are to be regarded as being well aware of the overall harm producing nature of their supposed evaluations, their dishonesties, and their projections.
In short, while principled parties may well enter "sequences" such as those described in this section with some lack of understanding of the long range consequences, unprincipled parties engage in such sequences knowingly , deliberately , and decisively , and, of course, deliberate misreport of perception a good deal about what they understand.
Indeed, as can be seen, the ability of an unprincipled person to get principled persons to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve that the unprincipled person does not understand, when
Page 65 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 the unprincipled person understands quite well what the unprincipled person is claiming to not understand, is a fundamental cornerstone of the maintaining of an unprincipled way of life in society at large.
Thus, we refer to the phenomenon of the original derailment in a person from principled to unprincipled as a "jettison sequence", and to the phenomenon of a person deepening their already unprincipled tuning as an "escalation sequence".
Although there is a similarity as regards the events involved, the differences are crucial.
The term "jettison sequence" is used here to denote the events involved in a change from a principled anxiety tuning to an unprincipled anxiety tuning and the term "escalation sequence" is used to denote the events involved in deepening an already unprincipled anxiety tuning.
Furthermore, the term "reprinciplization" refers to a change from unprincipled to principled and is again an entirely different type of process altogether from a jettison sequence or an escalation.
This portion of this letter is primarily concerned with what we refer to as a "jettison sequence", while an "escalation sequence" specifically is looked at in a later portion.
In still another section, the matter of "reprinciplization" is discussed.
One final note of introduction: while a person may well first engage in a "jettison sequence" at any age after two years old, the age range
between about twenty-three years old and forty- five years old has historically been the most common period for such an original anxiety tuning shift from principled to unprincipled in an individual.
In mid-1980's America, however, a "jettison" situation most commonly first appears in the early teenage years.
With a special ferocity over the past two and a half years in particular, the age at which persons, to use a frightening expression, get "their lights punched out" has dropped devastatingly to ten or eleven years old and continues to fall rapidly.
In order to understand how such "sequences" work, it is necessary to say a word or two regarding the function of various kinds of mental disorganization, given the original genetically formative situation.
In the wild of pre-12,000 and pre-100,000 years ago, the individual, tribe, and species central nervous system matrix of human beings evolved such that an individual's (and tribe's) response to a harm-producing situation would fit in well with the solution processes that simultaneously evolved.
As the organism - including its basic 'behavioral' structure - evolved physically, the design by which it best operates evolved alongside.
Thus, the individual's, tribe's, and species' central nervous system matrix evolved so as to respond most sharply to the sharpest ongoing threats to its survival.
Page 66 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 The greatest threats, and 'signs of' threat to the survival of the whole human CNS chain are presented when one person is separated from another particular person or persons, separation when accompanied by the threat of loss specifically, and especially loss itself.
These events - the "threat of separation", "separation", and "loss" - set off the loudest "alarm signals" in the CNS of all.
As such, one of the most severe sorts of intellectual, physical, and emotional changes a person went through in the genetically formative days of pre-12,000 years ago, and goes through currently, are those caused by loss, more specifically, loss of caretaking and loss of protection.
[We must note in passing that the effects on the central nervous system of "loss" are very different from the effects of "separation", which is a very different sort of phenomena.
'Separation', and the pain and passion associated with it, is thought of by the affected person as possibly temporary; the possibility of a reuniting under certain circumstances remains.
'Loss' - serious, 'flat out' loss - is a permanent matter, and as such, has an entirely different sort of effect; and the effects on the central nervous system of 'loss' have an entirely different function in nature than the effects of 'separation'.
The particular manner in which a person gathers protection, the 'types' of risks they are likely to take, and the way they go about enacting building and caretaking, that is, the "types" of
'inner states' that a person creates, is shaped by the 'separation' experiences that the person has been through and the adaptations that they develop.
This difference of "type", shaped by separation, is what is often called "personality".
[Experiences of loss, on the other hand, shape the 'automatic' portions of one's guidance system, which, in turn, regulates the relationship between the amount of protection gathered, risks taken, and caretaking built that a person does.
In other
'separation'
"personality" 'type', and "logical" "type" of cognitive organization, while experiences regarding 'loss' are directly influential on one's "anxiety tuning".
Severe losses can engender an extremely and intensely principled tuning, an extremely and intensely unprincipled tuning, or a serious, ongoing numbing of sensibilities altogether , depending on the nature of one's protection, one's "gridwork", one's decisions, and a variety of other factors, as will be seen.
[At any rate, what both separation and loss have in common is that together they make up the only sort of pain that the entire tribe-wide and species-wide human CNS chain - the thoughts, feelings, and enactments of human beings - sharply recognizes (although again, many deliberate misreports of perception are told regarding such).
words, shape
experiences one's "anxiety
regarding type",
Page 67 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In a word, the high level pain of separation and loss is an unmistakable, individually internal signal that some sort of overall, more advanced, protean development solution is required such that whatever threat to the CNS chain that is signaled by such pain is solved, and solved for all time.
"Separation", "personality", and particularly the whole matter of the effect of 'separation' on the central nervous system of human beings along with the function of that effect in the overall 'protean development' schema is detailed and profusely and colorfully illustrated in two chapters of our full paradigm and will not be touched on here.
In the discussion at hand, "loss" and "anxiety tuning" are the central concern.]
In humans the loss of caretaking comes about when something one is building or someone in whom one has invested a good deal of costly, high risk, high anxiety, 'caretaking' passions in, is damaged badly, is put out of reach in a damaging situation, or is killed.
This sort of loss tends to engender a powerful reevaluation of the whole way a person looks at life.
In the "protean development" manifestation within human intellect, severe loss of caretaking 'triggers' a 'break-up' of many of the individual elements that make up how a person looks at things.
This sort of 'breakup of elements' - for later reassemblage towards solution - is part and parcel of any prelude to coming up with a 'higher
level' solution, and is necessary for survival in our species whenever caretaking is in danger of going awry, or goes awry, or is destroyed or killed.
This 'break-up' or 'change-around' of thoughts evolved as part of the "solving in the overall" type of solution that is so special to mankind in particular whenever caretaking, or 'building future protections' is lost.
Loss of principled protection itself has a very different sort of effect than loss of caretaking.
Protection - any form of principled protection - is a pain absorber.
When protection is lost, especially without adequate replacement, and if pain reaches a certain very high level, there is a 'cut-off' within the loss-filled person of any sort of 'high level' evaluation whatsoever.
Thus, loss of protection leads to an overall 'tightening' of the way a person thinks about things and does things.
Without good protection to absorb pain and aid in solution, an individual tends to run far more on 'automatic', with far less evaluative and reevaluative abilities and a far 'thinner' emotional base from which to generate and 'hold' 'inner states'.
It could be said that a loss of caretaking leads to a kind of intellectual and emotional "tumble", while loss of principled protection leads to a "rigidification".
Page 68 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It must be noted that loss of unprincipled "protection", in terms of its endocrinological effects on a person, has much in common with loss of caretaking, since an unprincipled above figure receives the vitality and security that below figures ought to be receiving.
Thus, at a more fundamental level, it can be seen that when an outlet for pain absorption is lost there is "rigidification"; when an outlet for the projection of vitality is lost, there is "tumble".
Severe loss of both a person's protection and their caretaking as well, at the same time, is, in this day and age, an all too common, usually unnecessary, and extremely horrifying circumstance.
This 'compound' loss leads to an especially dangerous, volatile, and exceptionally vulnerable situation for the loss-filled person.
It can be seen that loss of protection - especially if the protection lost contained a modicum of principle, and especially if there is far less principled protection to be found elsewhere, concurrent with 'unanswered' loss of caretaking - can lead to a decisive lowering of the amounts of the various 'inner state' substances that the loss- filled party can muster or create, especially the 'high level' ones.
In our terms, we would say that one's "threshold" for anxiety drops drastically, that is, the amount of pain rising from below that a person can combine with protection and convert into vitality and solution for below parties and for the future, goes way down.
Indeed, the ability to create, crystallize, and utilize 'high level' 'inner states' and the conditions that produce them may well go off altogether.
Such lowering of both 'type' and quantity of emotion and intellect that the person themselves can create, changes a person's ability to regulate their behavior as regards principle, risk, courage, and responsibility, and changes it decisively for the worse.
While it can be seen that loss of caretaking or loss of protection can result - unless slowly, painfully, and riskily recovered - in the most profound loss of a person's ability to create high level inner states, these factors only 'set the stage', so to speak, for the change to a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning", or a 'running on automatic' 'majority protection-seeking' frame of mind.
It must be constantly emphasized that although each individual has a unique combination of strengths, what is common to all is each individual person's own internally controllable decision-making.
It must never be forgotten that while external influences on individuals are extremely powerful and must be examined carefully and altered wherever found to be necessary, each person carries with them an entire, internally controlled vitality-caretaking-cognitive- responsibility system, which also carries the most profound influence.
When high level inner states are present, one has better ability to face and evaluate risky situations and make the appropriate decisions, while when high level inner states are not
Page 69 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 present and a person is operating on 'low level' 'inner states' only, the daily life risk that our behavioral system was designed to run on, seems to a person far less enactable.
This matter, the lowering of a person's ability to create and otherwise internally engender, in a principled way, 'high level' 'inner states', accompanied by a severe lowering of a powerful sense of principle and responsibility, is most crucial to the discussion that follows and as such is worthy of some terminological delineation.
Enormous confusion is often projected regarding the concept of "freedom" as commonly discussed.
Our terminology for describing a person who generates and engenders in others in a principled way 'high level' 'inner states' - certainty, passion, satisfaction - is to say that such a person holds a "high homeostasis".
In such a case life is "thick", things are passionately important, anxieties run high, and often such anxieties, and the risks that signal them, are well mitigated.
When there is a certain level of high principle present in influential figures, satisfaction runs deep and powerful - although, to be sure, the risk of heartbreak and horror over the last several millennia has run quite high.
This overall 'inner condition' of a person - the ability to internally create an ongoing sense of depth and passion - has, most unfortunately, been the target of brutally dishonest propaganda.
Such propaganda deriding things like "depth" and "passion" is, of course, generally designed in such a way so as to engender the absorption of such 'inner states' from those who create them, but without oneself engaging in the risk and building that it takes for such creation.
It is for this reason that some persons have been known to project the ridiculous assertion that the ability of each individual to make and enact powerful decisions at all is somehow unhealthy or unprincipled.
Others attempt to force an association between "things being passionately important" and being 'burdened' with responsibility, 'chained' to some goal or other, 'naively' at high risk for mental disorder and great heartbreak.
Moreover , the decisions and enactments required of an individual in order for them to create and maintain the conditions that produce 'high level' 'inner states' - which are crucial to survival for every individual - and thereby themselves having a ready supply of them (not to be confused with the creating of the appearance of such) are sometimes referred to as some sort of "confinement" that restricts one's "freedom".
It is to be remembered, however, that it is the 'high level' 'inner states' - what we're calling a "high homeostasis" - that organize the central nervous system such that cognition - intellect - is sharply arranged, and it is primarily under these conditions that the very small 'pool' of "out-of- the-blue" factors mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr are most available and imagination is at its richest, most depthful, and most powerful.
Page 70 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Being equipped to, and deciding to, engage in the risks involved in creating truthfinding, and assuming responsibility for outcome of caretaking is sometimes said to be seen as some sort of "masochistic" 'weight' to bear.
The more sinister and desperately empty-handed of the professionals have been known to threateningly refer to a sense of 'high level' responsibility in a person - clearly a genetically endowed, adaptively arranged behavioral regulation integrate within every individual, of obvious, indeed, crucial survival value in the genetically formative situation - as some sort of "death wish".
It must be borne in mind, however, that imagery describing a passion for ongoing, high-risk, principled caretaking as "masochism", "death wish", "naiveté", or some such, is generally used especially by those who create 'high level' 'inner states' not at all, but who ferociously 'drink them in', 'consume' some and 'pump' the rest to those above them, deliberate misreport of perception about what they understand, and live on those who do create and build them, almost entirely.
Here we are talking about the most severe sorts of theft, and the most brutal forms of deliberate infliction of human pain, maiming, and murder.
While it is most obvious that everyone has responsibility for their decisions, it can be seen that there are cases wherein a person's internal homeostasis, that is, internal balance of judgments, decisions, and enactments is 'tighter' than others.
We use the term 'tight homeostasis' to describe the sort of situation wherein 'high level' 'inner
states' are not being internally created, their constant flow is not assured, and often the entire mental-emotional organization that an individual has to call on is a product of 'lower level' inner states only .
A person in this situation can be seen to be "reacting" - very much on "automatic" with little feeling of being in any sort of real control of their overall circumstances on the planet and in history.
Life is 'thinner' - sometimes "placid", sometimes violent, sometimes serene, sometimes funny , often comatose, sometimes 'cranky', even hateful - but rarely , if ever , certain, depthful, passionate, or satisfying.
A person in this state of mind may, at times, conclude that anything and everything that they do 'ricochets' and reacts against everything else and nothing they do ever changes anything - nothing ever has any formative, permanent, positive effect on anything.
This whole business of presenting a person - oneself or others - as ineffective, essentially helpless, unable to do anything that permanently alters anything, is what is often ballyhooed as being "free".
What is sometimes dishonestly called "freedom" refers to just this state of mind.
It can be seen that while the idea of "doing whatever one 'wants'" is often claimed to be associated with the idea of "freedom", such claims are often made only as long as such 'wants' are of the 'tight homeostasis' variety - particularly as long as such 'wants' are played out
Page 71 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 within the general "majority protection-seeking homeostasis".
It must be remembered that a person in a 'tight homeostasis' has the least access to the small 'pool' of 'out-of-the-homeostasis- factors'.
A propensity to 'mindlessly' "react" is often called freedom, while attempts to hold some sort of 'high level' framework whereby one can actually alter the situation for the better, is often dishonestly said to be seen as not being free, but rather being 'burdened' or worse.
Suffice it to say that 'high level' 'inner states', in conjunction with the conditions that 'evolution' or 'creation' designed to engender them, constitute the great "background" 'inner states' that give "depth", "color", passion, "meaning", and "importance" to all the other 'inner states'.
'High level' 'inner states' are also an absolute requirement for the sorts of advancement that bring overall solution for pain-producing difficulties.
The high level inner states are the most personally expensive and risk-filled to produce, and the holding and spending of such are what everyone strives for - all the deliberate misreports of perception told to the contrary notwithstanding.
Such 'high level' 'inner states' - 'certainty', 'passion', 'satisfaction' - although together constituting in the area of one third of the 'inner states' that it takes to sustain life, are the 'goal' or 'target' of ninety percent of the deliberate misreports of perception, theft, and murder present in our species for the past nine thousand
years, particularly the large scale deliberate misreports of perception listed eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr.
Furthermore, 'high level' 'inner states', in conjunction with the conditions that engender them, are powerful decision-making tools.
When they are lost, powerful decision-making abilities diminish.
The terminology that we use to describe the central nervous system's "inner state balance" when high level inner states are absent; wherein a person runs on 'lower level' 'inner states' only; wherein any attempt to muster either intellect or passion is 'shaken down' or 'pissed out' before the person has a chance to crystallize them into anything greater or do anything with them; wherein one is especially susceptible to 'signs' of protection, easily, indeed, to some degree 'automatically' mistaking such 'signs' for principled protection itself - such a state is what we refer to as a "tight homeostasis".
When principled high level protection (which engenders the certainty and security 'inner state') disappears, when risk (passion, pain, brilliance, heartbreak, courage) goes unanswered, and when caretaking (vitality , 'sense of importance', satisfaction) is destroyed, a person is greatly at risk for losing a ready supply of 'high level' inner states, namely, the supply they create themselves.
The loss of such abilities to generate 'high level' inner states within oneself and to influence others such that they are engendered in others is, of course, also a loss to the common pool of
Page 72 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 inner states from which we all draw much of our daily emotions.
When a person in a principled enactment homeostasis gets "tightened down" into an unprincipled enactment homeostasis, the loss is not only to the individual and those close to them, but to all mankind as well.
We ourselves have seen, and lived through, our own 'caretaking going awry' in most horrifying ways as regards many people who were looking to one or another of us for protection, and have taken scores of personal, as well as terrifying, numbing, and severely debilitating, large scale heavy losses in that regard.
Furthermore, particularly over the past three and a half years, we have seen one after another of our own protective figures, as well as persons whom we had previously bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved would serve as protective figures, turn on us, and especially our work in a most hostile and determined fashion.
Literally scores of well protected above figures at all echelons of hierarchy, one after the next.
There are no more than one or two persons, none possessed of substantial protection themselves, who have offered us anything besides a constant wall of unbridled hostility, and, even in the rare case, the wall of hostility is only occasionally and slightly interrupted.
[It should be noted that one consistent source of one kind of ongoing personal protection from above figures that does stand firmly is that created by those who have been long dead or who have recently died or been killed - several
billion persons both famous and seemingly unknown, in every corner of the world over the last twelve thousand years.
It is something we've learned about holding principle overall: when one "holds principle" as an ongoing matter in their life, especially through the end of their lifetime - that is, when one is 'tethered' to the whole "protection-risk- caretaking" "protean replication schema" - then those things which one has created and built, "stand" forever.
When there is truthful conceptualization of such a person's effects, a living person draws an enormous quantity of high level security - a measurable, quantifiable, tangible, transferable, substance - from the lives of persons who have long been dead, fully convertible into passion and vitality for the living in the moment.
Furthermore, under such conditions, the high level inner states that principled persons generated while they were alive continue to be available for living principled persons to draw upon long after the person who originally created the inner states dies.
Such transfer of inner states from the lives of persons who have long since died to the lives of persons who are currently alive, it must be noted, is but one source of high level inner states that a person may draw upon, but however powerful it is, it has but limited value as an overall source of protection - and solution.
[In this connection, it must be noted that the ongoing generating of substance by that which a person has created while they were alive is accomplished only in part through the written
Page 73 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 word, artwork, physical things that have been built, and other documents, for there are many other central nervous system mechanisms by which such transfer is accomplished, as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr in the Farming Society section and as elucidated in more detail in our full paradigm.
For it is a fundamental property of the entire bio-ecosystem that by a wide variety of mechanisms, the central nervous system chain of Homo Sapiens does not forget.
This memory is a fundamental property of much of the world of physics, has always been the case regarding DNA's overall basic mechanisms, and is, in even more detail the case regarding the specific memory of each individual human in particular .
While various physical records, documents, and physical things do amplify considerably one's lifetime enactments, and the CNS chain's memory of those enactments, the kernel of a person's actual effects - physical substances - on the whole bio-ecosystem, documents or no documents, are created by the individual while they are alive, and remain forever.
Such mechanisms are one major portion of what allows living persons to hold principle - high level truthfulness and certainty regarding the entire bio-schema - without 'living' protection being present to draw on.
Such permanent, ongoing creation of inner state substances for the living by the lives of persons who have long since died is what is oft alluded to in classical literature by the well known metaphor "immortality".]
Such personal experiences as we have had regarding severe loss, and the experience of others that we are aware of, as well as our scientific formulations, have shown that it is not simply severe loss of principled protection, or caretaking, or even both that results in a shift from a principled homeostasis to a "majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning", although losses are powerful contributing factors, and they, in and of themselves, do often create other very unfortunate conditions.
Rather, the decisive factor in such an "anxiety tuning" change from 'majority caretaking' to 'majority protection-seeking', is having specifically decided to 'turn against or consume and destroy one's own caretaking, or one's own principled protection, or, in fact, deciding to 'turn against', or destroy any principled protection, principled risk-taking, or principled caretaking at all.
Furthermore, ongoing decisions to back up and, indeed, escalate the homeostasis thereby engendered are the decisive factors in maintaining an unprincipled anxiety tuning.
Again, we must state that it is part of our purpose to elucidate the external circumstances under which it is more or less likely that an individual will make a particular decision AND to elucidate the nature of each individual's personal, accountable, internally controllable decisions.
These two factors - external influence on a person to decide one thing or another; and a person's own, internally controllable,
Page 74 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 accountable decisions - must be looked at separately.
To "mix" the two factors together, or to ignore or belittle the importance of either factor results in overall disaster.
It must be noted that one of the most common enactments of unprincipled persons is to "mix" these factors - influence from others on a person's decisions and the person's own decisions - or to examine one sort of factor and ignore the other, or to examine the decisions of a principled person while ignoring the far more "relevant to solving the problem" internal decisions of unprincipled parties.
As regards overall outcome, such factors - the influences on a person and the person's decisions - do not "cancel one another out", as is sometimes said to be bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved.
Each factor, and each person's decisions, has their own, separate, permanent, long term effect on overall human outcome, one way or the other.
As regards human enactment, there is no "canceling out"; there is only permanent, concrete, specific effect - destruction or advancement - one way or the other, for all time.
And each of such effects, be they health- producing, advancement-producing, damage- producing or murderous, are precisely measurable by the mental capacities of every single individual human being.
As regards the conscious decisions that a person makes, it must be noted that there are two entirely different types of decisions that a person is faced with and makes.
One is what can be called a "big jump" type of decision.
"Jettison" and "escalation" decisions fall into this category in that the sequence of events involved in being derailed from a principled homeostasis - 'jettison' - has much in common with the process of 'escalating' into an even deeper derailment.
The crucial difference is that a jettisoning person has no clear knowledge of the overall unprincipled outcome, while an escalating person does know that the outcome will be a more rigidly unprincipled one.
As will be seen, "reprinciplization" decisions also fall into the "big jump" category in that the enactments involved also change an overall homeostasis, however in the case of 'reprinciplization' decisions, the sequence of events, and the laws of physics therein involved, are of an entirely different nature.
The other type of decision besides the 'big jump' mentioned above is what might be called a "small step" type of decision.
"Small step" decisions are decisions whereby an entire change of "anxiety tuning" is not at issue; they are decisions that merely reinforce or do not reinforce a "tuning" that is already on line.
While we have found that all decisions are often presented as being in the second category - a small step that merely reinforces or does not
Page 75 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 reinforce an already present pattern, the presence of - and the importance of - the "big jump", "jettison", or "escalation" type of decision is generally far too little discussed.
Metaphors, as stated eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, are useful ways of identifying a general sort of concept; a 'metaphor' itself does not state a truth of the matter.
Designed to give a general sense of a situation, a metaphor "mixes" 'levels' of thought too rapidly, in an effort to quickly bridge a gap between what the writer or speaker is projecting and the reader's or listener's general knowledge.
Although a metaphor, at least as we use it here, may well be helpful in identifying the truth, it is never to be mistaken for the truth itself.
It must be borne in mind that 'metaphors' are most useful at times of good protection and are most deadly when principled protection is absent.
When a principled person uses a metaphor in an unprotected or unprincipled general situation, such a person is engaging in the most 'bleedable' and randomly directed form of attempt at caretaking.
When an unprincipled person uses a metaphor in a generally unprincipled situation, it deals one of the deaddeliberate misreports of perceptiont, and most infamous blows possible to cognitive processes.
[Our full paradigm devotes several sections to a detailed clarification of this matter.] It is for this reason that, in this letter, we use metaphors -
and anecdotes - as rarely as possible, and we caution the reader against conceptualizing any "metaphor", or "symbol", as if the metaphor were actually the truth itself.
It is in this light that we use the words 'devils' and 'angels' metaphorically in the following paragraph.
Having said all that, we note the following:
There has been a notion afoot in classical literature that the "temptations of the 'devil'" are responsible for various ugly behaviors of this or that individual human being.
Alongside this notion goes various statements that fall under the misleading heading of "common wisdom", namely that people become unprincipled out of a 'desire' for 'good feeling' or 'power', or security , or excitement, or 'temptation' or some such.
Although it can be seen how a person living in a society permeated with a "majority protection- seeking anxiety tuning" might well 'conclude' that "desire" or "temptation" or "the pursuit of 'power'" might "corrupt" people, these are all dangerously inaccurate notions.
"Tis not the 'temptations' of the 'devil'" that "throws" people onto a "majority protection- seeking" track, nor is it "temptations of the 'devil'" that maintains them there - rather, it is "blowing it with the 'angels'".
Anyone in an unprincipled homeostasis who reflects for a few moments on the first time, or perhaps the 'heaviest' time, or the most recent time that they decided to abandon or 'turn
Page 76 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 against', or consume and destroy 'high level' caretaking - their own or anyone else's - knows exactly what we mean.
Sometimes in life, although always in vastly more costly, more difficult, and more intensely risk- filled form, the situation comes around again.
Our description of a "derailment" 'sequence' begins with a person's own "caretaking going awry".
As a person watches this situation passing, they go through the most powerful of endocrinological changes.
First of all, as the principled caretaking that they have been doing deteriorates, anxieties run extremely high - that is, the bio-chemicals that produce the 'high level' anxiety 'inner state' in the central nervous system are internally secreted in large quantities.
The body receives messages through "extroperceptors" - eyes, ears, skin, and so forth - that principled caretaking is being destroyed.
In the genetically formative situation of pre- 100,000 years ago, if such messages - "caretaking is being destroyed" - were not perceived or if such messages were distorted or ignored, future protections would be lost and, on the larger scale, the tribe or species would not survive.
Thus, there evolved, in man, a set of neuronal configurations such that when caretaking is being destroyed externally to the individual, the message "caretaking is being destroyed" goes to the brain internally, that is, within the individual.
As the stimulus or 'message' comes in, it is combined with information accumulated throughout one's life regarding the matter at hand, and is further combined with internally controllable decisions and conclusions currently in the making and those from the past.
The combined message, in the form of a precise configuration of electrical signals, is sent to the cerebral cortex in the lower part of the brain.
The cerebral cortex takes the combined message and 'translates' it into another set of precise electrical signals, again sent through the neural system, to the appropriate gland or glands which then secretes the signaled bio-chemicals which in turn stimulates the central nervous system such that - in the "caretaking goes awry" case under discussion - the person feels pain-filled and extremely anxious.
In Homo Sapiens, such pain and anxiety are obvious signals that there is an overall problem to be solved - in Homo Sapiens intellectual advancement is required in order for solution to be found - and without good solution, individual, tribe, species, and indeed, in the current situation, the entire bio-ecosystem plummets toward extinction.
It must always be remembered that while the pathways between what happens in the world, external to the individuals, and the 'inner states' thereby engendered within the individual are very clear, understandable, and direct, along these pathways the 'stimulus', 'messages', 'signals', and so forth are joined by and integrated with the conscious, internally
Page 77 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 controllable, personal, decision-making process, within the individual person.
Such decision-making processes involve the "out- of-the-blue" factors mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, cognition with its focus on the truth itself, choices between overall outcomes that one aims for, a vast store of memory, a plethora of 'wants' and evaluations at many levels, and a host of other components.
Although much human activity takes place 'automatically', so to speak, as regards outcome in human affairs, both in the moment as well as over time, the specific, internally controllable, thoroughly evaluatable, personally accountable decisions of an individual human being - every individual human being - is, without question, the decisive factor.
When the personal decisions of an individual are principled, responsible, forthrightly made, and fully examined, outcome goes well; when the personal decisions of an individual are lousy, rotten, or involve a lot of lying, outcome in human affairs, particularly overall outcome, is hateful, and worse.
Understandings of mechanisms, reasons, and mostly 'automatic' progressions are never to be confused with a rigid 'self-perpetuation' or supposed 'inevitability'.
As regards human beings, especially over time - that is, over days, weeks, years, and more - outcome, including overall outcome as well as everyday outcome, is decisively effected by the internally controllable, accountable decisions of an individual person, and that includes, of course, every individual person.
Of course, deciding to feel a certain way in a situation or deciding to signal a certain 'inner state', is not generally the sort of decision a person can make, and, obviously, such would not be helpful, indeed, would probably be harmful even if it could be done.
Once again, creating the presence of the inner states - certainty, security, anxiety, or vitality - without the presence of the conditions that such inner states were designed to be signals and guidance for - protection, risk, and caretaking - drastically escalates an overall unsurvivable homeostasis.
Should a person decide to feel certainty, passion, or satisfaction, and then be actually able to find and enact a way to feel those things WITHOUT the presence of protection, risk, or caretaking, then disaster - short term or long term, but in any case, disaster - ensues.
Deciding to operate generally in a principled way, that is, making overall decisions such that inner states are created and exchanged such that life works out well all around, that is, the ability to create the conditions for which such feelings - and such guidance - were designed, is well within the everyday capacity of every single individual person and such 'one way or the other' decisions, to create such conditions are most helpful.
Indeed, the decisions - not, in this case, the 'automatics' - are decisive.
In pre-man and man in the wild, in those individual organisms and tribes where such "caretaking is being destroyed" signals to the individual were distorted, ignored, or deliberate misreported perception about, or if the signals
Page 78 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 gave inaccurate information as regards the external situation, there was no survival.
In those Homo Sapiens individuals and tribes where the signals were accurately understood - and heeded in a principled way - there was survival.
In the latter case, advancement - first genetic in the "pre-man" period, then intellectual in the last 50,000 years - for individual, tribe, and species ensued.
For each Homo Sapiens individual, the ability to distinguish the truth itself, which is absolute, unchanging, and the same for everyone, from the multitude of possible inaccuracies, untruths, and deliberate misreports of perception, constitutes the 'focus' and structure whereby specifically intellectual 'protean advancement' may ensue.
In the situation currently under examination wherein a principled person's high level caretaking is being destroyed and high level anxieties are flowing within the person, such a person typically spends their internal and external resources in attempts to stop the damage to their caretaking.
Included in these resources are the most important "maps of availability" of above figures - that is, having had the sort of experience whereby one feels confident that above figures will be able to absorb some of the enormous pain involved, and protect, to some degree, whatever solution may be forged.
Such internal "maps" of the external situation such that one knows that help from above figures is available, are one important part of the
'signals' emanating from the cerebral cortex to the appropriate glands; such signals engender the secretion of the bio-chemicals that stimulate the central nervous system to feel certainty and confidence, that is, the 'high level security inner state'.
This particular inner state is a 'type' of security substance that flows through a person as the result of "maps" of protection from above and which is manifested by a confident 'frame of mind' regarding the availability of aid from above.
This security substance "backs up" the risk-filled decisions and enactments that are necessary when high level anxieties are present.
The "internal maps of availability" of principled protection above, of course, have to be an accurate reflection of the external circumstance, that is, have to be the result of an accurate assessment of just how much of what sort of protection is actually available - otherwise, disaster ensues.
So the person, watching his or her caretaking going awry, spends some of their security, which is available to them in several forms, one of the most important of which is their internal "maps" of principled protection emanating to them from above parties.
As part of the general spending, of course, and before 'calling in' their "maps", the person generally taps their own internal store of personal "gridwork", their knowledge, their intellect, their passion, their possessions, and so forth, and their own internal store of personally costly risk-taking abilities.
Page 79 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 If their caretaking continues to deteriorate, the person is likely to turn to those who they have reason to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve would provide principled protection, that is, to those persons to whom the 'internal maps' refer.
Unfortunately, especially in this day and age, a person in this sort of situation is likely to find that their 'protection' - that is, their 'above figures' - will not protect them into the caretaking of below parties; will only offer help for 'vacuuming' security and vitality upwards while slamming anxieties - risks, pain, deliberate misreports of perception, and losses - back down below.
How many of us have kicked our feet and cried out in the night "< < < NOBODY CARES! > > >" only to feel laughed at, deliberate misreported perception to, and ridiculed.
In the metaphor from the children's story, "the piper is not paid."
Upon realizing that there will be no principled protection coming down from above figures, the 'high level' security 'inner state' substance being secreted within a person drops dramatically.
In other words, messages from the external world that principled protection is not actually available to them go through the usual neural channels resulting in an internal termination of the flow of the bio-chemicals that stimulate the central nervous system to 'feel secure'.
In other words, the person's high level anxiety emotional state - which has arisen from "caretaking going awry" - is stripped of the backing of the high level security inner state.
As the person uses up their own protective resources in desperately attempting to stop the destruction of their caretaking, and as they suddenly "learn" that they do not have 'reserves' above, they may conclude for a moment that they do not have the resources to protect their caretaking.
Now, at this time, caretaking is being destroyed.
As such destruction is rendered, the 'high level' vitality substance or 'inner state' goes off.
With caretaking destroyed, the 'inner state' endocrines designed to both engender and result from 'high level' caretaking - namely, what we identify as 'high level' vitality - stops being secreted within the person.
Often, when a principled person goes through such "changes" for the first time, they have little idea of what is happening to them - only that they are 'changing inside'.
Finally, as dangers and separations turn into losses, as "maps of availability" of principled protection show themselves to have been inaccurate, and as costly risks turn into 'flat out' losses all around, internal high level anxiety secretions close down to a trickle or go off altogether .
The person's whole 'high level' 'generating system' closes down.
A metaphoric expression that we use from time to time to state an approximation of this particular sort of change in the 'inner states' within a person, is one that is taken from another children's story.
Page 80 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Our expression for describing this sort of change in "overall emotional tenor" is to say that one goes from "the ballroom" into "rats and pumpkins".
Once again, it must be remembered that metaphors are never to be taken as truth, and whatever near-truthful sense they may project, they are not to be presumed as having such near- truthfulness beyond the specific 'parallel' that the teller of the metaphor is explicitly stating.
We have long since learned that one of the cardinal rules of health-producing psychiatry can be summed up as, to paraphrase one of our many teachers: 'do not project metaphors to a schizophrenic'.
Truth - and principle - engenders good health in those who may have difficulties figuring things out; untruths, in those cases wherein untruths are turned into deliberate misreports of perception - as happens with metaphors all too often - bleed, crush, and kill.
In the situation of this letter, we keep our own metaphoric and anecdotal projection down to the vicinity of the one percent level.
It is quite difficult, and indeed, somewhat depressing for us to do so, but entirely necessary, as can be easily seen.
Now of course, for the individual whose caretaking has been destroyed, and whose protection - or "maps" of protection - has turned out to be "hot air", a major life decision is in the making - what we call a "big jump" 'type' of decision.
Caretaking is destroyed, risk has, as far as one can see, gone to naught, and 'maps' of principled protection have disappeared.
'High level' 'inner states' have now been shaken down, along with one's ability to create them.
High level security substances are no longer being secreted within, resulting in a mental and emotional organization such that it may seem that no one and nothing can ever be redeliberate misreported perception on for anything; a sense of certainty recedes.
High level anxiety substances are reduced to a trickle or are off altogether leading to a newfound - and obviously insane - sense that nothing really matters anyway, life is just some sort of thin, hollow joke.
High level vitality substances stop being secreted as well, leaving the person with the terrible, erroneous 'sense' that they are personally insignificant, "small", and will never get anywhere, or never really accomplish anything permanent in their life.
Many principled persons may well not understand that this is a moment when the most powerful and far reaching of internal decisions are made.
Unprincipled persons, on the other hand, are fully aware of the momentous nature of the decision at hand in this sort of situation, and deliberate misreport of perception a good deal about what they understand.
It must be noted that although food gathering and early farming society people of Homo Sapiens's first ninety thousand years of existence
Page 81 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 were fully and consciously aware that a certain, specific balance of the physical conditions of protection, risk, and caretaking must be present in order for any feelings of security, passion, or satisfaction to continue, such understandings, for reasons that should by now be clear to the reader , are continually distorted, deliberate misreported perception about, and ridiculed during the contemporary, 9,000 year "majority protection-seeking age".
Furthermore, these obvious dynamics are well known to those at the higher reaches of the professional and scientific community and dishonesties, especially public dishonesties regarding such understandings constitute the gravest, most powerful, most influential, and most far reaching "crimes against humanity" currently enacted on this planet.
At this point, the entire question becomes a matter of the most profound of internal decisions: namely, does the person decide to take the great risk including what may appear to be - and what may well be - risk to life and limb in an unprotected general situation in order to remain principled, that is, in order to save their ability to internally generate high level inner states, that is, avoid becoming a thief, for however much longer they remain alive, or does the person 'give up the ghost' so to speak, that is, decide to embark on a "majority protection- seeking" way of life along with the horror for the world around them, and the murder and extinction therein engendered.
When internal generating of 'high level' inner states - most specifically vitality and anxiety - is
off, the protection provided by a person's own cognition is not easily called into use.
One's ability to make accurate predictions regarding outcome decreases, especially predictions regarding one's future judgment system, that is, the whole framework in which decisions are made.
When this happens, one's whole conceptual framework, one's whole 'frame of mind' changes such that much of the information, intellectual organization, and emotional tenor that the person has become used to is no longer at the person's command.
For a principled person, when first encountering this situation, and now no longer internally secreting the endocrines that engender high level inner states within the central nervous system, 'low level' thoughts and oft inaccurate metaphors may be leapt to or formulated, such as the idea that one must be unprincipled to 'survive', comparisons between humans and some metaphoric 'dogs' and other animals, and various other sorts of 'conclusions'.
These 'flashes' that dart across the mind, especially when encouraged by unprincipled figures - especially unprincipled above figures - form a "guidance" basis for the vacuuming and, to use another metaphor, 'cannibalization' that is characteristic of a majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning and enactment homeostasis.
This entire process, what we are calling a "jettison sequence", is made possible by a number of rarely discussed, generally deliberate misreported perception about, but widely known mechanisms.
Page 82 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Some of these processes are directly derived from genetically endowed characteristics, common to all human beings, some of them follow from the influences of other persons and the decisions of other persons, particularly persons higher in a hierarchy, and some of these processes follow from internally controllable decisions made by the individual themself.
Indeed, all three factors - certain eco-systemic processes, the conscious internally controllable decisions of above parties, and the conscious decisions of the person themself - must 'line up' in order for a "jettison" to ensue.
If either the above party, the person themself, or, in some cases, even the person's below party decides that principle is not to be abandoned, that is, that principle is to be maintained, then the "jettison" is thwarted.
One of the eco-systemic processes that plays a central role in a 'jettison sequence' is referred to by us in a term used throughout this letter, namely the term "homeostasis".
This word, taken from the field of medicine, refers to a balance between things that are "reacting" to one another in some sort of closely predictable and, in some sense, 'repeating' pattern.
A very simple example of this sort of 'maintenance of balance' is the manner in which body heat is kept within a constant range of temperature.
When it is cold outside, a person would freeze, and die if it were not for 'homeostatic mechanisms' that prevent this eventuality from
happening - one puts on a warm coat or one contracts their muscles - shivers - conserving heat within the body and allowing for a build-up of heat, such that the body stays warm, and survives.
When it becomes very warm outside, a person may remove heavy layers of clothing, and also the body sweats, the evaporating sweat thereby cooling the body - again there is a maintaining of the thermal homeostasis, required for survival.
Through these 'reactions' as well as a large number of others, the body maintains, to a large degree 'automatically', a 'thermal homeostasis' keeping body temperature within the certain very narrow range necessary for survival.
Although this sort of "thermal homeostasis" works almost perfectly more than 99.999 percent of the time, it does happen that the homeostasis gets thrown off - sometimes even fatally so - by diseases, inclement weather , or other factors.
A human 'thermal homeostasis', like every other homeostasis in biology, is subject to change, no matter how "tight" the homeostasis is, no matter how long term, no matter how vital to life, or indeed, no matter how disastrous it may be.
In the vast majority of cases, including this one regarding the human body's 'thermal homeostasis', of course, it is vital to life to preserve the going homeostasis; in other cases such as the homeostasis of a majority protection- seeking anxiety tuning and enactment system being so prevalent in society at large, it is vital to life to interrupt and change the homeostasis in some specific way.
Page 83 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Virtually every advancement, every gemstone in the entire history of art, science, scholarship, and indeed, romance as well, constitutes the enactment of an ongoing passion to make determinations as to what sorts of homeostasises, what sorts of balances are healthy and must be preserved - and even, in some cases, created - and what sorts of homeostasises, what sorts of balances are horror- producing and even fatal.
Those homeostasises, those balances that maintain and advance good health, the best of feelings and survival for individual, group, species, and beyond are to be preserved, and those that destroy, maim, and kill are to be interrupted and changed, always, of course, towards the enactment of overall life reinforcing 'protean advancement' solution.
Very early in this letter, we mentioned the concept of 'adaptive range': everyone, or almost everyone, is born with the same sort of structural characteristics, although as regards what is generally known as 'behavior', the 'low level' range within a particular characteristic that each person is born with varies from person to person.
Furthermore, the adaptation that each person develops - how this or that person's structural characteristic manifests itself within the person - winds up being unique for each individual.
We used the example of the structural characteristic of crying, and described possible ranges of crying notes and possible adaptations.
Furthermore, we mentioned that the note that a baby is most likely to wind up crying at, is the
one that brings protection, and the assurance of protection, from their primary attachment figure - usually (but not always, of course) their mother .
Mother too has a range of notes that she will most notice and identify as calling for her attention to her child, and as time goes on, this closes down to an 'adaptation' for the mother as well, namely, a note that she will respond to.
As the baby's range of possible crying notes "closes down" to the point of adaptation, that is, closes down to the 'note' that mother is most likely to respond to, mother's 'recognition range' for this particular sort of sound - the cry of her child - "closes down" to a point of adaptation as well.
In this case, mother's 'automatic' 'recognition range' "closes down" to a special alertness for the particular 'note' that the baby cries at when it needs protection.
It is to be remembered, of course, that the "gathering protection ranges", such as, in this case, 'crying', once "set", are less changeable and flexible, but the "enacting caretaking ranges" - such as, in this case, mother's automatic recognition of the baby's signals, are more changeable and shiftable as the caretaking situation requires.
Thus, while the adaptive ranges of both mother and child are developing a "set" complementarity to one another, in this case, the child's adaptation is likely to remain an ongoing, semi- permanent feature of the child's "personality", while the mother's adaptation - it being a
Page 84 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 caretaking one - is likely to readjust and readjust again to meet new situations.
The baby cries in a certain familiar way, mother pays attention to the baby - holding, feeding, rocking, cleaning, in short spending from what protection she has and thereby projecting that the child is "cared about", worth spending one's security on, and thereby protected.
When the child finds out that he or she is protected, security-producing bio-chemicals flow within the child.
It must be noted that "signs" and "symbols" of 'protection' projected by mother (or an above figure in any situation to any below figure) are of secondary importance in turning on the child's ongoing "internal generating of security biochemicals".
Such signs and symbols - in and of themselves - are not a decisive factor in that regard.
Actual spending of themself - and willingness to spend of themself - by the protective figure through risk or other "adding" type means, are the only sort of enactments that actually turns on the security biochemicals in the below figure in any sort of ongoing way.
The "signs" and "symbols" of protection, without the actual risk and spending by the above figure, are what are generally known as "communications technique" and are likely to result in the development in the child of a "character disorder" at best, and a sociopathic 'anxiety tuning' at worst.
When one projects 'signs' and 'symbols' of protection rather than the actual enactment of personal spending, risk and caretaking, that is, when a person "shows" that they "care" rather than enacting risk and spending, one engenders a highly inaccurate assessment by the below parties of just what it is that engenders life.
In the particular case we are describing here, mother - or whomever the child's attachment figure is - is enacting "caring" and is "spending" of themself (rather than only 'putting on' a "show" of such) and hence, security bio-chemicals flow within the child.
The child "coos", mother smiles - a little vitality "bursts forth" from within the mother, a certain amount of the medium level vitality inner state is transferred from the mother to the child where it is received by the child as medium level security.
The attachment figure then goes back about her business, keeping in mind a special alertness regarding the recognized signal from the child.
Meanwhile, the baby , now "brimming with security", turns their attention to what psychiatrists call "play" or "exploration", what we call their budding "risk" and "building", or "caretaking" system.
The child converts, internally, the security received from mother's "burst of vitality" into their own vitality - playing with a toy, crawling here or there, studying this or that aspect of their environment.
For a baby , the security suppdeliberate misreported perception by their protective
Page 85 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 figure, in this case 'mother', runs low quickly, and once again, the baby cries in its own special way, now uniquely recognizable to this particular mother .
Again - more security for the baby is required: food, healing, warmth, renewal of 'maps' of protection, and so forth.
For mother, the special cry from this particular child signals danger to caretaking and as such 'anxieties' rise within her, cognition goes on, she makes an accurate assessment of the situation, and in the situation given here she returns to the child.
Again the mother converts some of her own security and risk-taking capacities into caretaking - the internal state of the central nervous system within the mother is what we call the 'medium level vitality inner state' - which she projects towards the child who receives it as 'medium level security'.
The baby, once again, internally converts such security into his or her own vitality and again, uses it for building his or her own internal "gridwork" for caretaking and cognition.
In this particular case, the two persons - mother and child - are in a "homeostasis"; a (mostly) repeating and mostly 'automatic' pattern involving the creation, transfer , conversion, crystallization, and utilization of a variety of inner states - and, most importantly, the conditions that produce them - such that life proceeds in a health producing, passion engendering, satisfying, and survival advancing way .
There are long term, high level decisions that mother has made, and continues to make, conscious decisions, above and beyond the homeostasis described in the above paragraph; decisions that effect adjustment, readjustment, and even change in the homeostasis described.
Even the child, albeit at a much lower level, makes decisions, enacts on them, and is responsible for them, such responsibility being, again, at a much lower level.
It must be noted in this regard that a young child has the neuronal structure to make lower level decisions only; the physical growth and advancing physical organization of the brain in Homo Sapiens progresses over a period of one or two decades after birth.
It can be seen that while a very young child can make low level decisions only, and an older child has the capacity to make medium level decisions, it is not until thirteen or fourteen years old or so that the physical, central nervous system structure for high level decisions, evaluations, and personal responsibility for outcome, comes on line.
Finally, by age twenty-one, the full central nervous system physical structure for intellect, and for full responsibility for outcome, is in place.
Thus, although in the case given, both the mother and the child make decisions, and each is fully responsible for those decisions, the vast majority of responsibility for outcome - particularly in this sort of case - rests with the above figure.
Page 86 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It can be seen that mother and child get into a 'homeostasis' regarding this particular method of maintaining a protection-spending-caretaking situation between them, and thus an ongoing survival and advancement is maintained.
It must always be remembered that a homeostasis, although maintaining a back and forth interplay between various forces, is never unchangeable, that is, is always subject to change.
The change can come from the larger bio- ecosystem in the form of "out-of-the-blue" factors or from regular eco-systemic mechanisms as time goes by; it can come from the influences of above figures, or the change in homeostasis can result from the conscious, internal decisions and enactments of the individual themself who is in the homeostasis.
'Homeostasis' is what maintains balances in nature.
As regards matters of human 'behavior', we refer to this sort of thing as an "interplay of adaptations" within a person, between persons, and between a person and the world at large.
If one could find a way of counting up all the homeostasises currently in force in the biology of human beings, one might well conclude that well over ninety-nine point nine percent of such homeostasises are health-producing and life- advancing.
A homeostasis that is harmful, however, if put, maintained, and escalated far enough "out of hand" so to speak, can "throw off" the entire larger system, as we have seen in the case of a
majority protection-seeking enactment homeostasis and anxiety tuning operating at the upper and middle hierarchical reaches of a society, and with the unprincipled homeostasis in effect in more than a few people at the lower reaches of the hierarchy.
Again, although a homeostasis can be rigid or "tight", as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr , homeostasis in nature is never absolutely sealed - that is, it is always subject to change.
Indeed, the difficulties presented by homeostasises getting "out of hand" and "tightening down" into a harm-producing, strongly 'self-perpetuating' (but not completely so) pattern, is precisely the sort of difficulty that 'guided' - in the genetically formative situation - the evolution of cognition and conscious decision-making in particular; the guidance system evolved in such a way wherein health- producing and advancement-producing evaluation, adjustment, readjustment, and change of harm-producing homeostasises can occur .
'Tis little wonder that ridicule of a person's capacity for 'figuring something out' is overwhelmingly the 'joke of choice' among the most vicious, "tightened down", and unprincipled of persons.
Again, although a homeostasis can be rigid or "tight", as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr , homeostasis in nature is never absolutely sealed - that is, it is always subject to change.
Page 87 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Another term that is commonly used to describe the eco-systemic process known as "homeostasis" is the term "addiction".
One can see how a person can become "addicted" to a drug - such as a "pain killer".
Such an addiction is not simply, of course, an addiction to the drug, but rather a homeostasis wherein an enormous amount of pain is present in the environment and easily seen by the person.
Heroin - or alcohol or some "tranquilizers" for that matter - are pain-numbing substances and they tend to rigidify and "tighten" pain-producing circumstances over time.
As such, the 'addiction' is, in fact, a homeostasis wherein pain presents, principled protection is not present, the drug is ingested, the feeling of pain in the person who ingests the drug is "killed", the person then finds it easy to maintain in a situation where there is increasing amounts of pain and damage being created, indeed, the person may well vastly deepen the pain- producing difficulty, the drug wears off, lack of protection, that is, lack of principled pain absorption is again perceived, the pain reappears in the person's face, more drugs, and so forth.
This sort of 'addiction' is what we call a 'tight homeostasis' - an interplay of adaptations between a person, the world at large, and in this case, a 'pain-killing' drug.
[It can easily be seen that, in the current situation, "pain-killing" drugs rarely "kill" pain, or at least, the circumstances that continue to produce it.
Pain is a signal that damage - loss - is an impending possibility or is present.
"Killing" one's awareness of that "clue to danger", in the current overall situation, usually leads to more damage created, along with more pain created, that is, more clues presenting that increasing damage is being created.
More attempts to "erase" the clues to damage, are often followed, of course, by the damage growing exponentially.]
At any rate, the point here is that an individual operates within a homeostasis involving inner states and the conditions that create them, both within themselves and in the world at large.
Among many other things, this involves the ingestion, albeit through vocal and other means of transfer , of various inner states.
A person can get into a homeostasis of living on a certain balance and amount of inner states, and a certain amount of generating of such.
One becomes 'addicted' to the ingestion of this or that amount of one inner state or another, alongside this or that circumstance.
In other words, one becomes "addicted" to their "anxiety tuning" - that is develops a certain "self- perpetuating" (strongly self-perpetuating, but not completely so) homeostasis regarding the circumstances of their life, the interplay of adaptations with other persons, and internal usage and expenditure of inner states.
Page 88 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Such addictions - that is, such homeostasises - are very powerful but are, of course, always subject to change.
The fact that inner states are not only a substance that one needs for the most basic bodily functions as well as a thick, rich, health- advancing balance of such inner states constituting the things that virtually everyone "wants", but the fact that they also function as a very important and powerful portion of the organism's guidance system, means that a change of homeostasis or "addiction" as regards the generating, reception, projection, utilization, and consumption of inner states and the conditions that produce them, adds up to a fundamental change in one's ability to easily or 'automatically' enact principled behavior or enact unprincipled behavior.
It is to be borne in mind that, as used regarding 'behavior' in this letter, the term 'self- perpetuating' means strongly self-perpetuating but not completely so, and the term 'automatic' means mostly automatic but not completely so.
There is another "phenomenon of physics" so to speak, that is related to, but different from, the 'homeostasis phenomenon'.
In the world of mechanics, the word "meta" is used to describe something that is 'above' something else, something that 'shapes' something else, or, more important for this discussion, something that fundamentally changes something else.
We use the word "meta-homeostasis" to describe a 'sequence' or "system" of several homeostasises that together, in some sort of (imperfect)
synchronicity, some sort of closely - but, of course, not completely - predictable pattern, changes a particular homeostasis already in motion.
Thus, when a person is in a principled homeostasis, goes through a "jettison sequence" and thereafter develops an unprincipled homeostasis, the jettison sequence can be seen as a "meta-homeostasis" that comes into play for a short time, rendering a powerful role in changing a person's anxiety tuning from principled or "majority caretaking" to unprincipled or "majority protection-seeking".
That is, a "meta-homeostasis" is set in motion and changes drastically an already existing homeostasis.
What follows is some further discussion of the particular 'short time' or temporary "meta- homeostasis" that we are calling a "jettison sequence".
Much could be written describing the many different sorts of homeostasises that are shifting simultaneously between a person who is going through a 'jettison sequence' and various above figures, between the person who is going through a 'jettison sequence' and various below figures, as well as various shifts within the person themself.
Indeed, the sheer number of these homeostasises, while completely identifiable, is generally more than a person who is going through the 'jettison sequence' can sort out at the time they are going through it, especially considering the rapidity with which the homeostasises are shifting while the person
Page 89 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 themself is in the midst of a massive shift in their own judgment system.
Furthermore, in this sort of situation, a person who is engaged in a 'jettison sequence' is in some sort of state of confusion, and is likely to turn to above figures for clues as to just what is going on - as the person's own perceptual abilities are, temporarily at least, rather 'boggled' by a myriad of unexpected and unpreforeseen sorts of events, perceptions, and conclusions.
If the person has previously been used to, in the main, sorting things out with an eye on the truth, and is bedeliberate misreport of perceptionving that the above figures that they are attached to are principled persons, then when they suddenly find themselves and their judgment system 'locked onto' the "guidance" of what is now increasingly realized to be unprincipled above figures, the internal shifts in inner states, emotional tenor, and thoughts are enormous and can be quite frightening.
In previous pages, we have described some of the shifts in the inner states that the person who is going through a 'jettison sequence' is generating internally.
In what follows we will briefly touch on some of the changes in the various homeostasises that the person who is going through a 'jettison sequence' is engaged in with those around him or her, keeping in mind that the purpose of such elucidation is to enable persons to "retrace" their way "out of" a shift to an unprincipled enactment homeostasis and anxiety tuning and back to a principled one.
That process, which we call a "reprinciplization", will be discussed in some detail in a later section.
In this section, we will continue with our discussion of a 'jettison sequence'.
It is to be recalled that an "anxiety tuning homeostasis" is quite different from an "enactment homeostasis".
The term "anxiety tuning", as we use it here, refers to the high level 'automatics' (mostly automatic but, of course, not completely so) that make certain sorts of judgment, decisions, and enactments seem 'easy', obvious, or "natural".
When one is operating within a majority caretaking or principled anxiety tuning, principled enactments seem to come to mind 'automatically' and are not so difficult to discern.
However, it is still possible - indeed, it is quite necessary - for a person to also "go on manual".
For a principled person, at the very least, an occasional "going on manual" is absolutely required for the continual readjustments that are necessary for any ongoing principled homeostasis.
However, this ability to "go on manual" also makes it possible for an individual to go on manual in such a way as to develop unprincipled 'automatics', particularly in those situations wherein an above person's decisions, influence, and enactments are unprincipled or otherwise damage-producing.
Page 90 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Thus, a person can use their 'manual' decision- making ability to go against their principled judgments - that is, engage in unprincipled enactments - and in doing so, change their principled anxiety tuning to an unprincipled anxiety tuning.
Since virtually every person, when they are born, is headed, by way of central nervous system structure, for a principled anxiety tuning in adulthood, such a shift - from a principled anxiety tuning, to an unprincipled one - is a shift that virtually all unprincipled persons have gone through at some point.
In other words, virtually every unprincipled person has "gone against" their high level 'automatics' in order to become unprincipled, and such "going against" was, in all cases, a personally 'hateful' matter.
From this it can be seen that a person is not 'trapped' within their high level 'automatics'.
Indeed, every unprincipled person has gone against their high level 'automatics' when they first "went against" their principled tuning and became unprincipled in the first place.
And so it is with a shift from unprincipled enactments and 'automatics' to principled enactments and 'automatics'.
A person can, no doubt with far less difficulty, go against their 'automatic' unprincipled judgments, enact principled behavior, and return themselves to a principled anxiety tuning.
There can be little question that the only reason people do not readily do so is the extremely
"tight" and powerful unprincipled homeostasis that emanates from unprincipled above parties in the hierarchy at this time.
The outright threat from unprincipled above parties of starvation, death, and far worse, for those that attempt to make this shift from unprincipled to principled is a decisive factor regarding difficulties in this regard.
It must never be forgotten, however, that the decisions of the individual themself is also a decisive factor.
Again, continuations for a "retracing" or "reprinciplization" are the subject of a later section of this letter.
For the moment, however, we will look at some more of the factors involved in the change from a principled anxiety tuning to an unprincipled anxiety tuning.
First of all, when a person's principled caretaking goes awry, anxieties within the person go on full, that is, increase greatly in intensity.
This, coupled with a high level caretaking conceptualization, produces a good deal of high level cognition.
The person perceives a good many things that they never realized before.
When they go to their protection and attempt to talk of the difficulties that they are having, their protection absorbs an especially powerful dose of truth and vitality emanating from the below party whose caretaking is going awry, as well as
Page 91 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 an especially strong dose of anxiety flowing upwards.
At this point, the above party decides whether principled protection will be offered to the below person whose caretaking is going awry or whether the above person will, at this time, effect a 'jettison' in the below person altogether.
In large societies wherein hierarchically higher figures have been unprincipled - such as has been the case most of the time among our species for the past nine thousand years or so - personal protection for high level principled caretaking of below parties has not been generally available due to the majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning and enactment homeostasis that tightly enshrouds - strongly enshrouds, but not completely so of course - the entire high level of hierarchy and much of the middle and lower levels as well.
Most persons who rise to high levels are most aware of this and, for all caretakers at lower levels, at some point, they run up against this 'wall' of majority protection-seeking in above figures.
For convenience of explanation, in the discussion that follows, we will divide the 'jettison sequence' into six successive 'events'.
In this six 'event' 'sequence' we refer to four different individuals, one individual at each of four successive levels of hierarchy.
The distinction between a person being at a higher level of hierarchy and a person being at a lower level of hierarchy is defined as follows: the individual who has access to more of the security
substances - and especially access to the conditions that produce them - that could solve the problem at hand is defined as the higher figure and whomever has less access to the security substances - and less access to the conditions that produce them - that could be used to solve the problem at hand is defined as the lower hierarchical figure.
In the description of a 'jettison sequence' that follows, the roles of four different individuals, each at a different level of hierarchy are mentioned.
The person at the highest level of hierarchy of these four levels, and who appears in this description only in the second 'event', is identified by the term "higher above party".
At the next, or second level down, is a person who we identify by the terms "above party", "lower above party", or "unprincipled above party".
This "unprincipled above party" appears in four 'events', including three conversations with "the jettisoning person" and one conversation with their own above party.
The person who is going through the 'jettison' type change in their homeostatic balance of inner states and their guidance system is at the third level down of hierarchy and is referred to in what follows as "the jettison person", "the below person", "the higher below person", "the about to be jettisoned person", and "the now jettisoning person".
This "jettisoning person" appears in all six 'events'.
Page 92 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Finally, at the fourth level down, that is, at the lowest of these four levels is the person who is getting harmed in the first place, that is, the person who is referred to in the term "caretaking goes awry".
This person appears in our description in the first, third, and fifth 'events' and is referred to by us as "the lower below party".
Thus, we describe how these sorts of 'events' - and the effects of some of the words spoken in them - travel through several layers of hierarchy - in this case, four layers - not simply between two levels.
Furthermore, it can be seen that, in our descriptions, "the unprincipled above person" is in the above position in their conversations with "the jettisoning person" and this same "above person" is in the lower position when they are speaking to their own higher figure, hence the term "lower above party".
The "jettisoning person" is in the lower position when speaking with their own above person, and this same "below party" is in the above position when speaking with their "below party", hence the term "higher below party".
The two higher figures in this four person hierarchy are termed by us "the higher above party" and "the lower above party" while the two lower persons are described as "the higher below party" and "the lower below party".
When the persons at the second and third levels are talking to one another we refer to them as the above party and the below party.
While we are well aware that there are persons who would deceitfully suggest that the ability to keep the distinctions between persons at four different levels of a hierarchy in mind - and thereby thinking this through - is beyond the capabilities of most people, we are also well aware that no one actually believes that most persons are incapable of such.
In fact, virtually every single human being over the age of twelve is fully capable of cognitively, clearly, and accurately thinking this through, provided, of course, that they are not getting their "lights punched out" as they attempt to think.
We must note further that no person, of course, can ever be both a higher figure and a lower figure at the same time in same way for the same person, however, it is equally obvious that all persons change their relative hierarchical level from hour to hour according to the circumstances of their relationship with the person they are talking or enacting with.
Furthermore, a below figure to a person may well, under certain circumstances, become an above figure to that same person either for a set amount of time or as an ongoing matter.
Most persons over 1 1/2 years old and every person over 3 years old, has other persons looking up to them for guidance for the attachment portion of the below person's overall guidance and judgment system.
Every single individual person is an ABOVE figure to other persons in one way or another throughout almost all of their life.
Page 93 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 This is, without question, one of the most obviously truthful and most vociferously and dangerously deliberate misreported perception about facts of life among persons of this species.
These six 'events' that we will describe include three conversations: the first conversation being in 'event' two, the second conversation being in 'event' four, and the third conversation being in 'event' six.
They take place between a still principled, but 'jettisoning' fast, below person, and an unprincipled above person.
These conversations might be taking place between a parent and offspring, between a legal officer and a prisoner or parolee, between a teacher or advisor and a student, between two persons involved in a romantic engagement, between a supervisor or employer and an employee, between a mental health professional and their cdeliberate misreport of perceptionnt, between an officer and a soldier, between one friend and another, or between any two persons, one of whom is higher in a hierarchy or has more control over the external circumstances at the moment, and the other of whom is in a lower position in a hierarchy or has less control over the external circumstances at the moment.
These "conversations" can take the form of a series of brief, seemingly "off the cuff" remarks; they can take the form of a group of professional consultations; they can take place alongside a sexual engagement; or as part of a family talk.
They can take place within the realm of a "party conversation"; or as a portion of some sort of official 'training' program, and so forth.
It must also be noted that, while we describe six specific 'events', the amount of time, and the number of 'sub-events' can vary widely .
Thus, our description could well be a description of a series of events that takes place over a period of three days, three weeks, three months, three years, or even thirty years.
Generally speaking, however , a 'jettison sequence' - a person's initial shift from a principled anxiety tuning to an unprincipled anxiety tuning - takes place during a short, specific period of time.
Even when the 'jettison' takes place over a longer period of time, such as months or years, there are specific individual moments with this or that specific person that correspond to each of the events listed here.
This appdeliberate misreports of perception whether the jettisoning person is three years old, seven years old, eleven, fourteen, seventeen, twenty-three, or twenty-nine years old, or forty or sixty-seven or eighty years old.
As stated previously, our descriptions of a 'jettison sequence' begin with a person's caretaking going awry.
That is to say, the person's below party, someone who the person 'caretakes' as a matter of principle, is seriously damaged - or is in the process of being damaged.
The person, as a first measure, uses up internal and other resources in attempting to stem the tide of deterioration.
Page 94 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 We will refer to this initial 'deterioration' as the first 'event'.
As the caretaking situation worsens, the person casts about for some protection to use towards their caretaking from the above parties to whom their internal maps refer.
The person then goes to an above party - or above parties - and has some sort of conversation with them.
This first meeting in this situation with the unprincipled above party (or a principled above party who is themself about to 'jettison' into an unprincipled homeostasis) we will refer to as the second 'event'.
In this case, the above party listens to the difficulty of the below party, absorbs the enormous truth, information, and vitality, and, perhaps, even absorbs some of the anxiety and pain that is emanating from the below party.
Meanwhile, the above party may offer 'assurances', 'sympathy', or even some inadequate form of aid, in other words some form of protection may actually be put out by the above party, although such is mixed with some deliberate misreports of perception - some pain subtly sent back down - that may seem to the below party to be minor in the moment.
In fact, if the above party were principled, anxiety sent back downward would indeed, turn out to be part of a principled continuation, although if the above party were principled, of course, the anxiety would not be in the form of deliberate misreports of perception.
But in this case, the above party is unprincipled - or about to become unprincipled - and what might seem to the below party to be minor deliberate misreports of perception regarding high level issues grow decisively as can be seen.
At the end of this first conversation, the above party walks away, brimming with 'vitality', truth, and even some anxiety, while the below party leaves the conversation with a bit more of a secure feeling, although still quite troubled.
So ends what we are calling the second 'event'.
We have come to refer to this sort of initial conversation as "first date blues".
Many professionals, in fact, live virtually exclusively on what they can "skim-off" quickly on a "first date" before quickly disappearing out of sight.
Our own group has been subject to, as below parties, such "first conversations" with more than a score of psychiatric and education officials before we were able to piece together the subsequent sequence.
The pattern, we eventually concluded, is one of the most predictable and 'tightest' interactional homeostatic phenomena currently in force.
We have often thought to ourselves that while we may not be the first to have gone through scores of such encounters and remain principled, we are (apparently) the first to have remained principled and gone on to tell the tale.
Now begins the third 'event' of our sequence.
Page 95 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 The unprincipled above party goes to their above party to check to see how much and what sort of protection is available for them should they protect the person whose caretaking is going awry.
This is the sort of situation, it being a 'jettison sequence', wherein the actual caretaking requirements of below parties 'pierce', metaphorically speaking, the "mask" of 'appearance of protection' or 'appearance of principle' in above persons.
As such, the lower above party re-"learns" from their above party, instantly and in no uncertain terms, that there will be no protection coming down from above for caretaking, indeed, no protection for principled behavior at all.
Furthermore, this higher above party smells the familiar scent of principle, quickly "slurps" it in and reminds the lower above party of the quite serious, dire things that happen to persons who pursue principled behavior.
The higher above party furthermore repeats carefully the standard "top-of-the-majority- protection-seeking- homeostasis-deliberate misreports of perception" (as listed eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr) and tops off the conversation with the standard threat to expose the lower above party's past unprincipled behavior to other unprincipled competitors.
The lower above party's keen sense of unprinciple is heavily renewed.
Thus, the higher above party - the person at the highest level of hierarchy in this four level description - in the course of absorbing the 'juice'
and information from below, becomes somewhat more 'addicted' to such vacuumed vitality 'inner states' and makes offers to the lower above party regarding the lower above party's continuing ability to 'funnel up' such valuable inner states, while at the same time projecting a grave warning regarding any thoughts the lower above party may have of pursuing a principled course.
We call this the "offer" on the condition of unprincipled behavior and the "threat" should the lower above party even consider principled behavior .
Again, from our own experience: it took us quite some time to piece together the phenomenon of - after our own, as below parties, "first date blues" type of consultations with various professionals - the above parties that we went to receiving various promotions, bonuses, benefits and so forth while at the same time, 'dumping' us out onto the street.
Quite mystifying at first, it became quite clear, over time, just what it is that everyone lives on and where it comes from; that it is, exclusively, the enactments of principled persons, and that which is produced by them that everyone lives on, including unprincipled persons.
As an aside, we might note, that this whole phenomenon - appdeliberate misreported perception to romantic encounters - is at the core of the "Blues tradition" in American music.
A principled young fellow meets an attractive young girl with whom he falls wildly in love, and he pours everything he's got into her.
Page 96 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Within weeks, she is working for an extremely vicious pimp, leaving the fellow embittered, heartbroken and even, horrifyingly, suicidal.
Or, alongside that, a principled girl pours everything she's got into a guy that she falls madly in love with, only to shortly learn that all of her passions have gone towards the creation of a rather ugly and brutal gangster.
In these sorts of cases, the 'inner states' required for the intensity of the horrifying and unprincipled behavior of the 'above' figure were directly provided by the vitality and passions of desperate caretakers below.
But enough of our recent adventures as public high school students and teachers, most of which we will leave to our full paradigm, our artwork, and our other related materials, printed under separate cover.
Suffice it to say, as we used to frequently note in our high school classes: "Everybody's family lives an epic saga, far surpassing in depth and in scope the greatest of the world's classical literature".
Indeed, we were always stunned to hear other persons in our classes talk as if they were unaware of the spectacular, most profound, and often, as of yet, most tragic nature of their own family's - that is, their own attachments' - history.
Metaphorically speaking, "everyone's family lives a Melvillian legend, a Tolstoy novel, a Homerian epic, a Biblical tale.
We used to commonly note that: "while the story in the book may well be just an unevenly
translated metaphor, the scope and depth of the saga is happening to each one of you, in your every day life, now."
To return to our story of how the 'jettison sequence' generally develops, it is to be recalled that, in what we have called the first 'event', a principled person's caretaking has gone awry.
In the second 'event' this same principled person had a "first date blues" type of conversation with an unprincipled above party .
In the third 'event', the above party has gone to their above party to deliver the 'juice' and for further guidance, which turns out to be what we will term, in an abbreviated way, as the "offer and the threat".
Meanwhile, in the other portion of this third 'event', the still principled original below party returns to his or her deteriorating caretaking.
The minor 'sympathy', 'communications techniques', or other apparent 'protection' that was 'offered' by the unprincipled above party in the first conversation is certainly not enough to stem the tide of deterioration.
As the person watches their caretaking being destroyed, the soon to be jettisoned below party slowly becomes gripped with a gnawing fear that something - perhaps something big - is terribly awry, not just with their own caretaking but, indeed, something much bigger .
This sort of fear within the soon to be "jettisoned" below party - what we call "fear of jettison", which will be discussed in more detail in a later section - is well known and has been
Page 97 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 carefully , and in much detail, misdocumented, misidentified, and deceitfully identified by virtually all those who have worked in the field of mental "health".
Now anxieties - and cognition - in the below party soars, as the very high level, genetically arranged mechanism, common to all Homo Sapiens - which we call "fear of jettison into an extinction-producing unprincipled homeostasis" - goes into action.
The below party desperately thinks of a thousand solutions - one of which includes the desperate hope that the unprincipled above party "just doesn't understand".
And the below party, gathering all of the strength, ideas, truth, explanations, "juice", reasonability, and whatever else can be mustered, prepares to return for another conversation with his or her above party.
Now comes the fourth 'event' of this sequence, which is the second conversation between the still principled but soon to be jettisoned below party and their unprincipled above party.
It is during this second conversation that the flow of inner states develops such that the overall homeostasis within the below party begins to change; that is to say, it is here that the particular "meta-homeostasis" known as a "jettison sequence" formally goes into motion.
It is to be recalled that an 'inner state' - that is the "inner condition" of a person, consisting of a "type" of emotional organization and a "type" of thought organization - is always created within a particular person (although not necessarily
within the person who is in possession of it or who is spending it).
Once an inner state is so created it can be "held intact, crystallized, built upon, utilized, transformed, consumed, destroyed, or transferred." What is important for this discussion is the process by which such inner states are transferred from one person to the other .
One can, very roughly, trace the route of transfer of an inner state from its location inside one person to inside the other .
For example, looking at the path of an 'inner state' from the point in the central nervous system of an individual where decisions join other electronic impulses already traveling along the neuronal system, an entire set of signals arrive at the cerebral cortex.
The cerebral cortex then translates the electronic message from the various types and portions of mental 'processing' facilities (including high level decision-making processes, of course) into another sort of group of electronic signals.
This group of signals constitutes a direct 'command' to the vocal cords and other components of the "enacting speaking" system, part of the physical - or 'physiological' - system.
There, in the area of the vocal cords, sound waves are formed in a certain specific configuration wherein they stimulate air in a certain specific pattern of vibrations and such vibrations travel through the air to the ear canals of the other person.
Page 98 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 At the inner ear of the second person, the specific configuration of air vibrations is turned into a group of electrical signals in the second person's central nervous system and, by a variety of routes, such signals make their way through various central nervous system pathways - some within and some outside the person's conscious consideration - all along the way, the signals being sorted and rerouted according to a variety of mechanisms and factors.
Finally, the electrical signals come to the place in the second person's central nervous system where they are joined by the person's internal, personally accountable, decision-making facilities, where we will leave our description of this particular transfer of an inner state from one person to the next.
It can be seen that the inner state, traveling as a configuration of electrons within one individual, traveling as 'sound vibrations' through the air from the central nervous system of one person to the central nervous system of the other person, and traveling as another configuration of electrons through the other person can consist of either a "tone" - security or vitality - or an "anxiety".
As such, one key question, regarding a conversation between two persons such as we are describing here, is the matter of whether the audio signals passing from the speaker to the listener are truthful communications or whether they are deliberate misreports of perception.
It is to be recalled that eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr in this letter we mentioned a
clear delineation between the truth, untruths, and deliberate misreports of perception.
The truth, we mentioned, is singular , unchanging, and the same for everyone; untruths are multitudinous and are sometimes absolutely necessary as an aid in finding the truth and are absolutely necessary in other ways as well but are also, sometimes, destructive; and deliberate misreports of perception in particular are a special sort of untruth that always, by definition, harms, maims, destroys, and kills - often, one, two, or three steps removed from the immediate situation at hand.
A deliberate misreport of perception, especially to a below figure, can be seen as something which may, if it is not stopped, travel through several people, dishonestly claimed to be unnoticed, until someone perhaps five steps removed, ten thousand miles away , deliberate misreports of perception dead on the ground.
The damage in most cases, of course, is far closer at hand.
In the sort of conversation under discussion here, it can be seen that a truthful communication is that which will singularly create, organize, and "pack" into a crystallization those things that create the conditions for adding and building -
engendering transforming satisfaction.
vitality and high level
security while anxieties into
This is particularly the case when the truthful statement is spoken at high risk to the speaker.
Deliberate misreports of perception, on the other hand, disorganize the sort of survivable
Page 99 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 organization of the central nervous system that only truthfulness can create.
In other words, the truth builds and organizes in a life-advancing direction while deliberate misreports of perception consume and disorganize in a life-destroying, "consuming" direction.
Furthermore, it can be seen that when one deliberate misreports of perception to a truthfinder one is directly having their own mind (at least for the moment) organized and built by the truthfinder, while the truthfinder is spending the mental organization required for creating of truthfinding and the holding of such truth - that is, is spending what he himself or she herself has created, in this case, spending it on organizing the mind of the liar.
Obviously, if the air vibrations are configured such that the vocal comments are a deliberate misreport of perception, then the speaker is creating damage while projecting pain and other forms of anxiety at or through the listener; while if the air vibrations are configured in a truthful way - especially truth spoken at risk to the speaker - then the talker is projecting security or vitality at the listener, alongside an 'add' or 'build' configuration.
A person may well become quite anxious when hearing something truthful, but such anxiety can result from the person's own previous misformulations as well as the person's quite frightening expectations regarding their own above figures' reactions to a particular truth becoming known.
Additionally, a deliberate misreport of perception can appear "soothing", but such "soothingness" is indicative that the deliberate misreport of perception is picking up increasingly murderous force as it travels through people.
Someone, somewhere, usually close-by , will at some point, feel the full brunt of it.
At any rate, one who deliberate misreports of perception, specifically for the purpose of squeezing more truth out of a creator of truthfinding, is engaged, obviously, in a massive theft and bleed operation.
In the fourth 'event', that is, in the second conversation of this six 'event' 'sequence' which is now under discussion, two different types of deliberate misreports of perception are coming forth from the above party: one is the specific lying statement that the liar tells, and the other is the deliberate misreport of perception that the liar is propagating by saying that they bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve that their own lying statement is truthful.
In this sort of conversation between a lying, unprincipled above figure and a truth-telling still principled below figure, it is this second sort of deliberate misreport of perception - the one wherein the above figure claims to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve himself to be telling the truth - that carries the tremendous power to destroy the internal truthful organization of thoughts that the below figure has created and assembled.
One reason for the especially large influence of the above person's deliberate misreport of perception regarding what he or she believes is
Page 100 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 that if the below figure believes that the above figure actually believes to be truthful the deliberate misreports of perception that the above figure is telling, then the below figure continues to project more and more truth upwards in order to "convince" the above figure of the truth of the matter at hand.
Unfortunately for everyone in this situation, the above figure finds that the more the above figure deliberate misreports of perception, the more truth is poured into the above figure from the principled below party, the more the unprincipled above party's mind becomes intelligently organized (again, for the moment only) and the stronger the unprincipled above figure gets, while the below figure, in 'pumping out' enormous quantities of truth to the liar, uses up his or her own backbreakingly and painfully created resources.
Instead of the below figure getting stronger from the "gridwork" and future protections that the principled below figure has created in the course of principled caretaking, the below figure gets weaker and weaker from the deliberate misreports of perception and theft of such protections by the unprincipled above figure.
It must be remembered, of course, that unprincipled persons, when among each other and when alone, have a good deal of difficulty maintaining any clear understandings regarding the distinction between truth, untruth, and deliberate misreport of perception - the high level vitality and anxiety endocrines which organize the central nervous system such that this distinction is easily made are not readily available.
However, when an unprincipled person is with or among principled persons, the high level inner states necessary for the discernment of truth are present, namely exuding from the principled person, and in this situation, the unprincipled person does know the difference between truth and deliberate misreports of perception, and knowingly deliberate misreports of perception about what he or she thinks.
In the three conversations under discussion here - the first conversation in 'event' two, the second conversation in 'event' four, and the third conversation in 'event' six - during which the below figure goes through a 'jettison sequence', the views of the below figure regarding the intelligence and sincerity of the above figure go through three separate changes.
In the eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, or first conversation, the below figure thought the above figure was speaking in an honest way about what the above figure bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved to be the case, and the below figure also may have thought that the above figure either didn't understand the below figure's situation, or the below figure thought that the above figure is mistaken in his or her thinking.
The below figure may have even thought that the above figure "must be" correct in his or her thinking.
In this second conversation, however, the below figure realizes that the "top-of-the-majority- protection-seeking-homeostasis- deliberate misreports of perception" that are coming down
Page 101 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 at the moment are indeed deliberate misreports of perception.
But the below figure cannot figure out why the above figure talks with a basis of such nonsensical and obvious deliberate misreports of perception.
The below figure, at this stage, concludes that there must be "something" that he himself or she herself - the below figure - "does not understand".
Thus, in this second conversation, the below figure still believes in the above figure's sincerity, although a large internal, unspoken question develops regarding both the intellect and the integrity of the above figure.
The below figure, at this point, has some difficulty imagining his or her above figure to be a bloodthirsty, unprincipled, suicidal lunatic and imagining himself or herself as considerably more intelligent, possessed of more internal "gridwork", and more principled than his or her above figures.
It is not until the third conversation, what we are calling the sixth 'event', that the below figure realizes that the above figure is knowingly lying about what the above figure thinks - that not only are the things that the above figure is saying a group of deliberate misreports of perception, but that the above figure lives in - and approves of, indeed, enforces - an entire context of knowingly lying, with deliberate misreports of perception lived and told every day as a matter of course.
It is in this later, third conversation in this particular 'jettison sequence' that we are describing, that the below figure enters the world of the unprincipled, that is, the world of the stupid, unnecessary, and extinction- producing lunacy of the unprincipled above figure.
We will go further into this dynamic later on in this 'events' section.
Meanwhile, in the second conversation, this fourth 'event' which is currently under discussion, it is to be noted that all the truthful points that the still principled below figure 'pumps out' mostly goes to convince the unprincipled above person that there is just all that much more to deliberate misreport of perception about and therefore all that much more truth and vitality to vacuum, pass up, and consume.
Furthermore, the unprincipled above person becomes far more 'addicted' to - and desperate for - large doses of vacuumed juice received without apparent risk, that is to say, without apparent cost to themself, and becomes therefore increasingly convinced that lying about what they bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve will keep the vacuumed inner states coming strong.
Eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr in this letter we referred to a group of deliberate misreports of perception that we mentioned constitute a portion of the "top-of-the-majority- protection-seeking-deliberate misreport of perception-web" and that form the overall basis for the 'thinking' process of unprincipled persons.
Page 102 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 These deliberate misreports of perception, we mentioned, are commonly spouted by unprincipled persons who claim to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve the statements to be truthful while in fact, knowing quite well that they are deliberate misreports of perception.
We mentioned that there is an entire basis of judgment within an unprincipled person that "concludes" that nothing is truthful, indeed, that all statements that appear to be truthful are just, "in the end", ever more clever deliberate misreports of perception with which to "shake down" still principled 'naive' persons.
Thus, when information comes in that contradicts that which the unprincipled person already lives by, there is an assumption by an unprincipled person that there is nothing to be really figured out about regarding its truthful or untruthful nature - the only question that arises is "how to use such information to better deliberate misreport of perception to and steal from - that is, 'shake down' - the still principled, that is, those who are sometimes called the 'naive'".
However, when a principled person comes across information that contradicts what they previously bedeliberate misreport of perceptionved to be the case, the principled person then has the task of figuring out what the truth of the matter is - truth that is the same for everyone, deliberate misreports of perception, and lying about what one understands notwithstanding.
This calls for what we refer to as the "creation of truthfinding", an extremely difficult task that
requires much danger , doubt, 'gridwork', risk, work, and resources, as well as the absorption of, holding of, and crystallization of much anxiety, and the production of, utilization and expenditure of vast amounts of security and vitality inner states.
Thus it can be seen, that if an unprincipled party and a principled party are engaged in a discussion, and each is presenting information to the other that contradicts the other's previously held bedeliberate misreport of perceptionfs, the unprincipled party easily accepts the new information presented by the principled person as just more fodder to be "snapped up", drained out for its 'juice' and thrown away, while 'slamming down' ever sharper deliberate misreports of perception.
The principled person, on the other hand, when presented with new information from the unprincipled person, has the exhausting, risk- filled, and (eventually) vitality producing task of figuring out the truth of the matter.
It is for this reason that the principled person, the creator of truthfinding, pours everything he's got into trying to make some sense out of the new information, while the unprincipled person is merely chewing up any new information for later consumption.
The unprincipled person who simply consumes new information expends little energy in doing so; the principled person determines the truthful or untruthful nature of the new information - which is an absolutely decisive requirement for the creation of more advanced truthful
Page 103 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 conclusions - and expends enormous amounts of his or her own energy to do so.
Thus, at the end of such a conversation, the liar or unprincipled person is left in a far stronger position - in the moment - as the result of the conversation, while the creator of truthfinding - especially in the moment - is left in a far more exhausted position, in the early stages of sorting out the barrage of deliberate misreports of perception projected at them by the above figure.
In this particular kind of situation between an unprincipled above person and a principled below person, "whomsoever creates and organizes truthfinding, alongside all the work therein required" - in this case, the principled below person - becomes exhausted, injured, even "knocked out"; "whomsoever 'steals' such truthfinding" - in this case, the unprincipled above person - "walks away momentarily more 'bloated' and 'stronger'".
In other words, a principled person, who is 'pumping out' enormous truthfinding, may leave this fourth 'event' conversation "flattened" so to speak, although the long term process of creating truthfinding is the essential ingredient in building what we call "gridwork", and if the principled person survives such an encounter , and remains principled, enormous overall internal strength is built, including, most importantly , the ability to generate within oneself high level inner states.
(Of course, in the situation currently being described in this fourth 'event', the below person loses his or her principled anxiety tuning
altogether, and in doing so, loses his or her ability to use such absorption to strengthen themself, that is, winds up 'knocked out' altogether.) The unprincipled party - the thief or liar - on the other hand, leaves the conversation twice as bloated as before, with the appearance of far more strength and confidence than ever.
Of course, the apparent strength and confidence that the unprincipled person now has is simply that which has been generated by and vacuumed from the principled below person, and consequently, it is quickly used up, leaving the unprincipled person with no more gridwork than before - indeed, immersed more deeply in the "deliberate misreport of perception-web" than ever and more addicted to vacuumed inner states as well.
The unprincipled above person then, of course, peruses the area looking around desperately for more principled parties to 'shake down', and more high level inner states, including vitality and truthful information to vacuum, bolstering his or her appearance by using the very truth and juice he or she received from the last caretaker whom he or she "knocked out".
In the conversation currently under discussion, the truthful information that the principled below party speaks to the unprincipled above party is shredded by the above party for later use in projecting the appearance of principle to other persons, while the above party also picks up the vitality portions of the inner states that the below party is projecting.
Thus, the unprincipled above party becomes stronger and more confident as the conversation
Page 104 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 goes on while the below party, using up his or her own internal resources, becomes more and more exhausted.
In fact, contrary to what is commonly understood, in this particular sort of situation it is the speaker, which in this case, may well be the principled below party, who is more likely to pick up the mental construction of the unprincipled above party who may well be doing most of the listening.
Indeed, we call the unprincipled above party's enactments in this sort of case a "listening attack".
The truthful speaker in an increasingly weakened state, picks up the construction of the lying listener who becomes - momentarily - stronger and stronger by the minute.
However, this exhaustion and confusion on the part of the principled below person, who in this case is doing the talking only comes about as long as the principled below person believes the unprincipled above person to be telling the truth about what the above person understands.
Now the below person is in a much weakened state, is developing major doubts about his or her own entire perception of things, is exhausted; is under the duress of knowing that his or her caretaking is going seriously awry; is looking at his or her protection projecting offers, provided that the below person operates in an unprincipled way; and is further hearing his or her above parties making not so subtle threats regarding the below person's continuing insistence on principle.
At this point, the above person proposes that the below person enters into enactments whereby the below person is to tell deliberate misreports of perception to their caretaking, or in some other way destroy principle.
Of course, the instructions might not be stated as such; rather they are often couched in the terminology of "majority protection-seeking": i.e.
"there is no real truth", "no one really cares anyway", the notoriously bloodthirsty "it (caretaking) doesn't matter", suicidal, and obviously lying, "tight-homeostasis" references to some sort of "game" regarding the nature of life, grotesquely untruthful 'formulations' deceitfully proported to be taken from the world of physics or psychoanalysis, as well as the various other "top-of-the-majority-protection- seeking- homeostasis-deliberate misreports of perception" mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr .
The below party, under the influence of threats, offers, exhaustion, inability to crystallize and sort out what is transpiring, "tumbling" as the result of deteriorating caretaking, and bedeliberate misreport of perceptionving in the essential - although not at the moment understood - integrity of the above figure, finally decides to "go along", that is, to do something unprincipled.
Usually this amounts to some sort of lying to their caretaken parties or to other principled parties - that is some sort of consumption, abandonment, or destruction of principle in a way wherein the about to be jettisoned person enacts specifically unprincipled behavior - as we
Page 105 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 put it eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr , metaphorically, some sort of "blowing it with the angels".
It must be borne in mind that while the unprincipled above party is fully aware of the overall, disastrous consequences of what he or she is urging the still principled below party to do, the still principled below party is "going along", albeit amidst great internal fears regarding their own enacting of such behavior but without clear knowledge of the disastrous, long term, overall consequences for the 'automatic' portions of their guidance system and therefore for their life.
Furthermore, the below party may well conceptualize the proposed unprincipled behavior as not unprincipled at all, but rather as themselves making a desperate try at doing something different, something that will stop the deterioration of his or her caretaking.
It is not until sometime later, after the previously principled below party has 'jettisoned', that the jettison person realizes that such unprincipled enactments as are proposed in this second conversation embark one on a powerful derailment of one's whole judgment system from that of a person with integrity to that of a liar, a thief, a killer, and a person 'locked' onto a very 'tight' and unprincipled "attachment" "string"; the unprincipled above party, of course, was aware of these continuations and consequences all along.
The below party leaves this second conversation - what we are calling the fourth 'event' in this six 'event' series - determined to operate in what he
or she may now understand to be a "successful" manner, but which in fact turns out to be a simple destruction of his or her own principled sensibilities and an embarkation on an unprincipled way of life.
In other words, while the below person still has principled 'automatics', they are about to use their ability to go on 'manual' in order to engage in unprincipled behavior, and in so doing, they wind up derailing their entire principled anxiety tuning onto an ongoing unprincipled anxiety tuningtrack.
Now comes the fifth 'event' of our six 'event' series.
At this point, the below party returns to their below party intending to implement the 'advice' received from above.
This 'advice', it is to be recalled, centers around the idea that the about to jettison below party must do something that involves destroying, in their own mind, the whole idea of doing what we call 'high level caretaking' - that is, the "adding and building for below parties, for the future, and for all time".
While the actual, physical, 'in the moment' damage resulting from the about to be enacted lying may well be "several steps removed", such damage is quite severe and permanent all the same.
This matter of creating damage 'several steps removed' will be dealt with in a later section.
Regarding immediate enactments: lying to caretaking involves the higher below party
Page 106 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 enacting telling their caretaken parties some sort of deliberate misreports of perception about the high level issues of life that the higher below figure knows to be deliberate misreports of perception.
Although the full nature of the overall outcome of the about to be enacted 'lying to caretaking' is still unclear to the about to be jettisoned higher below party, their unprincipled above party is fully aware that such an enactment will result in the destruction of the principled 'automatics' of the person who does the lying to caretaking.
One's ability to operate on "manual" can be described, in part, as the ability to figure, decide, and enact outside of, or above and beyond the external "attachment" influences of the situation.
This involves, again, in part, operating on the specifically cognitive portion of judgment, the part of one's judgment that focuses on truth - which is singular, the same for everyone, and never changes - and which focuses, in addition, on overall solution to pain-creating difficulties.
In the latter stages of a 'jettison sequence', cognitive, manual ability - the ability to, non- automatically , figure something out; the ability to hold truthfulness all alone in a situation - diminishes drastically.
In short, the 'about to jettison' person is about to use his or her ability to go on 'manual', but to use it in a way that 'knocks out', in part, their ability to go on 'manual' altogether.
It can be seen that when one deliberate misreports of perception to their caretaking for
the first time, one is enacting using the 'manual' portion of their judgment - which is a usual and frequent necessity for a principled person - but this time the person uses their manual cognitive abilities in such a way wherein their anxiety tuning winds up changed from principled to unprincipled.
Shortly thereafter - at least in the case given here - the 'jettisoned' person "tightens themself down" into the new, unprincipled anxiety tuning, and in so doing, loses much of their ability to go on 'manual' altogether .
A principled person with a "high homeostasis" becomes an unprincipled person in a "tight homeostasis".
In fact, the moment of initial, high level lying to caretaking - as recommended by the above party in the 'fourth 'event' - is well known throughout the 'bloodthirsty' little world of many "educators", school administrators, "therapists", psychiatrists, "counselors", "advisors", and other professionals: to use an expression of common vernacular , "the 'trick' ('deprinciplization') is turned" and "the 'fix' ('tight homeostasis') is on".
So, in this fifth 'event', the about to be jettisoned person returns to their caretaking and enacts some sort of 'high level' lying to them.
The specific deliberate misreports of perception, at this point take the form of lying about what one knows to be the outcome of a given course of action, its effect on various people, the value of caretaking generally, the basis upon which decisions are made, the nature of conversations that one has had with above parties, the general current state of mind of the higher below party,
Page 107 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 and various matters mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr in the list of 'top-of- the-professional-homeostasis-deliberate misreports of perception'.
More important, of course, the jettisoning party, in conversation with their caretaking, insists that these things - which he or she knows to be deliberate misreports of perception - are truthful.
In other words, the jettisoning party deliberate misreports of perception to their caretaking about what he or she - the 'jettisoning person' - understands the truth to be.
It is most obvious that accurate assessments of circumstances are absolutely essential for creating a solution to any overall caretaking circumstance.
Indeed, it is so obvious that accurate assessment is required for survival and solution that the moment anyone encourages inaccurate assessment in someone they are caretaking, then the person who so encourages inaccurate assessment becomes fully aware that they are, in so doing, destroying the ability of whoever they are caretaking to come up with overall solutions themselves.
Thus, when an above person deliberate misreports of perception about what they think to someone below them, the above person immediately becomes aware that they are no longer in the business of creating advancement and solution for the world at large or for the future.
Our way of saying this is that they lose their "high level caretaking conceptualization".
What happens endocrinologically during an initial, powerful lying to caretaking is that the person's entire system for internally generating "high level vitality biochemicals" goes off entirely.
In other words, holding a spoken deliberate misreport of perception about one's understanding of their own words, that is, "the act of speaking" that which one knows to be a deliberate misreport of perception - and sticking to it verbally or in writing - destroys one's own ability to internally generate an accurate discernment and assessment of an overall harm producing situation, and destroys it such that solution, advancement, and survival is not arrived at.
Additionally, such lying discourages "accurate discernment and assessment" in their caretaken - or formerly caretaken - parties.
As the deliberate misreports of perception pass from the central nervous system of the higher below party - the 'jettison person' - through their own vocal cords to the central nervous system of the lower below party, a thousand things occur to the 'jettisoning' person for the first time regarding this sort of lying enactment.
At this time, the entire electro-neural, endocrinological homeostasis within the 'jettisoning' person begins to shift, and the particular "meta-homeostasis" that we are calling a 'jettison sequence' "picks up momentum"; it is now that the 'jettisoning' person begins his or her
Page 108 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 formal 'jettison' into an unprincipled anxiety tuning and enactment homeostasis.
It must be borne in mind that this shift, from a principled anxiety tuning or a principled set of 'automatics' to an unprincipled anxiety tuning or an unprincipled set of 'automatics' is engendered by an entire 'three-part' group of occurrences, not simply by a single act by an individual.
In order for the shift to take place there must be, firstly, a "caretaking goes awry" occurrence; secondly, there must be an internal decision and enactment to deliberate misreport of perception to caretaking on the part of the individual who is jettisoning; and thirdly, there must be an insistence by powerful unprincipled above parties that unprincipled behavior is required, as well as a "ratification" in that regard.
The above party or parties who is or who are demanding and ratifying the jettison must be the primary ones that the jettisoning person is looking to for direction.
Without any one of these three factors present, there will be no jettison.
Thus, each one of these three factors is, by itself, decisive: if caretaking does not go awry; if a person decides not to, and does not deliberate misreport of perception about what he or she thinks to caretaking; if the above party or parties decide not to insist on or encourage or "ratify" unprincipled behavior in the jettison party, there will be no jettison.
One 'veto', so to speak, out of these three factors, interrupts and changes the "meta- homeostasis" of the 'jettison' continuation.
In previous sections, we have mentioned "caretaking going awry" and in 'event' six, still to come, we will discuss the process of insistence and "ratification" by an above party.
In this fifth 'event' 'initial lying to caretaking' section, the decision by the jettisoning person to deliberate misreport of perception to caretaking, and the enactment of such, is discussed.
We mention the 'jettison' type of electro-neural shifts within an individual's central nervous system in this fifth 'event' section because it is at this time that the shift from principled to unprincipled is most "personally" noticeable and startling to the person themself who is going through the 'jettison'.
Again, all three factors - caretaking going awry, the decision to and the enactment of lying to caretaking, and 'ratification' from above - must be present in order for a jettison derailment into an unprincipled homeostasis to ensue.
In this fifth 'event', the jettisoning person's cerebral cortex, in spite of its principled tuning, enacts its "orders" from the person's central nervous system's 'decision centers' to signal a projecting of lying to caretaking.
As such, the various "switchboard connections" - electron configurations within the neural synapses that govern automatics along the pathways to the cerebral cortex - begin to rearrange.
The high level adaptive structure of 'automatic' "processing" of electrical signals along the pathways to the cerebral cortex shifts.
Page 109 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 The highest levels of processing, including the highest levels of 'automatic' processing, are 'disassociated' altogether as the new 'automatic' majority protection-seeking homeostasis begins to operate at a lower, 'tighter' level of neuronal hierarchy .
One's "automatic" inner state transformations and enactments from a given stimulus go from a majority caretaking homeostasis to a majority protection-seeking homeostasis.
Previously, when one detected principled caretaking going awry, one's "automatics" involved personal spending in order to protect, aid, heal, and solve the deteriorating caretaking and the overall problem that caused it.
In other words, "caretaking going awry" stimulates - in the form of anxiety - DNA's three billion year old 'signal of risk and danger' calling for overall, life-advancing solution.
Now, however, in the new, unprincipled situation, the high level "anxiety tuning" processing structure of the central nervous system changes; now, when the person detects principled caretaking going awry, their "automatics" are to 'bleed' such damaged caretaking further so as to better consume it - and deliberate misreport of perception about doing so, therein 'escalating' the permanent damages.
Major portions of the person's 'behavioral system', including much of their "want" system, become grotesquely derailed.
In other words, as the person finds himself or herself to be knowingly lying to their (previously)
caretaken parties, the structure of basic electro- neuronal configurations that make up the person's anxiety tuning begins to shift.
This shift constitutes a major change in the automatic portions of judgment.
Within the portions of the central nervous system that contain the 'automatics' of the person who has just deliberate misreported perception to caretaking, a different - and unprincipled - balance between inner states received and inner states projected develops.
In all this, it is never to be forgotten that conscious, internally controllable, decision portions of the central nervous system can, and frequently do override 'automatics' within a principled person and, to a lesser degree, within an unprincipled person.
Indeed, it is this ability to cognitively, consciously override the 'automatics' as regards overall enactments and enactment homeostasis that constitutes the special survival property of Homo Sapiens in particular .
Thus, while one develops an unprincipled anxiety tuning - a set of unprincipled 'automatics' - one may well remain within a principled enactment homeostasis, provided, of course, that one redeliberate misreports of perception heavily on their cognitive system and acts on 'manual' at the everyday crucial times.
However, if the person develops an unprincipled anxiety tuning and also operates on 'automatic', then, of course, their entire enactment homeostasis becomes unprincipled.
Page 110 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Once again, the vast majority - probably well over 99 percent - of all central nervous system activity runs on 'automatic', but, in Homo Sapiens, it is the non-automatic, internally controllable, measurable, accountable decision portions of an individual's central nervous system, which operate at a very high hierarchical level of a person's overall behavioral system, that are absolutely decisive overall factors regarding the nature of a person's overall enactment homeostasis as well as regarding overall outcome in human affairs.
We cannot emphasize too strongly that the only way that an anxiety tuning within a person can be changed in any sort of survivable, advancement-producing way, is through the conscious, internally controllable decisions of the person themself to initiate the ongoing enactments of risking, utilizing, spending, and building such that the conditions of nature that engender a caretaking homeostasis - caretaking in excess of the protection that is gathered - are in force in the person's daily life.
While the enactments, principled or unprincipled, of other persons - especially above parties - are most influential, indeed, decisive, in making it more likely or less likely that a person will enact their way back to a principled homeostasis and anxiety tuning, the person's own decisions are also decisive.
The point here is that conscious decisions to enact in a principled way in one's daily life, and so enacting, constitutes the only means of engendering a shift from unprincipled to principled.
While, it is most obvious that there is plenty that can be done by other persons - ourselves for example - and is done to make things work out well, it is also obvious that there is a small - but decisive - portion of what is required that cannot be done from outside the person concerned, now or ever, for that decisive portion emanates from the personal, internally controllable decisions that are made by each individual and within each individual.
It can be seen that the majority protection- seeking anxiety tuning developed as a temporary low and medium level phenomenon, part of a pain rigidification, and eventually, solution sequence in certain tragic circumstances that an individual faced in the genetically formative situation.
Prior to 9,000 years ago, this tuning, which came about only under certain special and generally rare circumstances, would carry - by various non- conscious (as well as conscious) means - a 'memory' of a loss-producing circumstance until such time as the overall problem that caused the loss could be solved.
Persons operating with a temporary low and medium level majority protection-seeking homeostasis remained within the lower reaches in any hierarchy and consequently operated under the overall high level principled framework, held by all surviving tribes.
The information - including the anxiety-laden information - carried by persons with such a tuning was used as part of the creation of overall solution and solution to difficulties that would otherwise result in devastating future loss.
Page 111 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In the wild, of course, the smaller size, the everyday, face to face contact among tribe members, and the great mobility of tribes, as well as the occasional contact with other tribes, prevented any majority protection-seeking tuning from rising in the hierarchy, prevented it from lasting very long, and prevented it from getting 'out of hand'.
In fact, the configuration within the affected individual would, over time, shift back to principled again.
It is to be noted that a majority caretaking - or a principled - anxiety tuning, that is a majority caretaking neuronal configuration along the pathways to the cerebral cortex, is vastly more strongly self-perpetuating (although still not completely so) than a majority protection- seeking one.
The decision to close off one's cognition, one's intellect, one's decision-making facilities is the fundamental factor in maintaining any 'self- perpetuating' in a majority protection-seeking 'tuning' and enactment homeostasis.
Once that cognition system, with it's vitality generating 'tether' to the truth itself, and its anxiety 'tether' to overall solution, is reopened and reintegrated with an individual's overall judgment system, a 'majority protection-seeking' possibility for the person's central nervous system's automatics becomes an obviously ridiculous 'option' within the individual human's behavioral matrix.
As will be discussed in a later section, the electro-neuronal configurations along the pathways to the cerebral cortex of a person with
a majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning are such that persons with this unprincipled tuning enact 'automatically' so as to, sooner or later, 'jettison' lower persons and still (or again) principled persons.
In large scale societies such as we have known of during the past seven thousand years or so, a "passing on of the unprincipled tuning down through the hierarchies", over time, has gotten severely "out of hand", although quite unnecessarily and quite reparably so.
A person, in deciding to abandon, destroy, or consume the source of principle, i.e.
abandon, destroy, or consume the creation and building of the conditions that produce the high level inner states that everyone lives on, at the same time loses their own ability to internally generate, from within themselves, vitality inner states.
In fact, such a loss of ability to generate high level inner states may well result in an internal feeling of lowered anxieties.
However, this lowering of anxieties does not come from the anxiety-producing problem being solved.
The lowering of anxiety, in this sort of case, comes from the person's vastly lowered ability to perceive danger to caretaking altogether - and 'clues' to such danger - and lowers the ability to accurately identify just where such danger might be emanating from.
This sort of 'dissipation of tension' - that is, "not caring" that caretaking is being destroyed, and
Page 112 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 avoiding and lying about noticing it - is oft cynically referred to among mental "health" professionals as a 'cure' for high level anxieties, but it can be easily seen that such an outcome involves 'closing down' one's entire 'high level generating system'.
Instead of the high level anxieties created by "caretaking goes awry" being met with solution, "the deepest of satisfactions", and advancement and survival for the entire CNS chain, lying to caretaking instead results in the "turning off" of such anxieties while rigidifying and magnifying the horror in the overall tribe and species central nervous system chain, to later emerge in the form of ten times ugdeliberate misreport of perceptionr pain in the surrounding group or tribe.
We refer to this as "creating rot several steps removed", and such rot always tends to creep back as time goes on, although in quite different form and at a much larger scale than how the deliberate misreports of perception and pain were originally projected.
Indeed, by the time the "web" of horror 'creeps back', it may be so large and so overwhelming that the original dishonesty may appear small by comparison to its large scale and grotesque continuation and result.
If, at the later time, when the "rot web" creeps back, there is again, instead of solution, a "turning off" of the now multipdeliberate misreported perception anxieties and pain, then obviously, the entire group, tribe, or species rumbles towards horror , numbness, and extinction.
Furthermore, persons who become unprincipled and who also have come to expect a certain high level of vitality or security as part of their inner states matrix - that is, those with a stronger 'addiction' to 'thick' inner states - develop a massive 'craving' for the security, passion, and vitality that they are no longer generating internally.
If the person does go through the complete jettison and decides to 'stick with' and reinforce their new, unprincipled tuning - that is, engages in "escalations" - then either they lose access to large amounts of security and anxiety inner states altogether - that is, they 'go numb' - or they replace that which they are no longer internally generating with massive amounts of vacuumed inner states from those below.
In other words, once a person has become unprincipled, they no longer have access to high levels of or large amounts of inner states without 'stealing' them from those that do create them.
Portions of this realization are manifested in the various 'low level' 'conclusions' that the jettisoning person thinks of regarding various ugly - and obviously inaccurate - views of life altogether .
In all this, it must be remembered, of course, that vacuumed inner states - like those that derive from drug use - are most temporary, never have the rich quality of those that one generates oneself, and lead directly to an extinction-producing internal "guidance" homeostasis, all the shallow 'smugness' that vacuum artists everywhere project notwithstanding.
Page 113 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Persons (almost all persons) who have gone through this "lying to caretaking" 'fifth event' type of situation recall the sense of 'flatness' and uncertainty that such lying immediately brought about, although given the enormous amount of lying by unprincipled above parties regarding this whole phenomenon, noticing such 'flatness' was either quickly or slowly put out of mind by the affected person until it became an ordinary, everyday phenomenon, and an 'automatic' (mostly automatic but not completely so) 'addiction' of everyday life.
While the person is going through the initial jettison, they are aware that something is "basically" "changing inside" but they have little idea of the nature of the change, whether to "go with it" or to "head it off", and are generally quite "clueless" regarding the high level effect of this or that course of action over time.
Again, while an unprincipled person is quite familiar with this phenomenon, one who has not become unprincipled, that is, one who has always remained principled, is generally not familiar with this phenomenon - at least as of the date of this writing.
Since principled protection is being withdrawn - both from the lower below person by the jettisoning person in this fifth 'event' and from the jettisoning person by his or her above party, anger is being fired up the hierarchy.
Anger, of course, is a genetically derived mechanism that evolved as part of a solution sequence whenever principled protection disappears such that damage is rendered.
Anger, and the pain that it carries, is part of a principled solution sequence when it is directed, in the main, upwards in a hierarchy and focuses on unprincipled enactment homeostasises; it is part of an unprincipled extinction sequence when it is directed, in the main, downwards in the hierarchy or focuses on principled enactment homeostasises.
Furthermore, by the nature of DNA organization, anger, like other sorts of anxiety, tends to cast a wide - but quite specific - "net" until the particular solution-producing path can be found.
As such, a person's anger is directed at anyone, past or present, who can be identified with the absence of protection - above parties, below parties, principled parties (who bring to mind the gravity of the situation and who seem to be able to internally generate some of the desperately needed protection), and, of course, some of the person's anger is directed towards themself.
At the conclusion of this fifth 'event', in which the now jettisoning higher below person has projected a lying 'frame of reference' towards their caretaken parties, the jettison person's central nervous system is 'gyrating wildly'.
Previously unknown - and entirely unfamiliar - combinations of inner states are present.
When the person recalls their high level caretaking conceptualization, their high level anxieties - and high level vitality - go on full, and their cognition comes up with the most brilliant of thoughts; sometimes such obviously truthful - albeit personally risk-filled to formulate - thoughts such as that their above figures are
Page 114 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 operating without any sort of overall, survivable basis.
When, however, the jettisoning person recalls their own, just enacted, lying to their own caretaking, and recalls the threats made by their unprincipled above figures should they - the jettisoning person - remain principled, the person starts to think of lying to caretaking as a necessity - and, as the result of this sort of unprincipled conceptualization, the high level inner states go "off", stop being generated internally.
Cognition disappears, and the person's "brains go flat"; they may 'conclude' (inaccurately of course) that it is 'impossible to make sense of anything'.
One moment brilliance; the next moment 'flatness' or "empty-headdress"; one moment intense anger at one person; the next moment at another - perhaps long dead - person; the next moment at themself.
One moment 'flashing on' the importance of maintaining truthfulness, the next moment remembering the threats from above should he or she attempt to operate in a principled way.
One moment intensely passionate caring about outcome, the next moment, not caring about anything at all.
The long familiar internal 'automatic' (strongly automatic but not completely so) principled judgmental guidance system is in disarray, is no longer 'locked' onto (strongly locked onto but not completely so) a principled track.
Indeed, with cognition gyrating - often in an "off" state altogether - and most unexpected and unfamiliar , intense thoughts and feelings present, the 'guidance' of (in this case unprincipled) above parties is referred to more and more by the rapidly 'tumbling' person.
In short, one moment being in an entire principled "judgment-thought-emotion-guidance- perception-enactment" 'inner states homeostasis' with the world at large, and the next moment being in an entire unprincipled "judgment- thought-emotion-guidance- perception- enactment" 'inner states homeostasis' with the world at large.
Having never even consciously thought about the very idea of such a thing as a difference between a principled and an unprincipled "judgment- thought-emotion-guidance-decision-perception- enactment" 'inner states homeostasis' with the world at large - and now being aware of two such 'frames of reference', a principled one and an unprincipled one - the person, overwhelmed with the newness and the enormity of what he or she is seeing now requires a powerful, truthful 'frame of reference' to talk out and sort out the situation.
As can be seen, such a truthful 'frame of reference', in the situation under discussion, is not available.
Partly because of the unavailability of any sort of principled frame of reference to talk things out in, and given the immediate confusion of the rapidly changing situation - and the accurately perceived dangers therein presenting - the jettisoning person may well develop a
Page 115 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 desperation for some sort of speedy outcome, some sort of 'end' to the seeming 'insanity', end for the pain of losing caretaking, the far greater pain of losing caretaking conceptualization, and their general internal turmoil.
Unfortunately, in the situation under discussion in this particular six 'event' 'sequence', the only continuation that their unprincipled above parties propose is an entirely unnecessary , complete jettison into a brutal and unprincipled future for the jettisoning person.
At this point, it is necessary to mention something of the relationship between the effect that a person has on the people around him or her and the effect that other persons have on the person themself.
It is to be recalled that every individual person is powerfully affected by the decisions of persons around them and that every individual person has an internally controllable, decisive decision- making effect on their own actions and the effect of those actions on persons around them.
It can be seen that an important portion - but only a portion - of the way other people affect a person is as the result of what the person themself projects.
Every person draws in from others, and projects towards others, a specific balance of - amounts of and types of - inner states and the conditions that produce them.
Furthermore, people come to 'expect' - that is, become 'addicted' to - a certain type and amount of inner states coming from within a particular person.
When familiar persons come in contact with one another , homeostatic behavioral mechanisms in each individual go into motion to engender the familiar combination that the persons involved have become 'addicted' to.
Thus, an individual develops an ongoing, homeostatic 'picture' of the world that is, in part - AND ONLY IN PART - the result of the sort of drawing of inner states from other persons and projecting of inner states toward other persons that the person generally enacts and that others 'expect' of them.
For example, a principled person in a "high homeostasis" may exude a large amount of inner states towards those immediately around them, creating in those around them much more vitalness than otherwise.
The person may, as a result, develop the ongoing impression that people generally are rather "heavy-weight", extremely attractive, powerful, brilliant, and so forth.
Such a person may take the bitterest experiences as an obvious sign that something is very wrong and sorely in need of correction.
On the other hand, a person in an unprincipled homeostasis or a person in a "tight homeostasis" may well generate little, and may well quickly 'drain off', in any situation, whatever high level inner states may be available, thereby causing a good deal of "flatness" in the people around them, and therefore 'conclude', in an ongoing way, that people generally are rather stupid, out of clues, and somewhat 'shallow'.
Page 116 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Furthermore, such a person may take bitter experiences to indicate that there is not a whole lot in this world worth bothering to want to be around, worth bothering to protect, or worth bothering to care about.
Again, both persons may well have a singular, accurate perception of the situation: i.e.
that everyone would like to have a rich, satisfying life, but one may well think that people are eminently capable of such and that difficulties in that regard are quite solvable, and the other may regard most, if not all people as hopelessly "flat", "stupid", and "hardly worth the trouble".
In all this, it is never to be forgotten that while there may be differing perceptions of any situation, and while some persons deliberate misreport of perception about what they perceive to be the case, there is of course, an absolute, singular truth regarding each matter, truth that is the same for everyone.
That is, there is a singular truth of the matter regarding what each person is drawing or creating, and there is an absolute, singular truth regarding whether people are capable of living a rich, brilliant - and survivable for all - life.
There are a multitude of untruthful and lying formulations regarding each of these matters, and there is a singular truthful formulation of each matter as well.
In other words, the truth never changes and it is the same for everyone; perceptions, on the other hand, vary , and additionally , a person may speak truthfully about what they are aware that they
perceive and they may deliberate misreport of perception about what they are aware that they perceive.
Indeed, unprincipled persons do often deliberate misreport of perception about what they are aware of perceiving.
Figuring out the singular truth of a matter - varying perceptions as well as lying about perceptions notwithstanding - is a cornerstone of survival, health, deep feelings, and protean advancement.
It can be easily seen that while a person obviously shapes, in a decisive way, the world that they perceive as well as the world that others perceive, other persons - especially persons in above positions - and particularly the decisions of other persons, also have a decisive effect on the shaping of the nature of the world that the person perceives.
Responsibility for overall outcome, of course, is, as always, everywhere; that is, resides within each single individual person, each and every one of whom has an internally controllable, decisive effect on the situation of every person, including themself - one way or the other.
A word or two must be said regarding the effect on the lower below party of the jettison person's lying to them about what the jettison person believes.
If the lower below party believes their above party - the jettisoning person - to sincerely bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve to be truthful what the 'jettisoning' person is saying, then, for the lower below party, such lying on
Page 117 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 the part of their above figure is one crucial element in the development in the lower below party of some sort of 'character disorder' or other central nervous system difficulty.
However, in that case, the lower below party remains principled.
If the lower below person knows their above party to be lying and accepts such lying about what one thinks as 'the way of things' then the lower below party also 'jettisons', that is, becomes unprincipled themself.
Only if the lower below party realizes that their above party is knowingly lying to them and determines that such behavior on the part of an above party is absolutely unacceptable, and decisively acts in a principled way on that determination is the jettison in the higher below party thwarted by the lower below party.
However, in the situation under discussion, it is the lower below party being in deep trouble ("caretaking goes awry") that set the entire 'sequence' in motion in the first place and thus, in this particular situation, the lower below person is in much disarray and, consequently, has some difficulty holding firm in the face of deliberate misreports of perception from above figures.
Again, the matter of below parties firmly holding principle in the face of deliberate misreports of perception from above will be dealt with in detail in a later section.
In the particular situation that we are describing in this 'events' section, the lower below party does not hold to a principled frame of reference,
that is, the lower below person also develops an unprincipled 'frame of reference', particularly in their relationship with their above party, and as such, there is a shift in the lower below person's relationship to the jettisoning person.
Previously, the jettison person could engage in various sorts of discussions with their below party regarding doubts and mistakes without jeopardizing - indeed, while strengthening - the ability of the lower below person to themselves create the finding of the truth itself, as well as strengthening the below person's tie to the above person, albeit amidst the periodic, great "heat" and "crucible-like" "combination" that principled relations often engender.
Now however, in the new situation, the jettisoning person comes to be seen by their below persons as an attachment figure and as a thief, but no longer as a principled person and a creator of truthfinding.
The lower below figure(s) now receives the 'message' that 'vacuuming' and 'consuming', and, more important, lying about what one thinks in order to do so, is the 'frame of reference' in which to operate.
Previously, expression of doubt or error on the part of the higher below person resulted in increased ability on the part of their below party to cognitively figure, and in fact, strengthened the lower below person's principled "gridwork".
As the new, unprincipled situation for both persons develops however, any such expression of error or doubt by the higher below party is taken by their below person as an opportunity to 'vacuum' and 'consume' whenever the slightest
Page 118 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 sign of 'faltering' by the above figure is shown, delivering the derived 'juice' to whomever projects the strongest "signs of" and "symbols of" 'protection', which, at this point, is certainly not likely to be the jettisoning person.
The original jettisoning person loses access to a truthful frame of reference in their below persons in which to reason things out and loses also the inner states that below parties had previously generated internally and projected upwards to their previously principled above party on the basis of a principled return of principled protection from above.
Prior to this time, before the jettison sequence began, the jettisoning person became used to a situation wherein their 'frame of reference', when they were uncertain, was continually strengthened by conversation with other persons - above persons and below persons - who projected some sort of principled framework.
Lower below persons, who had previously been attached to a principled frame of reference in the now jettisoning person would contradict, clarify , and generally hold some truthful 'grounding' for their principled above parties whenever those above parties needed a truthful frame of reference to talk into.
Now, however, first with the lower below persons getting hurt (caretaking going awry) and especially now, with the jettison person having projected to lower below persons an entire lying frame of reference, the truthful frame of reference that the lower below parties provided for the jettisoning party to talk into has disappeared.
It is now, perhaps for the first time ever, that the jettisoning person realizes - in a 'flash' - just how much of the world he or she has been holding up all along.
Watching that principled frame of reference in below parties disappear as the result of one's own actions is the single most stunning, specific revelation regarding the enormity of one's own power and influence in the world at large that a person experiences in their life.
It is also, quite often, the single most consistently deliberate misreported perception about event in an unprincipled person's repertoire of memories, as will be discussed in a later section.
Perhaps because of our work as public high school students and teachers, our current metaphor for this sort of thing is "lifting the 'pencil point'" and "watching the whole world go seemingly irretrievably haywire".
If the higher below person still had a principled frame of reference in which to talk out and figure out the situation, they would conclude the obvious - namely that their own regaining of, and permanent holding of principle is a decisive factor - indeed, is the fundamental factor - in promoting life, health, passion, advancement, satisfaction, and ongoing survival for individual, group, and indeed, the entire species.
Unfortunately , in the particular jettison sequence under discussion, principled frames of reference in below parties for the jettison person to talk into are disappearing rapidly.
Page 119 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Consequently , this particular decisive moment passes quickly, and, in the particular situation we are describing, the jettison sequence - quite unnecessarily - rumbles onward.
At this point, the jettisoning person finds that any "reversal of course" brings an increasingly 'vacuum' type of reaction from their below party.
Once a strong, initial lying to caretaking has taken place, the jettisoning person crosses a kind of metaphoric "Rubicon": to 'stick to' the jettison course means no longer being able to discuss mistakes and doubts with their below parties; the higher below person loses their ability to verbally - and honestly - doubt and reevaluate in a principled frame of reference, which is essential to any ongoing principled course.
Halting or reversing the jettison course would require discussing mistakes and doubts.
In the now newly unprincipled situation, however, such discussion of mistakes and doubts only gets the jettison person more 'vacuumed', escalating hiddenness, doubt, and increasing weakening.
Thus, as the original unprincipled lower above person knew full well when he or she gave, in the second conversation, the 'advice' to deliberate misreport of perception to caretaking, once a powerful 'lying to caretaking' enactment takes place on the part of the jettison person, the metaphoric "die is cast" for the jettison person: the jettison person becomes either rapidly and tightly unprincipled or - in order to reverse the jettison course and reestablish principled enactments - he or she risks an increasing battering from now unprincipled
below persons, and very real and escalating life and death risks in that regard.
While the "jettisoning" person remained principled, the risks - that is to say, the costs - of remaining principled were very real, but came 'naturally' to the person as an obvious necessity for the development of any sort of healthy, survivable way of life and, in fact, the taking on of risks strengthened the person.
By comparison, once one has presented an overall lying framework to their caretaking, a 'reversal of course' back into a principled enactment homeostasis quite unexpectedly entails far larger and ever more frightening risks than previously imagined.
Furthermore, much of the "gridwork" that "backs" such everyday risk-taking and personal expenditure is far less accessible, indeed, a portion of the jettisoning person's "gridwork" may, in fact, disappear altogether and become a permanent loss.
If the jettisoning person decides to complete the jettison, they may well become quickly expert at putting forth a facade of certainty to below figures.
In the new, unprincipled enactment homeostasis, should that facade of certainty drop, the now newly unprincipled lower below figures are quick to become vicious "consumers" of any doubtful or weakened person, most particularly, the jettison person.
In lying to caretaking about what one thinks, one creates the framework in below parties that constitutes a powerful, 'self-perpetuating'
Page 120 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 (strongly self-perpetuating but not completely so) "lock" on their new, unprincipled construction.
"'Tis far easier and less risky to keep a below figure principled in the first place than it is to survive attempting to 'reprinciplize' them." Although a portion of the latter can be done, it is vastly more difficult, and the risks and costs therein contained are of a far larger scale than anything the jettisoning person previously imagined.
Before going into our description of the sixth 'event' of this 'jettison sequence' - the third 'jettison sequence' conversation between the unprincipled above party and the jettisoning person - a word or two must be mentioned regarding the overall position of the unprincipled above party - the person who is most directly foisting the jettison on the jettison person.
It is to be remembered that the above party is himself or herself engaged in an unprincipled enactment homeostasis, that is to say, is unprincipled.
As such, the person "consumes", vacuums, "burns up" more than he or she creates.
Obviously, there must be persons from whom the unprincipled person can draw, otherwise more is used up than is created and the unprincipled person has nothing to live on.
An unprincipled person must have principled persons somewhere below them - that is, persons who are engaged in "gather-add-build" somewhere below them - otherwise no one generates up through the unprincipled person's
particular channels and the unprincipled above person "starves" to death.
However, in order for anyone to operate in a principled homeostasis, they - a principled person - must have some "map", somewhere, of principled protection above in the world.
Such "maps" are one necessary portion of a principled, high level structure of electro- neuronal configuration within a principled person's upper central nervous system.
These "maps" of principle enable the person to operate on the basis that "gather-add-build" produces overall protean advancement, for everyone and for all time.
As such, in order for an unprincipled above party to 'coax' up the inner states from below on which the unprincipled person lives, the unprincipled person projects downward some sort of appearance of protection or appearance of principle.
This appearance constitutes a kind of a "map" of 'principle', albeit a false "map" - or, metaphorically speaking, a "hot air 'map'" - which, when called upon, turns out to be entirely without substance.
Thus, when a still principled below party's caretaking goes awry to such an extent that protection for caretaking from the above party is starkly, clearly recognized by the below party to be absolutely necessary; when those persons to whom a principled below person's "maps" of protection refer must provide actual protection; when the actual caretaking requirements of the situation pierce the 'mask' of 'appearance of
Page 121 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 protection' or 'appearance of principle' in the unprincipled above party, then, rather than provide the actual protection that is required, the unprincipled above party operates so as to destroy altogether the below person's sense that principled protection is ever actually provided to anyone.
In this situation the above person reveals their own unprincipled nature in absolutely stark and no uncertain terms in order to destroy the below person's "maps" of principle altogether.
This "destruction of 'maps'" constitutes a powerful and decisive blow to the below person's ongoing ability to internally generate any sort of high level vitality and also delivers a decisive blow to the below person's ability to hold to a principled conceptualization and a principled course.
In the course of "precipitating", insisting on, and "ratifying" the full 'jettison change' in the below person in the sixth 'event', the unprincipled above party faces several difficulties and dangers of his or her own in this regard.
It must be borne in mind that, once jettisoned, the below person no longer can internally generate the vitality that he or she previously was able to internally generate, and that he or she was able to "pump up" to the unprincipled above party.
The unprincipled above person is quite prepared to lose such generating abilities of a principled below person, especially if the below person can continue to project some form of vitality and security upwards - albeit, now vacuumed from
sources further removed instead of those which the below person generated themself.
The unprincipled above person is not, however, inclined to lose the larger scale of vacuumed inner states that they are addicted to, and that they would lose if their unprincipled nature became known to all their sources of generating of inner states that emanate from below parties through several layers of hierarchy .
If the above party's unprincipled nature becomes clear to many other still principled below persons, then the number of "generators of inner states" - principled persons - in the unprincipled above person's lower hierarchical echelons dwindles.
As such, the supply of vacuumed inner states and the conditions that produce them, on which an unprincipled person lives, becomes severely lowered.
Additionally, unprincipled persons are well aware that unprincipled "competitors" are always on the 'lookout' for other unprincipled persons who become "exposed" or who suddenly 'weaken'.
This is one of several reasons why, once the unprincipled above person starkly reveals his or her unprincipled nature to the jettisoning person - which they must do in order to jettison the below person - the unprincipled above person then operates so as to make absolutely certain that the below party does indeed become 'jettisoned'.
If the below person does not jettison, after seeing and feeling, first hand, the full weight of the above person's unprincipled nature, then the
Page 122 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 above party operates so as to see to it that the below person is at the very least either discredited, disabled, or even killed, or in some other way, 'disappeared' altogether.
A little eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, we mentioned that the 'automatics' that make principled or unprincipled enactments seem 'natural' to a person are governed by an electro- neuronal structure at the upper hierarchical levels of an individual person's mental organization.
These electron configurations within the neuronal structure at the upper levels of the central nervous system are, at birth, configured such that a principled balance of protections gathered, risks spent, and things built will ensue throughout the person's life, unless "derailed" by some sort of 'jettison sequence' such as is described herein.
A principled electro-neural configuration at the high levels of an individual's upper central nervous system engenders an entire mental "construct" and high level homeostasis - high level thought and high level emotion - wherein protections are created and built upon in the course of more "gather-add-build", far into the future.
Emanating from this principled electro-neuronal structure, these principled "automatics", and the sort of homeostasis therein engendered, seem to the person like the most obvious thing in the world.
This overall conceptualization - creating, building, and advancing as the obvious continuation of choice for a person's 'automatics'
- operating at a very high level of hierarchy of mental organization of a principled individual's central nervous system, originates from the very same configuration of electrons within the neural structure wherefrom the person's "automatics" are governed.
Again, although decision-making is a separate and important portion of enactment signals to the cerebral cortex - independent of the person's 'automatics' - it can be seen that "automatics" or "anxiety tuning" constitute a large share of one's guidance system, especially for an unprincipled person.
Although an unprincipled electro-neuronal configuration in the upper central nervous system does exist in a person with an unprincipled anxiety tuning, an unprincipled "anxiety tuning" or "automatics tuning" does not exist at the higher levels of mental organization that the person possesses - at the higher levels of mental organization of an unprincipled person, the neuronal configurations, while quite healthy, are basically unused or "frozen", so to speak.
An unprincipled neuronal configuration exists at a lower level of mental organization only, a lower hierarchical level of neuronal organization, while a principled electro-neuronal configuration exists at a higher hierarchical level of mental organization.
The thoughts that make up an unprincipled set of 'automatics' - as well as the entire "vacuum- consume-burn up" "deliberate misreport of perception-web" 'construction' - are precluded from organizing at a higher level of mental
Page 123 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 organization because of the "deliberate misreport of perception-web" basis of the lower level configuration in an unprincipled person.
Elements at a lower level have to be truthfully organized in order for a higher level organization to be formulated.
Deliberate misreports of perception cannot be organized into a higher level configuration.
While deliberate misreports of perception can and often do increase in size, scope, and intensity at the level wherein they exist, unlike truthful formulations, they cannot be organized at a higher level.
Deliberate misreports of perception exist at an entirely different 'level of logic' than truthful things, an entirely different sort of, different 'type' of thing than the truth, which is solid, singular, consistent for everyone and consistent for all time.
The logic of sorting out deliberate misreports of perception, groups of deliberate misreports of perception, and combinations of deliberate misreports of perception, operates on a different mathematical system from that which is used in sorting out and combining truthful things.
Rules and processes for sorting out truthful things are not comparable to the rules and processes for sorting out deliberate misreports of perception.
Any attempts to take deliberate misreports of perception up to a higher level, quickly 'dissolves', 'dead-ends', 'goes up' into 'emptiness'.
Truthful things can be organized, in combination with other things, into something more advanced; regarding deliberate misreports of perception this is not the case.
In fact in order for there to be any advancement, any 'crystallization', anything that promotes the best of feelings, overall survival, and advancement, deliberate misreports of perception must be 'broken down' into their lower level elements, with the much smaller elements rearranged in order to find some truth in the situation and then the truthful elements combined towards something more advanced.
Distinguishing the difference between how the truth, once identified, is to be handled - by holding, combining, and building - and how lying things, once identified, are to be handled - by carefully 'breaking down' and rearranging - is a fundamental key to the workings of human cognitive processes altogether.
As such, the distinction between how the truth is to be handled and how deliberate misreports of perception are to be handled is probably already well known, or, if not, should quickly become well known, in all the higher sciences, as well as, of course, in everyday life.
In this connection we must note again that, in the contemporary situation, sorting out deliberate misreports of perception in the presence of someone who deliberate misreports of perception about what he or she understands is likely to lead to a destructive "knock out" of the creator of truthfinding as well as a destructive "bloating" of the liar.
Page 124 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 We refer the reader back to the fourth 'event' section of this letter some pages eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr.
As regards the memory portion of the central nervous system, each time an unprincipled person "escalates" - that is, deliberate misreports of perception, destroys caretaking, or as we put it eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr metaphorically, "blows it with the angels" - which for many such persons is an everyday, almost "routine" enactment - increasingly large amounts of pain are created externally, that is, in the world at large.
In order for an unprincipled person's high level mental organization to be organized in a truthful manner , that is, in a principled way , the stimulus or 'signals' regarding principle pass through a host of memories, including those involving damage done to past caretaking.
When such past events are accurately remembered - that is, when they are seen within a principled construction - the events, and the person's enactments as regards those events, are internally seen and felt to be extremely painful - and damage-producing for the world at large.
When past events involving damage to caretaking, and memories of those events, are seen by an unprincipled person in a principled light, enormous pain is manifested within the unprincipled person.
For every deliberate misreport of perception told, for every person hurt or killed, for every hope shattered, for every piece of the ecosystem that has been destroyed forever by the person's enactments, there is enormous pain to be
absorbed by the person who has done the damage, absorption in the direction of rearrangement and transformation into protean advancement solution.
Thus, when an unprincipled person comes in contact with an overall principled formulation, many of the unprincipled person's 'deliberate misreport of perception-web' memories start to reorganize in a principled way, and, consequently, signals travel through the memories, then to the cerebral cortex and then on to the glands which produce large quantities of high level anxiety producing endocrines.
In the overall schema as manifested in Homo Sapiens, such anxieties constitute a signal for the enactment of carefully thought out and clearly directed high risk towards protean advancement solution.
However, in the 'special case' of a person with an unprincipled anxiety tuning, these anxieties pass, once again, through the unprincipled person's 'automatics', and, if after that, rotten decisions are again made to 'quash', 'spin-out', or numb the anxiety and to destroy the person who brings such anxieties to mind, then there is more destroying of principle, destroying of caretaking, and, to put it metaphorically, more "blowing it with the angels" along with the severe escalation in the amount of pain-producing memories that all damage creates.
Regarding the internal electro-neural and inner states operations of the unprincipled above party in this 'jettison sequence', it can be seen that: principle presents; memories are seen in a principled light; pain and 'risk' are 'signaled' and
Page 125 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 "floods" the central nervous system; unprincipled "deliberate misreport of perception-web" 'automatics' signal to "destroy" whatever is making the painful memories and 'risk' apparent, namely, the presence of principle; then, in a different portion of the brain, ugly and rotten decisions are made; unprincipled enactments follow; more principle is destroyed externally; increasingly painful memories and increasing 'risk' are created; more deliberate misreports of perception are formulated to "numb" the pain of accurate memory and to 'kill' awareness of the presence of risk; cognition decreases; and so forth.
The person escalates their 'self-reinforcing', 'self- perpetuating' 'anxiety tuning', albeit strongly self-perpetuating but not completely so.
In all this it is never to be forgotten that decision portions of a person's mental capacities were specifically designed in the course of the evolution of Homo Sapiens to interrupt and change precisely this sort of otherwise 'self- perpetuating' continuation.
In short, when a person in an unprincipled homeostasis comes in direct contact with a principled overall formulation, enormous pain floods the central nervous system of the unprincipled person.
The principled continuation for such pain requires enormous absorption of pain, spending, and risk in order for protean advancement and overall survival to ensue.
If the decisions of the unprincipled person, above and beyond the 'automatics', are ugly and rotten ones, which they often - but not always - are in
the case of a person enacting within an unprincipled homeostasis, then more 'self- perpetuating' destruction ensues.
In short, when a person "blows it with the angels", that is, when a person either 'jettisons' a below person or damages a principled above person, one engenders in themselves an internal configuration wherein whenever memories of such events are accurately called to mind, enormous pain and 'sense' of risk "floods" the person's central nervous system.
As such, it can be seen that when an unprincipled person projects deliberate misreports of perception in the presence of a principled person, the unprincipled person is fully aware that he or she is lying, however, the telling of deliberate misreports of perception does tend to "numb" or "freeze over" the accuracy of memories and the pain and anxiety that such accurate memory produces.
If things are to work out well, however, then when the anxiety that accurate memory produces is presented, the anxieties are to be transformed such that advancement and ongoing solution are created, rather than "numbed" or 'killed'.
The 'numbing' of pain and memories that deliberate misreports of perception engender, of course, only rigidifies and perpetuates the pain and "numbing" on an ever larger scale.
Furthermore, such lying about memories - and the inaccuracy which is therein projected, destroys high level cognition, both in the teller and in any listener that believes the deliberate misreports of perception to be truthful.
Page 126 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Until and unless the unprincipled person reprinciplizes - with all the accompanying 'depression' and personally costly risks - any useful information that the person manages to muster (as well as other forms of security, passion, and vitality) comes to be vacuumed from below by the unprincipled person - that is, vacuumed from below by the liar - leading to further destruction of principle; a 'self- perpetuating', strongly self-perpetuating but not completely so, situation.
From this it can be seen that the unprincipled 'automatics' that are formed when one destroys principle, constitute a part of the 'self- perpetuation' that also destroys mental accuracy and indeed, destroys high level cognition altogether .
It is for this reason - and this reason alone - that unprincipled persons tend to be 'flooded with pain' and, tend to be terrified when overtly presented with the whole concept of absolute truth; it is also for this reason that unprincipled persons are infamous for destroying that which could shed accurate light on past events while principled persons, on the other hand, regard the permanent preservation of such records as an always obvious and necessary continuation.
While the above phenomena manifests itself throughout the everyday life of an unprincipled person, these phenomena are magnified many times in this sixth 'event' situation.
Indeed, when a person with an unprincipled electro-neural configuration comes 'eye-to-eye' with a person with a principled electro-neural configuration, the unprincipled person, for
possibly the only times in their life, comes face to face with the gripping, "painful-circumstance- awakening" 'sense' - a "flash" of "recognition" - that there is something, after all, that the unprincipled person has "omitted" and continues to omit from their brains and their life, namely, the ability to generate and create more on this planet than was previously available - and the ongoing, thick sense of life therein engendered - rather than the lying, sucking, consuming and more lying until everything is flat and dead that such persons are engaged in.
It can be seen that while an unprincipled person has a "keen eye" for the "juice" and information that only principle can produce, an unprincipled person also has a "keen eye" for locating its source, so as to "bleed" it in the first instance, and, if and when that doesn't work, to "disappear" it from view.
It is for these reasons that when the unprincipled above party gets resistance to the jettison from the below person in the sixth 'event', that is, when the unprincipled above party gets put in clear touch with whatever is left of the principled 'construction' in the below party, the unprincipled above person's electro-neuronal "pain-gates" to all sorts of internal memories are suddenly , unexpectedly opened in the unprincipled person's central nervous system.
As can be seen, the above party is faced with his or her own 'one way or the other' "big jump" decision, in this case an 'escalation' or a "reprinciplization".
In this particular case, for the above party to deal with the below party in a principled way
Page 127 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 would involve the above party taking on much of the risk and painful memory involved in a personal reprinciplization in themself; while for the above party to deal with the below party in an unprincipled way involves rigidifying and escalating their own unprincipled homeostasis.
In the particular 'jettison sequence' described here, the above party does not decide to 'reprinciplize' but rather decides to escalate their damaging enactments and their 'unprincipled tuning' in what the unprincipled above party does well recognize as their attempt to "disappear" whatever is opening their painful memories.
It can be seen that once things have gone as far as the sixth 'event' situation, then, in this sort of case, whenever the below party puts forth 'resistance' to his or her own 'jettison', the above party turns their most especially ferocious, and few - perhaps almost no - jettisoning parties survive it, stay principled, and live to tell the tale.
Most classical literature is, of course, replete with references to this sort of situation.
As should by now be clear to the reader, unprincipled parties are quite famous for (deceitfully) claiming to bedeliberate misreport of perceptionve that principled persons do not exist, while simultaneously being quite aware that they are sucking principled persons white and hacking them to pieces.
One must not underestimate the viciousness of an unprincipled above party when face to face with the prospect of absorbing much of the pain that they have created; such pain absorption by
the damaging party being, of course, required of any principled continuation.
From all this, it can be seen that an unprincipled above party will show up at all for the third 'conversation' in this six 'event' sequence only if he or she is confident that the below party has been engaged in enough "softening up" regarding caretaking coming fully apart and lack of principled 'maps' elsewhere such that the unprincipled above party can be sure that the below party will actually complete the jettison and wind up on a firmly derailed judgment, guidance, and enactment homeostasis track.
In this regard, we must note that most often, an above party avoids, as much as possible, being themselves clearly seen as directly responsible for 'jettisoning' a person in that they rarely engage in second 'event' "first date blues" and fourth 'event' 'advice' to a principled below party, and completing that same below party's jettison in the sixth 'event'.
Rather, in most cases, unprincipled above parties engage in one or two of these conversation type 'events' with a particular jettisoning below person while directing the jettisoning person elsewhere for other portions of the sequence.
This is done so as to make it much more difficult for the jettison person to identify a specific above party's specific responsibility in the overall jettison sequence, and to make it easier for each of the unprincipled above parties involved to deceitfully claim ignorance - or even, most deceptively, "disapproval" - of other portions of the sequence.
Page 128 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It can be seen that unprincipled above parties who engage in any of these conversations - the first, second, or third - engage in all of them, but with different jettisoning persons.
An unprincipled above party, operating as some sort of professional advisor, for example, may give fourth 'event' type 'lying to caretaking' advice in such a situation wherein the jettisoning below party finds themselves engaged in a sixth 'event' with a pimp of one form or another; when the newly unprincipled person returns to their fourth 'event' 'advisor', the above party may well shed, metaphorically speaking, "crocodile tears" of 'disapproval' at the sixth 'event' "methods".
In fact, and with a geometrically increased intensity over the last several years, such fourth 'event' 'advice' virtually floods fourth from every corner of what is called the 'mass media', the most ferocious of the barrage of recent years being directed at the teenage population in particular of the Western Hemisphere and the Western Pacific region.
Of course, almost the entire world of 'health', 'mental' "health", and 'education' "professionals" also join in most pointedly projecting the "fourth event" "lying to caretaking" type of advice, albeit from behind closed doors.
For clarity of explanation, we describe a particular 'jettison sequence' wherein the particular parties involved follow a single jettison through from the first 'event' to the sixth.
It must be noted that by the time that the below party enters the sixth 'event' - which is the third conversation between the unprincipled above
party and the jettisoning below party - the jettisoning person has, temporarily, lost much of his or her facilities for making and enacting principled decisions.
Previously, we mentioned that some biological processes run 'automatically' and some have a 'manual' portion.
While there are many decisive times, before, during, and after a 'jettison sequence', wherein the below party makes internally controllable, accountable decisions, the sixth 'event' is one of the most difficult times in this regard for the below party.
It can be seen that, during the sixth 'event' the now rapidly jettisoning below party is directly facing the full force of the entire high level of the majority protection-seeking hierarchies, without hardly even a modicum of external principled protection, particularly given that they have 'wiped out' a major portion of their own principled 'frame of reference' in the fifth 'event - "blowing it with the angels".
Thus, while in eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr portions of the 'jettison sequence' the below party made quite a few internally controllable decisions, and after the sixth 'event' he or she will continue to make internally controllable decisions, during the sixth 'event' specifically, the below party is hardly in a position to make decisions at all.
Due to the various difficulties of the below party at this time - difficulties that the above party is quite aware of, having, in fact, arranged them in 'event' four - the above party is in full control of this sixth 'event' situation.
Page 129 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 T o put it bluntly , throughout this entire 'events' sequence, but especially in this sort of sixth 'event' situation, the vast majority of responsibility for outcome rests squarely on the shoulders of the above party.
Of course no matter what the outcome, after the sixth 'event', the below party regains his or her capacity as a fully responsible party.
Additionally, it is to be recalled that the now rapidly jettisoning below party is undergoing a variety of extreme difficulties.
He or she is quite frightened, uncertain, and sometimes angry; is internally shifting back and forth between passion, anger , "hate", and flatness; finds their cognition system 'erratically' alternating between "on" and "off", between brilliance and 'empty-headdress'; finds themself with - perhaps for the first time in their life - no stable guidance system; and has few clues to the overall nature of the enormous and most frightening changes going on inside.
The jettisoning person, not having built enough "cognitive creation of truthfinding" internal "gridwork" long in advance, and consequently now feeling like a liar and a fool in addition to wondering about his or her own sanity, looks desperately to their attachment figure or figures for decisive guidance.
It can be seen that while in this particular sixth 'event' situation the below party has grave difficulties exercising their decision-making abilities, the unprincipled above party does have access to their decision-making abilities, is well aware, far more clearly than the below party is, of what is going on within the below person, and,
unfortunately, in this most decisive situation, the unprincipled above party, alongside the telling of the most bloodthirsty of deliberate misreports of perception about what he or she believes, makes very stupid, vicious, and rotten decisions and enactments.
To begin with, the above party starts off this conversation determined to project a solidly unprincipled frame of reference to their below figure.
It is to be remembered that previous to the whole jettison sequence, the above party generally projected - albeit entirely falsely - a principled framework to the below party.
This was done so that the above party could gain maximum access to the truth and vitality, which cannot be coaxed up and vacuumed up in the first place without some sort of projection of principle from above.
Now, however, in this sixth 'event' situation, the above party operates so as to completely destroy in the below party any conceptualization that principle will ever be provided by this above party , or indeed, by any above party , and in doing so, 'seals' the jettison in the below person.
As such, the facade of the principled 'maps' from above is dropped by the above party.
The unprincipled above party now informs the below party, in no uncertain terms, that actual principled enactments are absolutely unavailable from the above party.
A little eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, we mentioned that one important way that a
Page 130 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 person's overall view of life is maintained is by the fact that the person projects their own high level view towards those to whom they talk, and that the 'construction of reality' therein engendered reinforces the person's own high level conceptualizations.
In the fifth 'event', however, the jettisoning person - albeit unwittingly - destroyed the principled frame of reference in their below party and was thus left without that principled 'frame' to talk into.
Now, in this sixth 'event' any semblance of a principled 'frame of reference' in their above party also disappears.
This, of course, destroys both any 'maps' of principle of the above party that the below party may have had and also destroys the last vestiges of a principled frame of reference for the below party to talk into.
The loss of all principled frames of reference to talk into is a particularly crucial factor for the below party.
Now, instead of the below party's talking reinforcing a principled frame of reference as was previously the case, the below party's talking changes his own frame of reference to unprincipled and thereafter reinforces that new, unprincipled conceptualization.
Thus, once the below party is jettisoned, their talking reinforces their new, unprincipled 'automatics', strongly automatic, of course, but not completely so.
It is at this point that the below party sees the effect that above party's advice to the below party in the fourth 'event' - to deliberate misreport of perception to caretaking - actually had, and more important, the formerly principled below party sees that the unprincipled above party meant for that advice to have precisely the deprinciplizing effect that it had.
The below party is hit with the full force of realization of the entire way that people become unprincipled altogether .
Indeed, this realization constitutes a virtual 'knockout' of whatever is left of the below party's entire, high level, "gather-add-build" electro- neural construction.
For the below party, the thought may come fleetingly to mind that a principled frame of reference to talk into may never again become available to him or her .
The unprincipled above party, now confident that the below party is on the road to a permanent deprinciplization, operates so as to intensify this "revelation" by, metaphorically put, bluntly and overtly, fully "removing their own 'mask' of principle".
Indeed, the above person now bends every effort to "show" that anyone who "achieves" any "success" is entirely unprincipled, throwing in massive amounts of deliberate misreports of perception along the way.
The above party then ridiculingly derides anyone that he or she perceives that the below party might look up to as principled as "just another 'con' artist" or, alternatively, as a "naive" "loser".
Page 131 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 More importantly, the above party hammers away at the jettison person, in an attack that is designed to "prove" that the jettison person themself is as unprincipled as anyone else, indeed, even more so.
The below party, having just emerged from his or her own fifth 'event' "lying to caretaking" is quite devastated by these "arguments".
Although an alert, principled observer would be fully aware of the intensely dishonest nature of the "set-up" that the below party is being subject to, the below party, in his or her most devastated state continues to find themself losing, more and more, any sort of principled grounding that may be left.
Furthermore, it is a cardinal rule of above parties in such sixth 'event' situations as this one that there are to be no alert principled observers present.
Now comes the major "pitch".
The below party is deceitfully "informed" by the unprincipled above party that the whole world is made up of principled "loser" types, who spend their lives creating and building - but don't get "lucky" enough to be jettisoned - and of unprincipled types who are either "sloppy" and therefore also "losers" or who are "clever" and therefore "successful".
The smirking, vicious, and obviously insane above party refers to this formulation as the "fabled" "secret" of "success".
While the above party is well aware that anyone with the slightest kernel of working intellect
could see clearly that such a formulation is both inaccurate and quite horror-producing for ninety five percent of the population in the moment - including, in almost all cases, the below party in question - and fatal for one hundred percent of the population over the long term, the unprincipled above party is also aware that the intellect of the below party is being rapidly destroyed, in fact, the below party's "intellectual gridwork" is, at this moment, being ferociously "consumed" and "pumped upwards" in the hierarchy by the unprincipled above person.
It is to be noted that there is a particular - and absolutely necessary - characteristic of any principled behavioral homeostasis that is specifically designed to question that which one believes to be true.
This characteristic of the cognitive system, generally known as 'doubt', is an integral portion of the process of coming up with a more advanced solution and continuation, absolutely necessary for any sort of ongoing health, satisfaction, or survival.
It is to be noted that the process of 'doubt', as part of the cognition system, is a hugely exhausting and costly process.
It is a quite risky portion of cognition that is always frightening, sometimes even fatal, and never 'fun'.
Indeed, the personal costs of this sort of very necessary risk-taking are sometimes maximal.
As such, vitally necessary doubt is not to be engaged in lightly, and when one so engages, it is always to be used in the direction of overall
Page 132 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 solution and an overall, ongoing sense of certainty .
One engages in doubt so as to accurately correct one's truthfinding judgment or locate a higher level truth and solution, and in doing so, wind up with a deeper and more powerful sense of satisfaction, passion, and certainty.
While the below party, when they were principled, was quite familiar with this whole matter of doubt, what is now being ridiculed by the unprincipled above party is the whole concept of deeply feeling, and, more important in this situation, thinking or cognitively concluding anything at all.
Previously, when the below party was principled, doubts were employed, at certain times only, for the purpose of figuring out, beyond what is already known, just what the truth of a matter is in order to solve some sort of pain producing difficulty, some sort of danger to, or damage to, the entire CNS chain.
When cognition goes on, doubts of all sorts flood in.
In this sixth 'event', however, when doubt goes on, what is 'doubted' is the entire matter of figuring things out altogether.
As such, this particular 'doubt' feeds into the destruction of the below person's whole cognition structure.
Now doubt itself, as a truthfinding structure, 'closes down' alongside high level cognition.
At a lower level of neuronal hierarchy in the brain, the "top-of-the-majority-protection- seeking-deliberate misreport of perception-web" forms, which is the group of deliberate misreports of perception that the jettison person comes to use for vacuuming purposes.
Doubt, and the truth of a matter, lose their importance in the new, unprincipled "deliberate misreport of perception-web" 'construction'.
The newly jettisoned unprincipled person begins to operate so as to come up with the "cleverest" deliberate misreports of perception possible, so as to vacuum the maximum vitality and security out of those below, "consuming" some and "pumping" the rest upwards, therein gaining maximum 'protection' from unprincipled above persons.
In this particular 'jettison' situation, when one 'doubts' the value of intellect, one loses ready access to their own, independent cognitive facilities, and consequently loses their ability to doubt altogether.
Part of the way that this portion of the jettison sequence occurs is through the unprincipled above party getting the below party to begin to deliberate misreport of perception, routinely.
The above party, well aware that the below party is having a good deal of difficulty holding any cognitive thoughts at all in their mind, provokes the below party into speaking untruthfully - and then ridicules the below party for doing so.
Should the below party attempt to explain himself or herself, the unprincipled above party
Page 133 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 'lunges' viciously by pointing out any inaccuracies in the below party's statements, again being fully aware that the below party has just emerged from lying to their caretaking in the previous fifth 'event'.
The below party, should he or she attempt to explain themself, finds themself getting weaker and more confused and may well feel quite small, perhaps even, mentally 'incompetent'.
At any rate, the below party "picks up the above party's construction" (as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr) and concludes that he himself, or she herself "must be" an unprincipled person.
In fact, in this case, the below party was principled before the fourth and sixth 'event' conversations with their above party, but is now rapidly becoming unprincipled.
As such, the below party tries to figure out what the unprincipled above party "wants" to hear, regardless of a statement's truthful, untruthful, or lying content.
However, the below party finds that lying is not so simple - not merely the 'opposite' of the truth.
In fact, truth has no 'opposite' - it is singular, while untruths and deliberate misreports of perception come in a vast multitude.
The above party does not seem interested in 'any old deliberate misreports of perception', but rather in a particular group or set of deliberate misreports of perception that this particular above party has come to favor.
Furthermore, the above party is aware that the more the below person 'scampers about' trying to figure out or 'hit upon' which particular deliberate misreports of perception this particular unprincipled above party wants to hear, the more the below person "deletes" truthfinding and overall problem-solving altogether from their considerations.
The more the below party deliberate misreports of perception, attempting to hit upon this attachment figure's 'favorite' deliberate misreports of perception, the more cognition in the below party, which requires a combination of risk and building, closes.
As cognition closes down, the person's internal attachment judgment system - which constitutes their 'automatics' - takes full charge of their entire judgment system.
And the person's attachment judgment - or 'automatics' - now newly powerful, indeed, now the majority portion of the below person's overall judgment system, "locks onto" the 'thin', 'tight', 'low', and 'bloodthirsty' 'frame of reference' that is projected by their unprincipled above party.
As the above party alternates - however subtly or bluntly - between offers, provided the jettisoning person operates in an unprincipled way, and threats, should the below person insist on principle, and as the above party drives the prostrate below party into seemingly endless circles of deliberate misreports of perception, the below party's high level "gather-add-build" overall caretaking conceptualization becomes
Page 134 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 more and more distant, more and more unreachable.
If the below person, after this sixth 'event', operates so as to rigidify himself or herself into this new, unprincipled track, this lying by the now jettisoned person creates increasingly large amounts of damage and losses in the world at large, both permanent losses as well as at least partly recoverable damages and separations.
Statements become constructed without any special reference to their truthful content but are rather designed to keep such damage as far removed as possible and so as to keep the "rot- web" from creeping back to the person's immediate vicinity as much as possible.
Of course, it is only a tiny percentage of new- time majority protection-seekers who can keep the "rot-web" away.
For between ninety-five and ninety-nine percent of new-time unprincipled persons, the "rot" does hit home relatively quickly, and, when what are now seen to be solidly unprincipled persons are referred to for judgmental guidance, the recommendation is always to deliberate misreport of perception some more so as to keep the "rot" back, which steadily increases the scope of the damage that the unprincipled person engenders, and thereby piles on increasing amounts of pain within the person whenever any accurate memory of circumstance is brought to mind.
High level cognition - which combines the absorption of pain and the creation of truthfinding with the development of overall,
life-advancing solution - disappears, indeed, becomes a most terrifying matter .
The person becomes increasingly 'addicted' to vacuumed security and vitality from below for personal consumption as well as for "pumping up" the hierarchy, in exchange for a modicum of 'protection' from above that the person then uses to stave off the damage that is continually 'creeping back inwards' on an ever larger scale.
The above person leaves the sixth 'event' with a mixture of low level 'vitality' that he or she has vacuumed from the previously principled but now newly unprincipled below party , and contempt for the supposed "weakness" of the below party for "falling for" the deliberate misreports of perception projected and the grossly simple "techniques" that were used to 'jettison' the below party.
For the unprincipled above party, this is deceitfully claimed to be 'proof' that no one is 'really' principled - an obviously ridiculous notion.
In fact, everyone is solidly principled until they are jettisoned by unprincipled above parties, and even then, everyone has the internal, structural capacity to return to a principled homeostasis, all the deliberate misreports of perception to the contrary notwithstanding.
The above person may even claim to be "saddened" by the destruction of principle in the below person, and may even - smirkingly, and of course, deceitfully - remark on the "cruelness" of life altogether .
Page 135 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It can be easily seen that, in the current majority protection-seeking age, well over ninety-nine percent of any "cruelness" is entirely unnecessary and is the result of the conscious decisions and enactments of unprincipled persons - particularly in this situation - the conscious decisions of the unprincipled above party, rather than anything inherent in life itself.
Pain and anxiety, or some eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr form of it, has been, for more than a billion years, a 'signal' for overall more advanced solution and it has been brought on line from time to time as part of DNA's overall life-advancing, solution-producing mechanism.
It has only been during the tiniest percentage of pre-man's and man's existence that such unrequited pain as is currently known has been such a wide-spread phenomenon, and, as such, it is an anomaly.
That is to say, "majority protection-seeking" as more than a very tiny fraction of one percent of the overall human enactment homeostasis is long overdue for a complete interruption, alongside a large scale reorganization of its lower level elements.
In Homo Sapiens, it is the cognition of each particular individual that specifically evolved to solve any sort of high level problem or high level threat to the ongoing survival and advancement of the entire DNA chain - that is, any sort of high level pain - and each individual's cognition is particularly well suited to the task of reprinciplization of the person themself, as well as a good portion of the entire human species.
From all this, it can be seen that the above party has, in 'jettisoning' the below party, severely escalated himself or herself into a far more rigid and more 'self-perpetuating' unprincipled 'anxiety tuning' and, in doing so, has rigidified themself into a more rigid unprincipled enactment homeostasis as well.
Any accurate recollection by the above party of the events of this 'jettison sequence', and the effects of the above party's enactments, brings to the above party's mind the role that they have played in the overall destruction of life on this planet and the consequent diminished ability of virtually all members of this species to thrive and survive.
For this reason, any hint of a possible principled continuation that the above party may encounter in the future, floods him or her with enormous pain, while their 'automatics' operate so as to 'consume' and destroy principled possibilities.
Again, it is never to be forgotten that such 'automatic' continuations are strongly 'self- perpetuating' but-not-completely-so.
Reprinciplization is vastly less "traumatic", less costly, and, once in place, far more 'self- perpetuating' than the deprinciplization was.
Just why it has taken so many millennia for an overall, species-wide reprinciplization to ensue, and why reprinciplization, in the contemporary situation, presents amidst such huge danger, cost, and risk, is a subject worthy of further research.
At any rate, the below person leaves this sixth 'event' conversation with a much changed 'inner
Page 136 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 states' homeostasis from the way they were before - much changed both within himself or herself and between themself and the persons that he or she already knows or newly associates with.
The below party has just lost their high level generating system, and their own 'maps' of being able to gain 'high level' inner states by generating them from within.
Furthermore, while the newly unprincipled below party can, from time to time, vacuum high level inner states from still principled persons, being unable to generate them internally destroys any hope of being able to, in any way, gain high level satisfaction, ongoing passion, or depthful certainty.
Their "stimulus-enactment" homeostasis changes from signs of pain calling for risking, solving, and building to signs of pain reacted to with vacuuming, consuming, and killing.
The person's "addictions", "reactions", and overall conceptualizations change, leading to a "thinner", "tighter", lower level "sense" of life altogether .
Whereas in the old, principled conceptualization, caretaking was the thing that mattered so passionately most of all - so obviously so that it was not even questioned - now, in the new unprincipled construction, 'nothing' "really" matters "all that much".
Furthermore, previously, when the person was principled, the absorption of pain from below in the course of the enactment of overall problem- solving and advancement was most obvious to
the person as such absorption of risk and creation of solution constitutes a most fundamental survival methodology of nature.
Now, however, in the newly unprincipled - and most inaccurate - "construction of reality" that the person takes on, such problem-solving, and the anxieties associated with it, bring to mind the greatest of terror and the most profound sense of depression.
The person's entire 'want' system undergoes a cataclysmic - and deadly for all - change, and stays that way until the risks and costs of a reprinciplization in the person are taken on and enacted.
The newly unprincipled person walks around, and becomes used to, a vastly lower internal inner state level altogether, an internal inner state level that rises (slightly and temporarily, of course) only when the person takes certain drugs or "beats the life" out of someone else.
It is in this sort of unprincipled, reactive, 'low level' state that the jettison person must make what is, up until this time, the most important and personally riskiest decision of their life.
For if the jettison person decides to themself remain principled, that is, to recover their principled enactment homeostasis at this early "post-jettisoned" stage, knowing full well the depth and scope of the lack of principle in above parties, then the jettison person is likely to draw the most withering and crushing fire imaginable from above parties who are now being directly defied, and all this without having any internal 'maps' of principle in available above people.
Page 137 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Should they become a "post-jettisoned" principled party, they become "the person that knows too much", and as such, loss of job, marriage, family, friends, income, and possessions, loom.
Additionally, they may find themselves facing homelessness, exile, institutionalization - either 'medical' of one kind or another, or 'legal' institutionalization - and, all too often, they may be killed, outright.
As the result of these sorts of losses, a person who cognitively decides to remain principled in this sort of situation must do so while having lost their 'automatic' "bearings", that is, their principled external "grounding" in the world.
Such a situation could well continue into additional "meta-homeostatic" disaster.
Finally, it is to be noted that while an unprincipled person may be able to put on a variety of "faces" to "fool" the principled, in the case of a principled person, this is not quite the case.
Especially as regards the high level issues of life, an honest overall demeanor is very hard to hide - especially when the person is under a good deal of stress.
Indeed, regarding any sort of specifically 'intellectual' endeavor , when the "stakes are high", integrity is nearly impossible to hide, and, as such, a principled person in such a situation is constantly exposed to the ugdeliberate misreports of perceptiont sorts of deliberate misreports of perception and assaults in the entire unprincipled repertoire.
Under the severest of pressures, an overall principled demeanor is as noticeable - if not more noticeable - than skin color, language accent, or any physical distinction between people.
In this connection, it is to be noted that, as has been well known to 'shell-shocked' survivors of wartime battlefields throughout the history of the majority protection-seeking age, in the contemporary unprincipled general situation, when the stakes are obvious and maximal, it is to some degree the principled - but in large part the newly 'jettisoned' - who are the most likely to become gravely injured or get killed.
Indeed, it is knowledge of this very 'fear of cognition' fact that is a key factor in decisions by the upper reaches of the various unprincipled hierarchies to engender war in the first place.
Although the very grave risks ensuing from recovering principle immediately following a sixth 'event' may seem "overwhelming" to the newly jettisoned person, particularly when the 'jettison sequence' is accompanied by some sort of bloodthirsty 'offer' from above, the daily increase in damage produced by continued escalations and parallel increase in risk and personal cost alongside any future 'reprinciplization' grows exponentially, as rapidly becomes clear , with every 'routine', passing escalation.
For persons that decide to rigidify their new, unprincipled way of life, escalation at all levels becomes an everyday, almost "off the cuff" matter .
Page 138 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In the jettison situation described here, the newly jettisoned person does not immediately decide to enact their way back into a principled anxiety tuning and enactment homeostasis.
In fact, in this particular case, the person comes to accept and reinforce their new, unprincipled inner states homeostasis within themselves and between themself and the world at large.
This, of course, involves entering into a long string of escalatory enactments such as has been previously described in connection with his or her above party.
From all this, it can be seen that, in a generally unprincipled societal situation, the ability of a person to maintain principled caretaking as life goes on - which is at the core of what engenders healthy continuations for everyone - is almost always interrupted by some sort of jettison sequence such as is described in the previous pages.
As was stated eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, some persons who go through this sequence become extremely, and, in many cases violently unprincipled, some persons "go numb" to all high level sensibilities altogether, and, in very rare cases, some persons manage to hold
onto their high level sensibilities and remain principled.
From our own broad experience of the last several years we can say with some certainty that no one, or almost no one, survives a jettison sequence as a still principled person and goes on to rise to any sort of high position of authority in current hierarchies.
It can be seen that the pervasive lack of principle that is so widely recognized among persons in positions of authority and protection comes about, in the immediate sense, as the product of conscious, internally controllable, accountable, measurable, changeable, everyday decisions of individuals rather than any sort of "necessary" continuation.
Indeed, this whole, 9,000 year majority protection-seeking anomaly, can easily be seen to be one of the least likely continuations imaginable from pre-man and man's previous five million year history, and it is long, long overdue for a retirement from its currently pervasive position, with various of its lower level elements rearranged towards survivable, health-producing, depth-producing, passion and satisfaction- producing, permanent advancement.
Page 139 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Paradigm From California by Neil Miller et. al.
Copyright © 1984, 1986
Volume II: Letter To A Responsible Party
Part V: Modern Times Chapter 16: Continuation/Prologue
    Having mentioned something of the process by which a person, in the current situation, commonly develops an anxiety tuning and enactment homeostasis that is absolutely antithetical to anything that can work out well and that bears little relation to survival, good health, and the general patterns that govern biological life, and before discussing some of the large scale manifestations of the systematic destruction of cognition in the daily life of individuals - what we call 'Fear of Cognition: Escalation' - and the general subject of 'retracing' and reprinciplization to be taken up in later portions of this letter, reference must be made to some of the basic patterns by which life operates.
Identification of and examination of such individual, 'primary' "patterns of physics" - patterns that operate in such a way wherein life on this planet is engendered - reveal some very sharp clues as to the precise nature of the disastrous, large-scale derailment that occurred in 'middle farming society' some 9,000 years ago and that is long overdue for correction.
This derailment, it is to be recalled, is characterized by the sudden and most unexpected 'self-perpetuation' (strong - but not complete - self-perpetuation) of what we have called a majority protection-seeking anxiety
tuning, 'judgment' system, and enactment homeostasis among large portions of the population, especially by those who operate in the higher reaches of hierarchy .
One introductory note: terms such as "several million years" and "several billion years" refer to periods of time that, given the current state of human intellectual advancement, is more than can be realistically conceptualized on a year by year basis.
Several hours, several weeks, several years, and several centuries is more within grasp, and, as regards the longer time periods, while something that happened over the given period can be accurately described, it is vastly more difficult to look at, for example, 100 million years, in terms of the relationship between the events of a single year and the overall time period.
When one says "over a short, five million year period", one is in a very different realm from "over a short, five year period" or "over a short, five day period".
Thus, the casual portion of references - such as "shortly thereafter" - which may be accurate when appdeliberate misreported perception to days, weeks, or even years are metaphoric at best, when appdeliberate misreported perception to millions or billions of years.
Page 140 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Words like 'short', 'few', 'several', 'brief', 'quickly', and so forth, when appdeliberate misreported perception to hundreds of thousands of years or more, are accurate as to their numerical value but would be inaccurate if the processes therein conceptualized corresponded to many of the processes that take place over weeks, years, decades, or centuries.
This is also true of quantifications from the world of astronomy and micro-biology that measure distance by billions of miles or millionths of a millimeter, and of quantifications of weight that measure by trillions of tons or millionths of a gram.
At the current state of human intellectual development, humans, when possessed of a good deal of gridwork, and while spending and concentrating a good deal of effort, can generally conceptualize an actual amount itself within a range of about one to a million - in time, weight, or distance.
Until such time as the English language - and other languages - develop an additional syntax and grammar to include an easy and automatic ability to specify logical type, logical level, and the various mathematics, processes, and wordings that describe "configuration", readers must always apply great caution when hearing great distances, great bulks of matter, or great amounts of time described in a terminology which may bring to mind processes that could only occur as regards the scale of everyday experience, that is, comparatively short-term processes which are unlikely to occur in connection with billions of years or billions of miles.
Having said all that, we note the following:
About four billion years ago, a particular, definable group of "forces of physics" which we identify as "the patterns that govern DNA replication" began operating on this planet such that living organisms came into being, developing and advancing in their internal hierarchical structure from species to species over time.
Certain overall, high level patterns can be clearly discerned and delineated which govern the evolution of proteins to cells to plants to fish to reptiles to mammals, primates, and higher organisms.
Three of the primary "forces of physics" - that is, three of the fundamental patterns - that are part of the matrix of forces by which life within this "DNA system" operates can be abbreviated as: patterns governing creation; patterns governing survival, replication, and building; and patterns governing advancement.
It is this last phenomenon, advancement, which is of particular interest here as it is this primary, high level pattern that was specifically damaged in the course of the initial 9,000 year old derailment, this derailment continuing up to - but not necessarily beyond - the present day.
Furthermore, this particular 'advancement' pattern went so far as to create a structure that has superseded its own methodology, and as such, it is useful to have a look at the some of the basic workings responsible for this process.
Early manifestations of the overall 'advancement pattern' are to be found in the evolutionary
Page 141 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 process generally known as "mutation-natural selection".
In this process, very briefly: collections of molecules in the form of "genes" are produced according to patterns that are operating in 'strands' of DNA, and those genes in turn determine, in a closely regulated homeostatic pattern, the specific cells that make up an organism.
From time to time, some of the molecules that make up a particular gene get "knocked sideways", 'displaced', rearranged, "spun" together, or broken away, and, as the result of this almost 'random' change process, a particular genethatbecomeschangedinthiswayleadsto the production of a group of cells that are different in characteristics from the cells that were formed by the gene before the gene was changed.
When this sort of change happens to the genes in the cells that are slated for replicating the entire organism, that is, happens to the genes that replicate the surrounding organism into an entire 'progeny' organism, the change in structure of a gene is called a 'mutation'.
If the changed gene becomes 'active' in the new whole organism - that is, 'active' in the 'progeny' of the organism with the reshaped genes - then the 'progeny' organism develops with a group of cells whose configurations are changed from the organism that was their predecessor , and therefore has characteristics that are structurally different from that of their predecessor.
Again, the general term for this particular sort of change in genes and characteristics from one generation to the next is 'mutation'.
Since the specific changes that come about, come about almost randomly, the vast majority of the changes in genes produced in this way are not particularly helpful to the organism, and indeed, if such changed genes immediately developed into characteristics of progeny , the new characteristic would be likely to be injurious and lead to a relatively lower likelihood of propagating into the future.
That is to say, of those organismicly reproductive genes that are changed - or 'mutated' - the vast majority, well over ninety-nine point nine percent are not likely to produce changes in characteristics that last over generations, at least, not immediately anyway, as almost all such immediate changes would give the organism containing them a lower likelihood of surviving over time.
Some of the changed genes, however, replicate changed cells that are, in combination with other already existing cells and other changed cells, an improvement - in terms of the new organism's ability to complement and contend with the "non-DNA" 'forces of physics' as well as better able to complement other organisms within the "DNA pattern system".
In other words, a very few of the changed genes, well under a tenth of a percent, are an immediate improvement and are likely to be replicated in ever stronger patterns, generation to generation over time.
Page 142 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In this regard it should be mentioned that there is some evidence that vast numbers of changed genes may well be carried forward for many, many generations without affecting the characteristics of the organism that contains them.
It is known that the majority - possibly as much as 90% - of gene-like portions of every DNA strand are 'mute', that is, do not engender the production of cells and have a function that has not yet been definitively identified, at least not that we know of at this time.
It seems possible to us that most mutations may collect, coalesce, and combine in these apparently 'muted' portions of the strands, to appear as a small part of a combination of new characteristics in some creature ten, twenty, forty generations ahead.
We do not know if the truth of this matter of apparently 'muted' genes is already known to scientists and mathematicians at this time, although if it is not known, it seems likely that it will be known shortly.
One further note regarding this matter of 'mutation': sometimes, two, three, or more different sorts of genetic changes that do manifest themselves as characteristics of progeny organisms and which bring the same sort of advantage but in different ways, may continue to be replicated in different organisms generation to generation, 'side by side' so to speak.
For among those changed characteristics that turn out to fulfill the overall evolutionary criteria, survival and propagation ensues with
any combinations that work out well in the overall over time; not merely to the "fittest" or the "best".
Of course, under the conditions obtaining in evolutionary times, the better that a given combination of characteristics makes the overall situation, the more likely it is to last over time.
So the first portion of the "advancement pattern" involves the creation of a huge number of almost 'random' changed possibilities, only a very tiny few of which, in a certain rare combination, operate as an improvement on the organism, species, and bio-ecosystem, and become part of the overall structure of future organisms over time.
In this regard, it must be borne in mind that within the specific group of "forces of physics" within which biology exists, there are a huge number of ways by which things can be unworkably arranged, compared to the very few, sometimes even a singular way of improving them.
Thus, another key mechanism by which DNA's stunningly powerful overall, evolutionary homeostasis and "advancement meta- homeostasis" is created, maintained, and developed over time, despite what would otherwise be low likelihood for such, is the presence of a highly consistent, ongoing, overall criteria, or overall 'set of criteria', by which a particular cell, that is, a particular characteristic, is found to be workable or not workable.
In the evolutionary situation on this planet, among the criteria in this overall 'set of criteria'
Page 143 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 are the changed organism's ability to complement and contend with other 'forces of physics' that are not specifically part of the DNA matrix as well as the changed organism's ability to operate in tandem with other species that are within the DNA matrix.
In all this, it is to be remembered that changed genes or 'mutations' are themselves only the tiniest fraction of a percent of all the genes operating.
Thus, changed genes are a tiny portion of all genes, and changed genes that are a survivable, workable improvement are only the tiniest percentage of all changed genes.
The generation to generation, steady, mostly unchanging reproduction homeostasis of genes is extremely strong, while "out-of-the-homeostasis" changes that improve the situation, and therefore last over time - as measured by the given, constant, overall criteria - are extremely small.
The evolutionary process is famous for , metaphorically speaking of course, creating and "looking for" those proverbial 'needles in a haystack' - and 'finding' and organizing them, time and time again.
Furthermore, the overall 'set of criteria' by which something survives, replicates, and lasts, is the same for determining which changed genes, or combinations of genes, will or will not last as it is for determining which already lasting gene configurations will or will not continue to last.
While a changed gene has far less than a one percent chance of falling within the overall criteria, a specific gene configuration that has lasted for quite some time has well over a 99% chance of falling within the overall criteria.
A word or two must be mentioned regarding the usage of words such as this term 'overall criteria'.
Here we are referring to overall, or high level criteria rather than to medium level or low level criteria.
For example, an animal may be well able to operate within conditions of climatic temperature fluctuations between 400 and 750 Fahrenheit.
That condition is a "lower level" criteria for survival - absolute 'life or death' criteria to be sure, but "lower level" all the same.
Should the climate change such that only an organism that could survive in temperatures ranging from 100 to 600 Fahrenheit would survive, this "lower level" criteria for which organisms - including those with already firmly placed genetic configurations as well as those with newly changed genes - will propagate into the future, will change.
That is, under changed climatic conditions, the 'lower level' criteria for survival will change.
But the high level criteria pattern, which includes, among other things: that the pattern of workings falls within the general DNA patterns of physics; that the organism has good ability to complement and contend with the non-DNA forces of physics; and that the organism operates
Without
changes, however, nothing survives.
those
"one-in-a-very-large-number"
Page 144 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 in good complement to the vast array of other DNA produced organisms - that high level criteria does not change, over all the eons.
While the word 'criteria', meaning 'lower level criteria' is the same word as the word 'criteria', meaning 'high level criteria', the word has a different meaning depending on whether it is meant to mean lower level criteria or high level criteria.
Generally speaking, when we use the word 'overall', we are referring to the high level usage of whatever concept the word 'overall' is modifying.
While these essentially mathematical understandings of the ways that words are used are, especially alongside good explanation, fully within the cognitive grasp of every person, as we have elucidated, diagrammed, and illustrated them in an early chapter of our full paradigm, we will keep our explanations here in this regard to the barest minimum.
A third factor in this 'mutation-natural selection' "advancement pattern", in addition to the creation of many, almost random 'possibilities' and in addition to the presence of a constant, unchanging, high level criteria by which workability is determined, is the nature of the hierarchical placement of a newly integrated gene pattern or pattern of characteristics.
The vast majority of the individual changes in genetically endowed characteristics that take place within a species or even from species to species are of a similar nature, they are changes of a similar sort or of a similar 'type'.
Various individual characteristics of the creature may become 'sharper' or more useful and additional characteristics of one kind or another may develop.
However, as regards the operations of the particular species to species advancement pattern under discussion, when many characteristics, each at the same level of organization are properly organized, a higher level entirely of organization of internal structural characteristics - ranges and adaptations - comes into being, a 'level' or "type" of organization that previously did not exist within the organism, or indeed, did not exist within any organism previously.
Thus, groups of genetic changes or 'mutations' may combine such that a species gains, for example, limbs that are a bit more versatile, slightly more sharpened senses, or a digestive system that can digest a few more previously indigestible nutrients.
Such changes can come about without the addition of an entirely new, higher level of organization for the organism as a whole to coordinate the changes and advances.
While in eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr evolutionary times, some advancement changes came about as the result of a single gene or two having its structure "bumped" or rearranged, in later evolutionary times, that is, in the last half billion years or so, changes in characteristics came to be the product of a vast number of changed genes combining and rearranging over many, many generations, without immediately manifesting themselves into a particular
Page 145 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 characteristic, and later combining into a brand new characteristic relatively quickly - 'all at once' so to speak - that is, over only a comparatively few generations.
As time goes on, and if that new characteristic well fulfills the overall DNA system evolutionary criteria, then that new characteristic is itself sharpened, advanced, and developed over a period of many , many generations and additionally, eventually serves as a basis for further, still more advanced developments.
Among the more advanced combinations of changes and characteristics that took place within organisms during evolution were new whole physiological systems such as a narrowly ranged internal temperature control system - the 'thermal homeostasis' mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr - which allows huge numbers of homeostasises within the neural system and the body generally to operate uninterrupted, 24 hours a day over many decades; an extremely powerful and increasingly flexible attachment system, which takes the species so endowed more and more out of the lower reaches of the food chain, and in fact, operates in such a way that every individual of the highest level species comes to be, finally, at the top of the food chain altogether; and an increasingly dense neural system which tends to reorganize upwards in terms of developing a higher level of organization rather than simply 'outwards' in terms of greater size, mass, or variety .
In fact, this combination of changes - constant temperature control; a highly protective attachment system, especially for the young; and
an increased hierarchical level of internal neural organization - bespeaks an overall "level" of advance, in this case an advance from reptiles to mammals rather than an advance at the same level.
It can be seen that each of these sorts of advancement changes require a higher level of internal organization to coordinate the new characteristic itself, and, more importantly, a higher level of internal organization to coordinate the whole new creature that is walking around with such a more advanced system.
Furthermore, when the higher level advances mentioned above, which are characteristic of the advance from reptile to mammal, themselves are added to by entirely new changes such as exponentially increased levels of internal neuronal organization within an individual organism, giving the organism long range anticipation capabilities, that is to say, the capability of having "maps" of the future; advanced calculation capabilities; internally controllable decision-making capabilities; and a social posture so stunningly attractive that clothes had to be worn from almost the first moment human skin appeared for the obvious survival necessity of consolidation and crystallization, alongside an increasingly depthful and spectacular range of audio and tactile intonation - all of which engenders a thick, varied, and enormous transfer of tenor and information between individuals - the combination of all these changes together organizes into another "leap" in level of internal organization.
Page 146 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In fact, the "rapid advance" to a higher level of internal organization described here, is, of course, the five million year advance from mammals and lower primates, which "top off" at a lower level of internal organization, to 'pre- man', and, at the current level of outcome, Homo Sapiens.
In the Homo Sapiens case, this advance of "level" manifests itself in every single individual member of the species having the structural ability to, at the higher hierarchical levels of their central nervous system, anticipate over time, that is, over days, years, and even centuries; every person having the structural ability to accurately calculate possibilities and alternatives according to consistent, unchanging, high level criteria; every person having the structural capacity for generating and living within a thick, ongoing, powerful, passionate, varied, and highly satisfying matrix of 'inner states'; and every person being able to make measurable, internally controllable decisions, using a brilliantly patterned matrix of genetically inherited 'information', observationally gathered 'information', internally added, crystallized, and built "gridwork", huge stores of memory, "out-of- the-blue-factors", and a host of other things.
In all this, it can be seen that there is a building process that is of a different sort than a simple addition of more capability, more size, or more variety at a single level of internal organization.
Given the same amount of matter and energy, or just a bit more matter and energy, when many things at a particular level of organization coalesce and are organized in just the right way, another entire level of organization comes into
being, one that previously did not exist within the bio-ecosystem.
The new organism, organized at a higher level of organization, operates on a very different sort of logic than an organism operating at a lower level of organization.
The logic of thick inner states, stunningly attractive social posture, voluminous and depthful creation, crystallization, and transfer of tenor, long term anticipation, many factored calculation, and internally controllable decision- making is a very different sort of logic from the logic of reaction, and, as such, is governed by an entirely more advanced 'set' of "axioms of mathematics".
In this connection, it is to be noted that although non-human mammals have some form of inner states matrix for guidance; and while some can collect, hold, and transmit a very small amount of unique electro-neuronal configuration; and, additionally, while many clearly have a powerful recognition of - and indeed, in some cases, even a special fascination for - human consciousness, the audio and tactile intonation, the social posture, and especially, the extremely dense, high level neural system such as is contained within every single Homo Sapiens individual, does not exist within land-going, non-human mammals.
The "level of consideration" to be employed for matters concerning non-human mammals and other animals is an entirely different "level of consideration" from that used for matters concerning an individual Homo Sapiens, each one
Page 147 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 of whom operates at a vastly higher level of operation than other animals.
In the evolution of man in particular, three unique properties - a high level neural system with fantastically voluminous, deep storage mechanisms and rapid retrieval and advanced processing facilities; social posture; and every individual member of the species being at the top of the food chain - worked spectacularly well together, eventually bringing forth a creation - Homo Sapiens - the likes of which had never before existed.
In short, it is not that Homo Sapiens individuals have 'better' 'consciousness' than other animals, whose highest level of internal organization "tops off" at a lower level than Homo Sapiens; it is that every individual Homo Sapiens has a level of internal organization high enough to include 'consciousness' as is described here whereas other animals do not.
One aspect of the increasingly high level build-up of changes and advancements leading to higher and higher levels of internal organization - eventually to the creation of human beings - involves a quantification concept that may be unfamiliar to some readers.
This is the matter of the form that various additions and advancements take.
Biological organisms, like all solid objects, are made up of atoms which are combined into molecules of various kinds.
One might say that atoms are, metaphorically speaking, basic "building blocks" of all solid things.
However, the amount of matter and energy that is contained in an organism or in any object bears little relation to just how advanced, how useful, or how valuable that object may be, or how much it may generate.
It is the configurations into which the atoms and molecules are organized that constitute quantity, value, and productive abilities - not the amount of weight or mass.
In biology, almost all cells in every organism are constantly replicating throughout the life of the organism, the old cells being washed away as fresh ones come on line.
The fact that the actual, physical atoms that make up an organism are only present in the organism for a few days, a few months, or a few years does not alter the fact that the make-up of an organism, its configurations, its organization, changes almost not at all.
The atoms and molecules - that is, the physical matter - comes and goes; but the configurations themselves into which the atoms are organized remain.
It is the organization of the physical mass, in addition to the physical mass itself that constitutes the substances that make up biological organisms and on which organisms thrive.
A lasting gene configuration, can, as part of a vastly more advanced configuration, continue to replicate, basically unchanged over a quarter of a billion years and more.
Page 148 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 While it is built upon to a greater and greater degree over the eons, and while tens of thousands of sets of atoms may have moved through it - that is, may have come and gone - the configuration itself remains.
While the physical matter - and the 'space' that a gene configuration occupies - constitutes part of the framework in which biology exists, the great substances of life are contained in the organization of that matter, that is, how it is put together .
As the organization of the atoms grows, more and more life is created; furthermore, when the "matter" that is holding a workable, survivable, and long built pattern of configuration is disassembled without the high level of that pattern being transferred or otherwise preserved in another group of atoms, life is damaged, or even destroyed.
In short, the substances of life - the organization of matter and energy - are never to be confused with matter and energy, for these are different sorts of "entities of physics" from one another.
Unlike matter and energy which can neither be created nor destroyed, the organization of such matter and energy is constantly being created, lasting thousands, millions, even billions of years, and can be damaged and even, in the worst of cases, destroyed.
Thus, the substances of biology can be created where none previously existed, can be held intact, can be built upon, can be damaged, and, in the most terrible of cases, can be destroyed.
In biology, while the specific configurations into which the atoms are organized obviously cannot exist without the atoms, and while, if the configuration is not transferred to a new group of mass, an untimely disassembly of the atoms can damage or even destroy a configuration, it is the organization of the atoms, the configuration itself, that constitutes most of the substances which make up life; the specific particles of 'raw' matter are an important, indeed, decisive, but transient aspect.
In this connection, it must be noted that inner states are composed of long-built configurations of energy and long built configurations of matter and as such, they, and the conditions that produce them are creatable to an almost unlimited degree, alongside the "gather-add- build" conditions of nature that engender such inner states and that the inner states were designed to be guidance for.
As we have seen, as inner states travel between persons, or are stored, transformed, utilized, created, added to, cherished, crystallized, multipdeliberate misreported perception, built upon, damaged, and even destroyed, and although a given inner state can exist as any of several different sorts of configurations of electrons, configurations of air vibrations, configurations of bio-chemicals, or a variety of other forms, the identifiable, substantial, and long-built character of a particular inner state can be specifically delineated and quantified.
In that we are discussing the most spectacular advance the world has ever seen, namely the advance from mammals and primates to pre-man and man, it is useful to have a look at the overall
Page 149 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 schema to see just how high it is necessary to go in order to sort out the great bulk of the health and survival threatening difficulties - namely, majority protection-seeking at high levels of hierarchy and in more than the tiniest percentage of the population overall - that our species has been having at the current level of development.
In the first page of this letter, we mentioned: "The tendency of DNA to replicate genes and the principles of physics therein contained are as far back as we can trace the 'basic' forces that structure biology, but that tendency is quite far enough back to trace ahead the structure of the biological schema generally and to specifically identify human judgments, emotions, and enactments in relation to the best, the healthiest, the most passionate, the most depthful, and the most survivable workings of individual humans and of that schema." 'The tendency of DNA to replicate genes' consists of a specific, identifiable, group of 'forces of physics' that exist alongside many other forces of physics.
Whether the number of such other 'forces of physics' can be counted in the dozens, the hundreds or the tens of thousands we do not know, and it seems quite possible that counting and other conceptualization systems at the current level of intellectual development do not yet contain the facilities to enable the articulation of just what is up at the level above the top of the biological homeostasis, that is, at the level at which exist "all forces of physics".
Furthermore, any levels of development beyond that are two, three, or even four full levels beyond what is required for "'tracing' the
biological schema generally" in order to trace human activity along that schema.
While we fully recognize that our species, through its high level internal organization, built on a fantastic, high level and extremely solid, near 'perfect' genetic base, has the full structural capability for sorting out, in good detail, the entire homeostasis consisting of "the forces of physics by which", or "the patterns by which" "DNA tends to replicate genes", criteria for such sorting does not become apparent until this level of development is properly, that is to say truthfully sorted out.
While one major portion of the criteria for sorting at this level can be easily discerned as the stemming of losses, recovery of recoverable 'losses', solution to loss-producing problems, another can be located by specifically identifying "human judgments, emotions, and enactments in relation to the best, the healthiest, the most passionate, the most depthful, and the most survivable workings of individual humans" and of the overall bio-schema.
The original "guidance 'signals'" - 'inner states' or 'tenors' - alongside the conditions of nature that they were created to be guidance for, as mentioned in an early section of this letter, constitute excellent and obvious guidance as regards criteria - as long, of course, as the person's high level "'want' system" or "anxiety homeostasis" remains principled.
Obviously, when a principled person gets what a person in a principled homeostasis wants, things work out well for everyone.
Page 150 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It is equally obvious, of course, that when an unprincipled person gets what a person in an unprincipled homeostasis 'wants', then things work out terribly for most persons in the moment and terribly for everyone in the overall.
Should this level of organization be sorted out throughout the species-wide CNS chain such that the "'gather-add-build' - 'protection-risk- caretaking' - 'attachment-cost-cognition'" matrix again constitutes the general 'automatic' high level "tuning" "across the planet", then at some point, our species will find ourselves with the entire group of high level biological "patterns" in hand creating, choosing, influencing, and sorting with other 'forces of physics' - on a reasonable "footing" so to speak.
However , again, the overall, extremely high level, 'same for everyone' criteria for such an advanced level of operation cannot be discerned until two, three, or four levels of development after the current level of development is truthfully sorted out, species-wide.
Furthermore, it is never to be forgotten that the rearrangements currently required at this level of development are accomplished through, as a decisive factor , the conscious, personal, internally controllable decision-making facilities of individual human beings in the enactments of the ordinary and intimate moments of their everyday life.
While it has been well known, most notably in regard to the case of the Greeks, the Romans, the ancient Mongols, and modern-day Europeans and Americans, that extremely stupid, thoroughly rotten, and obviously horror-
producing internally controllable decisions have been very influential in determining the course of events, it is also most obvious that the derailment that such awful decisions engendered, and that such terrible decisions continue to engender, is - and has long been - entirely interruptable because the decisions themselves are INTERNALL Y controllable, and people are fully capable of making principled, healthy, and advancement-producing decisions, particularly - but not exclusively - when they are in the position of being the above party.
It is to be remembered that human decision- making has access to, among many other things, the truth itself which does not change and is the same for everyone; has access to an overall "damage-preventing", "loss-stemming", problem- solving judgmental 'tether'; has access to a 1% "pool of" "out-of-the-homeostasis" factors; has access to the judgment of above parties (for a 5% to an 85% extent, of course, depending upon whether the above figure whose judgment is attached to is principled or unprincipled, and depending upon the general context of the situation); has access to a vast store of memory - part of which is unique to the individual and part of which is in common with others; and has access to a host of other facilities for internal decision-making to draw from.
Before any criteria for selection of 'elements' one or two or three levels up can be discerned, all of the elements of the entire majority protection- seeking homeostasis must be - to put it most restrainedly - rearranged and regrouped, with absolute preservation of all that has been previously built for future combination, crystallization, and the building of greater
Page 151 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 protections, and all, of course, with absolute minimal damage and very little loss.
In all this, it can be seen that within this particular group of "high level 'patterns'" that constitute biological life, there is an overall advancement pattern that can be discerned.
A manifestation of the overall advancement pattern can be seen in the way that the various portions of the DNA 'strands' - genes and other portions - collect, combine, add, create, select, and advance to higher and higher levels of life, thus, producing consciousness-producing, inner states-producing, and increasingly powerfully attractive, more advanced configuration.
That is to say, as organized, as 'multifold', as varied, as hierarchically arranged, as 'wondrous', as adaptable, and as powerful as genetic and DNA 'strand' arrangements and what they have built are, the 'strands' themselves - as the creation of the overall high level group of 'bio- ecosystemic patterns of physics' - have created, over a four billion year time period, an arrangement that operates at an even higher level than that of physical genes.
Indeed, in this way, evolutionary genetics "has outdone itself", so to speak.
This higher level arrangement, structurally capable of operating at a higher level than even the genetic arrangements that built it, is generally known as "human thought process".
Instead of holding "information" in the form of 'configurations' of groups of atoms and molecules in DNA 'strands', 'information', that is, "configuration" is held in the arrangement of
electrons among neurons of the central nervous system of each individual human, gathered, created, retained, built upon, and transferred, generation after generation, through the previously described processes involving 'inner states'.
Furthermore, the whole human arrangement, at the current level of development, operates so as to create, store, and sort - in the form of all sorts of writing, artwork, and many kinds of external 'blueprints', what is sometimes known as "extra-somatic memory" - vast amounts of 'configuration' at all levels, stored and available in the form of the written word, 'sculpture', and other records of a million varieties, in addition to what is containable within the ten billion or so neurons within an individual human's brain, and the billions more elsewhere in every individual human's central nervous system.
All of this has brought forth individuals - that is, every individual member of the Homo Sapiens species - with a neuronal capability to gather, integrate, retain, and combine into highly structured hierarchical layers, the incredible myriad of things that goes on in an individual person's everyday life.
The person's neuronal structure, builds, day by day, extensive 'maps', memories, and pictures of the person's life, all hierarchically arranged in many layered structures in the brain aided by vast stores of 'extra-somatic memory'.
The 'information', or 'configuration', that is gathered, added to, crystallized, created, retained, cherished, utilized, expended, transferred, multipdeliberate misreported
Page 152 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 perception, built, and built upon, throughout a person's life constitutes a form of "gather-add- build" that has similarities to the old "gather- add-build" of genetic evolutionary days - on which the new crystallizations are built - but this form of electro-neural configuration is itself of a much higher level.
For an example: the development of the constant temperature 'thermal homeostasis' in mammals, of which we spoke eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, may well have taken fifty or a hundred million years of genetic development.
Once in place, such internal, automatic, constant temperature control of the trillions of cells in a mammal allows for exponentially greater crystallization and building of higher level forms, alongside a "thick" inner state matrix for guidance - all of which brings the species closer and closer to the overall, high level evolutionary criteria.
However , once that internal thermal homeostasis in mammals is in place, further advances - previously not conceivable - became possible, allowing for , eventually , human thought processes, and also allowing for a vast thick, passionate, satisfying, powerful, and more stable inner state matrix to operate alongside.
Human thought processes, alongside this 'inner states guidance system', can then create - from conceptualization to implementation - an external thermal homeostasis, that is, central heating in homes in cold areas across the planet, and could do it in a short century or so, making
possible further crystallizations and advances that were, again, previously inconceivable.
These high level "thought processes" and other 'inner states', alongside a 'principled guidance system homeostasis', can engender an extremely important adaptation in, using the "thermal homeostasis" example, a one millionth the amount of time that it takes genetics to engender an adaptation, and all of this without touching the already near perfect genetic base.
In all this, the advances continue to produce outcomes that themselves operate ever closer to the overall, high level, bio-ecosystemic criteria, that is, operate as a higher and higher level form of the overall pattern.
Much as protons, neutrons, and electrons form into configurations of atoms which constitute, metaphorically speaking, the "building blocks" for the molecules and higher configurations of biological life - proteins, genes, cells, and so forth - so such organic substances, again metaphorically, constitute the "building blocks" of human thought processes.
The 'chain', so to speak, of overall, high level 'evolution', from 'quarks' - the smallest particles of matter yet identified - to human beings, the highest level of configuration of matter and energy in existence (at least within a several hundred trillion mile radius), is unbroken.
The metaphoric "fly in the ointment" at this particular level of development, of course, is the pervasive 'majority protection-seeking', especially - but not exclusively - majority protection-seeking at the higher levels of hierarchy .
Page 153 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In above paragraphs we mentioned that creation, holding, transfer, and building of the various configurations that are required for the continuance of biological organisms were, in evolutionary times, configurations of genes contained within 'strands' of DNA.
Such configurations eventually became built upon to such a high level of organization that they engendered the creation of a high level central nervous system, itself capable of creating, holding, transferring, and building even higher level configurations in the form of "clusters" of electrons contained in various neural synapses of the brain.
Thus it can be seen that in humans, rather than increased 'adaptation' being developed over millions of years of genetic development, increased 'adaptation' - that is, closer conformity to the overall high level criteria by which life operates - is developed by persons during their lifetime through their ability to hold and build upon the accumulation of the lives of other persons - past and present - and through the accumulation of creation and crystallization that the person adds in their own daily lives.
In this way, a finer and finer 'adaptation' develops among humans, that is, among the highest level creatures in all biology.
It can be seen that while the genetic structure varies very little, indeed, almost not at all from one human to the next, the presence of a high level central nervous system - the human brain - enables each human being to themself contain an enormous store of thoroughly unique
configuration - built up and gathered by the person over their life.
The Homo Sapiens system depends absolutely on this store of vast and unique configuration for continued advancement and development for the entire species, including every individual in it.
Indeed, the ability of individual "pre-man" to receive from other 'pre-man' individuals what has been created elsewhere and before, add to it, and pass such configuration outward and on to future generations such that there is enactment ever closer to high level pattern criteria - and do it through inner states and electro-neuronal configuration, that is, through 'thought process', rather than doing it through the genetic configuration on which the more advanced 'thought process' is built - is the very characteristic that gave the entire "pre-man" and man "'family' of organism" its most special and most powerful survival property.
Although the operations by which genetic configuration is created, selected from, retained, combined, and 'hierarchically placed' are of a 'lower level' than the operations by which 'thought process' and 'inner states' create, select from, retain, combine and 'hierarchically place' electro-neuronal configuration and their external manifestations, many of the same 'basic overall patterns' seen eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr can be discerned in the more advanced electro-neural configuration processes, although, of course, in vastly higher level form than the old "mutation-natural selection" system.
However, because these two processes - genetic accumulation and "thought process/inner state"
Page 154 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 accumulation - operate at different "levels of logic" from one another , direct comparisons between specific genetic mechanisms and specific 'thought process' mechanisms are metaphoric at best and apparent 'similarities' between mechanisms at the two different levels are therefore to be approached with much caution.
It is only the large scale overall patterns such as "gather-add-build", "elements-combination- solution", "truth, which is singular and constant for all time", and so forth that run right through the entire, multi-level schema.
That is to say, while certain overall processes are the same at every level within the bio- ecoschema, many - perhaps most - mechanisms and processes at any given level are absolutely different from those that take place at another level and can not be compared from one level to the next.
Since, in the current "age of majority protection- seeking", more than ninety-five percent of difficulties encountered are the direct outcome of damage and loss that persons in a majority protection-seeking homeostasis engender , mechanisms involving an individual's response to the untimely loss of human life, loss of that which is required to maintain human life, and especially the threat of such loss, are most plainly seen.
As such, examination of the genetically endowed, 'same for everyone' responses to loss of human life and that which is required for the maintaining of human life - as well as the 'threat of loss' - also known as 'separation' - show
something of the details of the old "gather-add- build" mechanisms as regards the human 'behavioral' homeostasis mechanisms.
Furthermore, as avoidance of untimely loss constitutes the immediate 'focus' of the entire 'risk-anxiety' inner states matrix in human beings, we start with a look at human responses to loss itself, after which are elucidated some of the mechanisms by which the almost always preventable tragedy known as loss is avoided.
Much as the genetic building of configuration redeliberate misreports of perception on the retaining of "changed genes" that have previously been created for selection and combination into more advanced organisms, so 'thought processes' also have their generation after generation 'saving and storing' mechanisms.
In other words, alongside the development of the brain, mechanisms evolved within each member of the species for maximal retaining in the overall CNS chain of that which is gathered, added, built up, figured out, and generally 'experienced' by individual species members.
As it turns out, in the evolution of 'pre-man' leading up to man, those groups of individuals whose genetic base included mechanisms for retaining the configurations of other persons to whom they were close, configurations which would otherwise be lost, tended to have a better survival rate than those whose genetic base did not include any such retention.
Eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr in this letter , we mentioned that every individual person walks around with internal "maps" of - or adaptations to - other persons to whom they
Page 155 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 have learned they can refer for higher level protection.
Furthermore, we mentioned that "when familiar persons come in contact with one another, homeostatic behavioral mechanisms in each individual go into motion to engender the familiar combination that the persons involved have become 'addicted' to." In fact, people develop 'adaptations' to specific other persons that are held in the form of electro-neural configurations in their central nervous system.
Such other persons include those from whom they receive protection, those with whom they engage in various risk-taking, and those who they caretake.
When a person dies, persons who were close to or who were familiar with the person who died, retain within them not just the specific thoughts and memories that they have of the person who died, but also retain high level complementary 'adaptations' in connection with that person as well.
While the person was alive, the complementary adaptations to them that other persons have, served their function as part of the whole "guidance, inner states, enactment" matrix.
When a person dies, whether those close to them received protection from the person who died, had taken risks with the person, or had caretaken the person, the complementary adaptations that the loss-filled person has do not simply "go away", or simply shift to other persons.
For the adaptations themselves evolved in such a way so that they - the adaptations - operate as a continuing "conduit" into the overall, ongoing species-wide central nervous system chain; they are part of the "adding, collecting, saving, and building 'information' process" by which the particular type of "gather-add-build" system special to Homo Sapiens has always operated and on which it has always depended.
Mechanisms for collecting information in the genetic code of early evolution were not sensitive enough to operate on an hour to hour and day by day basis; only a generation to generation 'collection of information' constituted a workable basis for determining genetic adaptability.
Thus, as regards the overall information required for continuing genetic 'adaptation', losses of an individual non-man-like creature, prior to 'conscious thought process' and prior to 'cultural accumulation', did not have the sort of devastating impact that untimely loss of a human being has among Homo Sapiens and for the bio- ecosystem generally.
In the more recent "pre-man" species and in man, unlike other animals, mechanisms for collecting the vast majority of the vitally important adaptive information do operate on an hour to hour and day by day basis, and consequently, over the last several million years or so, the more highly organized the "pre-man" individual's high level neuronal structure became, the more the untimely loss of an individual creature became - for nearby persons, for tribe, for species, and for bio-ecosystem - a survival problem of the first magnitude.
Page 156 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 As such, over the eons, those 'pre-man' individuals and species that evolved with mechanisms specifically designed to retain and transmit some of the unique configuration of a lost person by means of inner states - despite the untimely death of a person carrying such configuration - and evolved with mechanisms by which circumstances producing untimely loss were regularly solved, stood a better chance of survival over time.
Thus, an entire "response to loss" homeostasis evolved in humans, including 'automatic' mechanisms - common to everyone - by which loss-filled persons operate, and including cognitive enactments by above parties operating in complement with a bereaved person and their loss-related 'automatics'.
In all this, we must briefly remind the reader that these 'behavioral mechanisms' evolved under the conditions obtaining on the planet during the time of the genetically formative period and those conditions remained in force during the first ninety thousand years of man's existence as well.
As the conditions obtaining at that time were almost invariably principled, the 'automatic' portions of various 'retention' and 'solution' sequences, and the cognitive and decision portions of those sequences, worked well together to turn events generally, especially pain-producing ones, towards increased overall adaptability and better , 'thicker', more satisfying, and more secure ongoing survival.
In contemporary times, however, wherein the high level of persons generally - especially
persons at higher levels of various hierarchies - is not held by principle, the 'automatic', genetically endowed portions of such sequences remain unchanged but the cognitive portions of the sequences go terribly awry.
As a result, various genetically endowed, automatic 'behavioral responses' to various tragedies, which originally evolved such that there was continuation towards spectacular solution, continue, in the current unprincipled general situation, into horror , numbness, and disaster instead.
The genetically endowed mechanisms that go into motion in a person when the person undergoes the loss of someone close to them include mechanisms by which the person 'automatically' - through various 'search', 'retrieval', recall, and 'recreation' processes - brings forth much of the unique configuration of the person who died and "talks" those configurations "into" the overall CNS chain.
Through this and other enactments, some important elements of otherwise lost unique configurations are retained.
Other mechanisms allow for a person to be able to, internally , accurately 'sort out' and 'reintegrate' much that had been held by the person who died, but it is to be borne in mind that the ability to do so in the wake of serious and unexpected loss requires enormous internal gridwork as well as a certain amount of pain- absorbing protection from above.
Finally, in situations wherein there is little protection generally available, and especially when there is enormous pain and anxiety being
Page 157 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 'carried forward' by the loss-filled person, then, in this sort of case, 'automatic' mechanisms go into motion wherein the complementary adaptations to the lost person that the loss-filled person has within them tend to 'rigidify' (strongly rigidify, but not completely, of course) into the person's own adaptations.
All these responses served a decisive "retrieval and continuing build-up of information" survival function for man in the wild, and for the entire bio-ecosystem.
As the result of several million years of 'pre-man' evolution and as part of the requirements of a high level neural system, some combination of all these 'behavioral' responses to loss came to be 'built-into' the genetically endowed behavioral system of humans.
As such, these mostly 'automatic' responses operated as part of an overall homeostasis wherein the advent of an untimely or preventable loss of a Homo Sapiens or of that which is required for healthy human life, set in motion sequences that were likely to lead to the overall solution to whatever caused the loss- producing difficulty and, as previously mentioned, in this way became a decisive portion of the engenderment of a finer and finer adaptation over months, years, and generations.
The above mentioned 'responses' to loss - that is, transmission into the overall CNS chain; reintegration within the loss-filled person; and rigidification by the loss-filled person - constitute the 'automatic', 'retrieval' 'protection- gathering' portions of the overall "response to loss homeostasis".
These 'automatic' responses evolved in the (obviously) genetically formative situation, wherein the high level of tribes of 'pre-man' and man was continually held by principle.
As such, another set of responses - this time, responses enacted using the cognitive portion of judgment - developed alongside the 'automatic' ones of loss-stricken persons.
Indeed, cognition evolved specifically to solve otherwise loss-producing and pain-producing problems that came 'barreling' up the hierarchy and as such, these 'cognitive' 'caretaking' responses to loss-stricken persons by above figures were also a portion of the overall 'response to loss' homeostasis.
It can be seen that when a person is stricken by the untimely loss of someone to whom they were close in some complementary way, such a person is suddenly in the position of being requiring of an especially large amount of principled protection of various sorts.
Firstly, the complementary, proximate inflow of inner states that used to come directly from the lost person is no longer available, leaving the person with the often frightening 'sense' that some sort of cherished feeling is 'gone'.
Additionally, the "maps" that the person has of the lost person, may, to some degree, no longer provide the security and vitality that is a vital part of the person's inner states homeostasis, although the "maps" themselves, that is, the complementary adaptations within the loss-filled person do, to a greater or lesser degree, remain.
Page 158 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Second, much of the 'carried forward' configurations contain - alongside various high level configuration - extremely vital 'clues' to the nature of, and clues to the solution to, pain- producing problems.
Such 'clues' come in the form of an awareness of painful circumstances that the now dead person had while they were alive being transferred to loss-stricken persons; and in the form of 'clues' regarding the nature of the particular preventable circumstance that caused the untimely loss.
While the central nervous system of Homo Sapiens was originally designed to, more or less 'automatically', integrate such anxiety-producing 'clues' and, combining them with other things, transform them into overall solution, it must be borne in mind that in order for this process to take place 'automatically', so to speak, the high level of the hierarchies that are present must be held by principle.
And thirdly, if the loss was untimely - and preventable, as is in fact the case as much as ninety-five percent of the time in contemporary society - there is a large-scale 'scream of pain' that floods loss-stricken persons, an absolutely unmistakable 'signal', 'emanating', so to speak, from the highest level patterns in this world, that there is an extremely serious, quite dangerous, and thoroughly solvable problem, one that makes the retention of good 'maps' of the survival of other persons frighteningly and entirely unnecessarily more precarious.
As such, a portion, perhaps a major portion, of the 'information' 'carried forward' in the wake of
untimely or preventable loss, information that is vitally required for overall Homo Sapiens adaptation, is accompanied by a certain amount of sheer pain to be absorbed by the CNS chain at large and to therein be combined with available protection, further risk, building, and vitality - the entire 'crucible' combining into some portion of an overall, permanent solution.
In sum, it can be seen that, in persons who have undergone the loss of a close person, or have been affected by the severe loss of accumulations and advancements that are required for the maintenance of human life, genetically endowed 'automatic' mechanisms go into motion within the loss-filled person to 'retrieve' and 'regain' much of what would otherwise be lost.
Such responses require a good deal of complementary protection of various specific kinds from above parties in order for there to be increased survival altogether .
If principled complementary responses from above parties are not available - although they were almost always available in the genetically formative situation - then there is 'rigidification' of 'carried forward' configurations rather than advancement built from configurations.
If cognitive and decision-related responses of above parties are unprincipled, then disaster ensues.
It is to be borne in mind that serious damage and all untimely loss constitutes an absolute negative effect on human existence and the bio- ecosystem generally.
Page 159 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 Although such losses, when handled in a principled way, create an internal organization whereby advancement can be created, untimely loss, no matter how much is retrieved, always produces some amount of permanent damage - which will never be fully repaired.
Furthermore, there are other ways that advancements occur, besides in conjunction with untimely loss; untimely loss is not required for the advancements that humans live by and is, especially in an unprincipled situation, an unlikely proposition in that regard.
As such, humans have evolved with genetically endowed, built-in behavioral systems, specifically designed to treat every loss as a catastrophe, for as regards the bio-ecosystem and the species at large, every untimely loss is a catastrophe.
As such, when 'retrieval' and advancement mechanisms are working properly, the always catastrophic nature of an untimely loss is followed by a continuation wherein the particular loss-producing problem that caused the loss is solved such that these sort of losses do not happen in the future.
For the individual, overall solution constitutes an indication that the internal 'maps' of protection that were thrown into chaos return, as strong as or stronger than ever; that is, that the person can engage in other powerful 'attachments' - can create within themselves new, powerful 'adaptations' to other people - with the strong knowledge that the sort of thing that caused the loss previously is not likely to happen again.
When the overall problem that caused the loss is, in fact, solved, and solved for all time, then the "maps", that the loss-stricken person had in connection with the dead person, and the 'inner states' that derived from those "maps" return with a sense of certainty more powerful than before, keeping in mind that untimely loss always produces some amount of irreparable damage.
(Of course, if a preventable loss is presented as 'inevitable', and is presented as the result of an 'eternal', 'unsolvable' difficulty, then the 'maps' or 'adaptations' 'rigidify', without producing the accustomed inner states, and a 'sense of certainty' recedes drastically).
For the overall bio-ecosystem, advancement type solution to loss-producing problems results in a finer and finer 'adaptation' for its highest level organism - every Homo Sapiens individual - and in this way, the bio-ecosystem continues to engender the creation and organization of 'configuration' at an ever higher, more advanced level.
In all this, it can be seen that, while unnecessary and terrible damages and untimely losses do come about, there are basic, genetically endowed mechanisms within the central nervous system of every individual, designed to, in an ongoing manner, solve such problems in advance, designed to inform of the extremely unnecessary nature of an untimely loss, and designed to 'retrieve', hold, and transfer into the CNS chain some of the 'configuration' that would otherwise be lost.
Page 160 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 In the genetically formative situation of 'pre- man' and man, these mechanisms operated so as to retrieve what could be retrieved in the event of untimely and preventable losses - and the unnecessary, oftimes permanent, and most painful damages associated with them - and operated such that enormously vital 'anxiety type' "'clues' to the possibility of future loss" would become known within the CNS chain at large.
It can easily be seen that when the high level of any tribe was firmly held by persons operating within an unmistakably principled homeostasis, genetically endowed, internal mechanisms within human beings operated so as to 'channel' the inner states that constitute human response to loss into better and better 'adaptation' - that is, in the overall, better "maps", better and more accurate cognitive processes, and previously unheard of, entirely workable, permanent solutions.
While genetically endowed, internal human responses to loss provide massive, extremely powerful, and decisively vital "lower level elements" - and 'criteria clues' as well - for human thought processes to work with and select from, and without which, in a loss-filled situation, there can be no advancement, adaptation, or survival; when the high level throughout a hierarchy is not held by principle, that is, when a "deliberate misreport of perception-web" type of formulation constitutes the predominating 'frame of reference', those same responses to loss are often 'channeled' directly into an increasingly and 'escalatingly' loss-filled continuation.
In a principled overall situation, genetically endowed, internal human responses to serious damage and loss operate so as to engender less loss and less damage as time goes on.
In an unprincipled overall situation, those same genetically endowed, internal human responses to serious damage and loss 'channel' the inner states engendered in such a way that, instead of less damage in the future, there is more damage and loss as time goes on - in escalating fashion.
Principled reception of human responses to loss engender overall solution to loss-producing problems; unprincipled 'reception' of or 'reaction' to human responses to loss operate to 'rigidify' (strongly rigidify, but not completely so) and 'escalate' the loss-producing situation.
The great horrors presented by the terrible losses that persons have absorbed - and do currently absorb - do not derive from the genetically endowed human responses to tragedy; such genetically endowed responses constitute a major portion of the solution to horror-producing problems.
Only when the internally controllable decisions of influential individuals - that is to say, in the main, the internally controllable decisions of above parties - are unprincipled, do the inner states that are 'automatically' engendered by loss become 'channeled' into increasingly loss-filled continuations.
In the genetically formative situation, during which these responses were built and designed, the possibility that high levels of hierarchy of a tribe would ever develop an unprincipled 'frame
Page 161 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 of reference' did not arise in any tribe that survived over time.
For this reason, 'pre-man' and man's genetically endowed responses to loss in the wild worked powerfully and unequivocally, over a million year time period, towards accumulating and building increasingly higher levels of protective configuration, first genetic configuration, and later, electro-neural configuration.
In that the untimely and preventable loss of an individual Homo Sapiens has such a devastating impact upon the overall Homo Sapiens central nervous system chain, it is not surprising that "clues to the possibility of future loss", a condition often referred to as 'separation', engenders the single most powerful 'set' of anxiety inner states known to man, alongside the extremely 'sharp' cognitive organization, the 'terror', and the desperate passion that such separation-related inner states are famous for.
As such, it is under the conditions of 'separation' - that is to say, under the conditions of an individual receiving stimulus from the external world consisting of 'clues to the possibility of future loss' - that much of the previously mentioned overall 'advancement pattern' can be especially clearly seen in the 'behavior' of humans.
While responses to loss provide the overall CNS chain with some vital 'clues to the possibility of future damages', the overall process by which 'clues to danger' are created, selected from, combined, formulated, and enacted towards the solution to otherwise loss-producing difficulties can more clearly be seen in the responses of
humans to their being separated from close persons in such a way that indicates the possibility or 'threat' of loss - or the 'threat' of separation.
Given that loss can only be avoided when there is solution in advance, it can be seen that the anxiety system evolved such that clues were generated in advance of a loss coming to pass.
In humans, the entire anxiety matrix within an individual is designed such that when clues to the possibility of future loss present, such clues stimulate within the person a flow of bio- chemicals specifically stimulating emotional and intellectual organization such that cognition is mobilized.
As such, the presence of risk of possible future loss further engenders within an individual a wide variety of specific ideas, memories, 'senses', 'hunches', and 'flashes' about the nature of the avertable loss and about possible routes to solving the problem in advance of an otherwise impending devastation.
Some pages back, we mentioned the process whereby the evolutionary genetic "mutation- natural selection" system engendered 'adaptation' ever closer to the overall, high level DNA pattern criteria, and, as such, engendered ever more advanced configuration.
While the more advanced 'thought process' methodology for individual Homo Sapiens, which operates in the same direction, lacks some of the apparently 'random' and 'one-in-a-million' features of the eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr method of biological advancement - that is, genetic change and 'mutation' - and lacks
Page 162 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 the enormous 'fatality' and 'error' rate that goes with it, an obviously spectacular advancement to say the least, something of the 'cast a wide net' portion of the eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr method remains.
It is for this reason that we say that the various forms that anxiety manifests itself in - i.e.
emotional pain, fear, anger, passion, and so forth - "casts a wide but quite specific net".
Each of these internal responses to "clues to the possibility of future loss" is engendered, in part, by a matrix of emotional and intellectual organization wherein the problem that might cause that possible future loss is solved in advance, thereby averting the future loss.
In man, it is especially the ideas of one sort or another that occur to a person when such 'clues' to the possibility of future loss present, that constitute much of the key building blocks that engender accurate assessment and timely solution.
The 'fears' that people feel - the anxiety inner states that are surging through them - are the body's response to the 'clues' that are coming in from the world at large that the possibility of imminent loss is present.
As regards the distinction between a loss itself, and 'fear' in connection with that possible outcome, it must be noted that while a person may 'fear' that a damaging outcome will come about, the fear itself, that is, the physical substance - in part, anxiety biochemicals coursing through the person's body - is a response to some sort of specific clue that the person has
received that an outcome of loss will come about if the problem that could cause the loss is not solved and the loss therein averted - again, averted in advance.
Internal responses to 'clue stimulus' of this nature in the environment include 'thick' 'anxiety type' physiological, emotional, and intellectual organization, a wide but quite specific variety of ideas and thoughts, various high level mathematical organizations resulting from specific 'personality' combinations between people, out-of-the-blue factors, and a variety of other things.
It can be seen that the ideas that people get about the clues to the possibility of impending loss can be used as a portion of a construction of an accurate assessment and solution, again, in advance of the possible loss, so as to avert it.
Because the workable solution to be found, by the very nature of DNA and the forces of physics that created it, must be found at a level above the level that the problem presents, the ideas that a person has about a solution to the impending difficulties, must be broad, seemingly vague, and often, even appear to be larger than the possible impending loss.
Thus, the entire range of effects that 'clues' to the possibility of impending loss have on a person, is designed such that the higher level problem can be figured out, including the truth of the matter being accurately ascertained, and a solution - perhaps a first time and for all time solution - created.
For humans, responses to danger, even in the eardeliberate misreports of perceptiont stages of
Page 163 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 development, involve finding solution at a higher level than that at which the problem presents.
For example, in the genetically formative situation, as mentioned in an early section of this letter, the primary cause of death of babies and young children in a tribe was the various "exposure" problems, particularly the problem of predation by other species.
Those babies whose genetic makeup included an 'automatic', genetically arranged recognition of such stimulus as strangeness, suddenness, 'looming', animals, the dark, the 'visual cliff', and being alone - and recognized them as 'automatic' clues to danger - survived.
Those babies who were born without genetically endowed arrangements whereby they would automatically respond to these clues to danger by taking corrective action did not survive.
Without these genetically endowed, 'automatic' 'low level' 'childhood fears', pre-man and Homo Sapiens did not survive in the wild.
Furthermore, the responses to such clues that the young 'automatically' enact also operate at a higher level than that at which the problem itself presents.
For it has been decisively shown that a baby or young child automatically 'reacts' to clues to danger neither by escape nor 'attack'; rather the child finds a higher level solution, namely, the child moves into immediate physical proximity to their primary attachment figure, which is usually - but not always - their mother.
Indeed, this is even the case when the source of the stimulus of danger or damage is emanating from the attachment figure themself.
That is, the genetically endowed "response to danger" by human babies and young children operates on the 'presumption' that the solution to danger is to be found at a higher level than the one at which they are currently operating.
In short, when low level 'clues to danger' from the world at large stimulate a baby's central nervous system, then the continuation within the baby that prevails above all others is neither escape nor 'defence' nor attack; rather, as arranged through evolution, the baby and young child's primary solution is physical, proximate, attachment to protection.
In the case of a baby or a young child, above figures are, as a matter of the child's genetically endowed, structural, same for everyone understanding, pre-supposed to provide 'higher level solution'.
As internal cognitive "gridwork" is built, older children learn to discern medium level clues - taking vastly more into account than simple, genetically arranged 'reactions'.
They become very sharp with small local tasks and are particularly frightened by and 'sensitive' to clues to an outcome of loss through 'disbursement'.
Finally, as the person passes the age of thirteen or fourteen, and especially after they reach twenty-one, clues to danger involve a highly sophisticated, many layered matrix of emotion, thought, memories, out-of-the-blue factors, and
Page 164 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 other things - all of which serve as an early stage of the process by which solution is found.
While with babies, the "higher level solution" that is found is external to the child, namely 'mother', with teenagers to some degree, but especially with adults, the "higher level solution" includes, as a decisive portion, solutions created by the person's own internal, personally built "gridwork".
As can be seen, both in regard to the cognitive clues one must 'manually' and painstakingly assemble, as well as regards 'automatic' reactions within human thought process, lower level elements are created and assembled towards the engenderment of more advanced solution.
While these 'elements' - "disassociated" thoughts, ideas, already known information, 'fears', 'flashes', 'hunches', memories, 'feelings' and so forth - appear in highly various forms and in large volume, in order for them to actually be employed towards the creation of solution, overall criteria for selection and combination must be present.
As we have seen, for Homo Sapiens in particular, a decisive portion of the criteria for such selection and combination and for the sort of advancements required is "that which will solve otherwise loss-producing problems".
While there are other criteria involved in the selection and combination process, when the criteria regarding the retrieval and retaining of otherwise lost configuration and regarding ongoing, higher level solution to otherwise loss- producing difficulties is not met, there can be no survival.
"Maps" - accurate maps - of the survival of that which one creates and caretakes are an important 'element' in the internal organization required for the creation of long-term solution.
In short, retrieval of what would otherwise be lost, and the stemming and halting of losses and the damage that a loss has already produced, must be properly handled in order for other criteria to be usefully approached.
Some of the advancements that were produced through "thought process" type of accumulation and crystallization during "food gathering" times, that is, during the first 90,000 years of Homo Sapiens's existence, included such things as the ability to control fire, increasingly advanced shelter arrangements, increasingly organized verbal language, scientific knowledge regarding the properties of water, the creation, retaining, and long-term preservation of human-created extra-somatic memory, a science of long-term meteorological and other sorts of prediction and so forth.
Each of these man-made, 'thought process' type of advances brought solution to one or another difficulty or otherwise loss-producing problem that a tribe of Homo Sapiens in the wild encountered.
While the 'thought process' that was employed by man in the wild worked well to produce a great multitude of such solutions, another entire level of advancement was continually thwarted by the problem of the physical transience inherent in nomadic living.
The lack of availability of a single constant base in which to carefully build seemingly
Page 165 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 disassociated ideas - that is, the lack of an environment of good protection from the dangers of exposure - precluded the possibility of an entirely higher level advance beyond those mentioned above.
Furthermore, because of the dangers inherent in "experimenting" with hithertofore unknown possibilities without the protection of stable location, without the enormous benefits of the vast inner states combinations wrought by a local population numbering in the thousands or millions, and without a large "surplus" of protection, man was prevented from creating more than could be physically carried or stored, more or less in the open.
In this regard, it can be seen that certain types of creation and gathering of 'elements' required for more advanced solving of the problems of daily life for the first ninety thousand years of man's existence were not available to man as an exposed creature - even though people were capable of solving them if a stable base, a larger population, and a 'surplus' of protections could somehow be created and put together.
There are certain sorts of things - as illustrated in the example of genetically endowed fears in young children given above - that cannot be figured out through experience.
Indeed, while adults in the wild were able to make enormous use of 'thought process' and 'observational' figuring, 'figuring something out' by a "trial and error" enactment process was generally impractical, as errors in a completely exposed situation would be generally likely to lead to death, therefore reducing the possibility
that what was learned would in fact be used to advantage in the future.
A way had to be found whereby grave errors could be made but where such errors could be corrected and learned from BEFORE any serious damage or losses ensued or escalated.
Many of the advances of food gathering society were selected from, combined, and crystallized into "early farming societies" primarily in order to create a general situation wherein the sort of higher level advances that were impossible among exposed nomadic people could, in fact, be made.
The great advance to organized, stable, 'surplus'- laden, well protected farming societies that was attained beginning about twelve thousand years ago, constituted a new, altogether higher level environmental structure for Homo Sapiens life than had previously existed.
This new, fantastically more advanced mode of Homo Sapiens existence afforded an end to the vast majority of untimely loss that food gathering man had been subject to, and the large collections of persons, with wide-spread 'specialization' of skill, massive accumulation of extra-somatic memory, huge combinations of inner states, and advanced cognitive development made possible a "thickness" of protection, passion, and vitality such as had been dreamed of by people everywhere for as much as ninety thousand years.
For the first three thousand years or so of farming society's existence - that is, from about 12,000 years ago to about 9,000 years ago - most of the trials, problems, and difficulties of ninety
Page 166 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 thousand years of nomadic existence were solved beyond even the wildest imagination of eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr food gathering peoples - loss due simply to exposure was now preventable; food and shelter were plentiful and constantly available; the immediately available population grew to sizes that allowed for a never before seen and most powerful high level 'inner states' combination; and, most important, many sorts of "experimental" enactments which would previously have resulted in instant death for any tribe that attempted them could be, in the new, highly protected situation, tried with good control over possible damage and any required repairs.
A much higher level of 'configuration' was created, selected from, retained, combined, crystallized, and built upon.
Extra-somatic memory in the form of the written word in particular and engineering and artwork in general grew to previously unbedeliberate misreport of perceptionvable proportions, doubling, tripling, quadrupling the capacity and efficiency of the already astoundingly advanced human brain.
In all this it can be seen that from 'quarks' are built atoms, and from atoms are built genes, and upon genes is built 'thought process', and upon thought process is built "trial and error" - each configuration originally formed as a high level process, and later becoming an absolutely fundamental lower level 'element' in the next, previously unseen higher level process.
Again, "the 'chain' of evolution, over four billion years time, and through several, full scale advances in 'level', is unbroken" - so far - and continues on to ever thicker, more secure, more satisfying, more passionate, more attractive, and generally more advanced configuration, all the while reaching ever closer to the overall high level bio-ecosystemic pattern criteria.
Unfortunately, certain properties of the new, more advanced 'trial and error' process made possible a special, previously unanticipated situation.
While the new, 'farming society' circumstances worked extremely well for several thousand years, certain aspects of the whole trial and error process became skewed - as the result of some obviously stupid, rotten, and entirely unnecessary decisions - in such a way wherein increasingly large populations of persons, especially those higher in hierarchies, became 'derailed' onto a majority protection-seeking anxiety tuning track, as mentioned eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr .
At a certain point, new sorts of enactments were tried, were found to be in error, and in fact, were the type of error that specifically destroyed the very correction mechanism - the cognition portion of an individual's judgment system - that was specifically designed through evolution to correct errors.
Although this sort of error is dangerous in and of itself, it is entirely correctable.
However , decisions were instead made to escalate and rigidify the crippling of the
Page 167 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 cognitive abilities of other persons rather than to correct the situation.
The fundamental difficulty was neither the new, 'large-scale' of things nor the ability to make decisions, both of which are fully within the criteria for overall survival.
The fundamental difficulty was the specific decisions that were made and that continued to be made to avoid the pain absorption required for the correction of errors and the subsequent decisions to maintain and reinforce the majority protection-seeking homeostasis therein escalated - catastrophically destroying the entire basis by which the whole new, more advanced system was created.
It must be mentioned that the term error refers to an enactment that leads to an unintended and damaging outcome, wherein the pain-absorption and expenditure required for the necessary repair of such damage is properly handled.
Errors of this nature, and the required repairs, were part and parcel of the more advanced, settled, farming society system.
However, decisions to rigidify a continuation wherein cognition, that is, the "error-correction mechanism", is seriously damaged, necessarily involve lying about what one understands and involve an awareness of the deadening outcome of one's enactments, and for this reason do not fall under the category of error.
The new, large-scale societies well protected the ability to make certain sorts of errors without producing the terrible damages and losses of an eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr day.
However, at a certain point, instead of the damage and loss stemming from errors that were made being absorbed within the overall tribal CNS chain towards overall solution, the presence of large communities, a 'surplus' of protection, and other extremely beneficial factors unfortunately allowed for damage to be "pushed" 'downwards' in the hierarchy or 'outwards' towards other hierarchies through the various unprincipled enactments described in eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr sections.
The enactment of this sort of 'slamming down' of pain by persons constituted the beginnings of a never before seen deprinciplization sequence, affecting large numbers of people.
Such an escalating deprinciplization was virtually impossible under the genetically formative and "food gathering" circumstances and should have been, and could have been, made near impossible in the new situation as well.
The enormously beneficial increase in scale was handled quite properly for a long time, but, as the result of some very rotten and entirely unnecessary decisions being reinforced - decisions that never should have been made, never should have been carried through, and never should have been allowed to be carried through - the new situation went into a dangerous, extremely painful, hugely costly, and entirely unnecessary continuation.
In the genetically formative situation of mobile tribes of twenty to two hundred persons it was generally self-evident that a majority protection- seeking homeostasis being influential in a tribe's 'frame of reference' would have resulted in the
Page 168 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 rapid decline of the entire tribe, and even the possibility of its total destruction.
Humans were - and, of course, are - born knowing, as a matter of genetically endowed, same for everyone understanding, that, referring to a metaphor explained eardeliberate misreport of perceptionr, when one "blows it with the angels", that is, in modern day terms, when one destroys a caretaking balance, close things, big things, die rapidly.
For this reason, the possibility for unprincipled hierarchical relations such as have been in force for much of the past 9,000 years did not arise under previous circumstances, and a majority protection-seeking homeostasis remained a rare, temporary , obviously tragic, low level 'behavioral' anomaly throughout the several million year history of 'pre-man' and man in the wild.
It is only in the last 9,000 years that such criteria as is required for general survival has been continually crushed out of large portions of the human judgment system.
Unlike previous "food gathering" days, in the 'large-scale arrangement gone awry' a person who rigidified outcomes that damaged cognition - that is, that damaged the "error correction mechanism" - was still able to physically survive for the moment, but in a homeostasis of wreaking increasing destruction, albeit oftimes some steps removed.
Under these conditions of decreasing availability of cognitive facilities generally, high level criteria for ongoing advancement and survival - and even such obvious criteria factors such as
truth itself - came to be deliberate misreported perception about and allegedly 'discounted', while the various "vacuum" methods described in some detail in part three and part five of this letter came into use for the first time.
Certain sorts of vociferous arguments, the likes of which continue to echo through every household on the planet to this day, first came into existence.
In all this, it is, of course, never to be forgotten that the conscious, internally controllable, internal, measurable, changeable, personally accountable decisions - then and now - operate as a decisive factor in any continuation of this nature, one way or the other .
When the decisions are sound ones, as they were throughout the ninety thousand years of food gathering society and for the first three thousand years or so of the much more advanced farming societies, things go spectacularly well for all concerned.
When the decisions are rotten, ugly, bloodthirsty, and - most importantly - when decisions or circumstances of the present or past are deliberate misreported perception about, things go horribly for most people in the short run, and lead towards extinction for everyone in the overall.
It is obvious that the recent derailment of nine thousand years ago which has continued on to - but not necessarily beyond - the present day, was an extraordinary and previously unpredicted and unprecedented occurrence.
Page 169 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
 It was and is entirely outside of any bio- ecosystemic homeostasis and should have been stopped in its tracks a long time ago.
Although we have decided not to include here the aforementioned sections entitled 'Fear of Cognition - Escalation', and 'Reprinciplization', it is clear that one decisive element involved in any reprinciplization includes a 'tracing back' through various 'events' and memories of many kinds such that additional accurate information from many sources is gained, and in combination with other things, is used toward the assembly of accurate, consistent, and internally examinable high level conclusions.
All in all, it is most obvious that the derailment remains entirely correctable to this day - with minimal, perhaps even no further damage and loss.
While it is most unfortunate, and most obvious, that the correction may not come, it is also quite obvious that a permanent, extremely 'self- perpetuating' (strongly self-perpetuating, indeed, almost completely so) entirely principled, survival homeostasis has been entirely within the realm of possibility throughout the last nine thousand years - although it is perhaps a stronger possibility at this time than at most other times in recent millennia.
Schema Volume II; Part IV; Chapter Eleven - Paradigm from California, 1983 to 1992 Page 802 Letter To A Responsible Party - Paradigm From California, Volume II
Schema, Farming Society, Current Professional Homeostasis, Reply, written in 1985
Jettison Sequence, Continuation/Prologue, and summaries of Fear of Cognition and Replincipalization, written in 1986
First edition dated December 1, 1986, Slightly Revised edition dated April 27, 1987.
Copies to 480 recipients posted May 11, 1987 ( Neil Miller
This printing is unedited; and was printed on April 10, 1996 --- Paradigm From California ( 1978-1994 by Neil Miller, All rights reserved.
Correspondence: Neil Miller , Environment For Cognitive Development P.O.
Box 31035, San Francisco, California 94131 Voice Msg./Fax: 415-282-6859
- 725 -
Page 170 of 145 printed 11/26/2003 -- Letter to a Responsible Party – April 29, 1987 - © Neil Robert Miller imaginenine.com
