Plutarch : [The lives] / translated by John Langhorne, and W. Langhorne.Plutarch.London : A. J. Valpy, 1831-1832.http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256Public Domain, Google-digitizedhttp://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-googleWe have determined this work to be in the public domain, meaning that it is not subject to copyright. Users are free to copy, use, and redistribute the work in part or in whole. It is possible that current copyright holders, heirs or the estate of the authors of individual portions of the work, such as illustrations or photographs, assert copyrights over these portions. Depending on the nature of subsequent use that is made, additional rights may need to be obtained independently of anything we can address. The digital images and OCR of this work were produced by Google, Inc. (indicated by a watermark on each page in the PageTurner). Google requests that the images and OCR not be re-hosted, redistributed or used commercially. The images are provided for educational, scholarly, non-commercial purposes.?Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?i.i;r-dlson, M 53?Ob-1494If"!1'II:!' i!II I I1LbEbbi<Lh50b9??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?Madison, Wi ^,00-1494??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.-?----THANSLATED BYJOHN LANGHORNE, D. D.ANDWILLIAM LANGHORNE, M.A.VOL. VII.LONDON:PRINTED BY A. J. VALPY, M.A.AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.1832.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?1853??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?111 ash. .YsiCONTENTSTHE SEVENTH VOLUME.THE LIVES.PAGEAntony ....... 1Demetrius and Antony compared . . . .84Dion 89Marcus Brutus ...... 141Dion and Brutus compared .... 19$Artaxerxes ....... 198Aratus . . . . . . .283-Oalba 289>Otho 320??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ILLUSTRATIONSTOTHE SEVENTH VOLUME.PACEHead of Antony ...... 1-- Dion . . . . . .89-- Marcus Brutus ..... 141-- Artaxerxes ..... 198-- Aratus . . . . . .233-- Galba 289-- Otho 320??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH'S LIVES.ANTONY.THe grandfather of Marc Antony was Antony the ora-tor, who followed the faction of Sylla, and was put todeath by Marius. His father was Antony, surnamedthe Cretan, a man of no figure or consequence in thepolitical world, but distinguished for his integrity, bene-volence, and liberality; of which the following littlecircumstance is a sufficient proof. His fortune was notlarge; and his wife, therefore, very prudently laid somerestraint on his munificent disposition. An acquaint-ance of his, who was under some pecuniary difficulties,applied to him for assistance. Antony, having no mo-ney at command, ordered his boy to bring him a silverbasin full of water, under a pretence of shaving. Afterthe boy was dismissed, he gave the basin to his friend,and bade him make what use of it be thought proper.The disappearance of the basin occasioned no smallcommotion in the family; and Antony finding his wifeprepared to take a severe account of the servants,begged her pardon, and told her the truth.His wife's name was Julia. She was of the familyef the Caesars, and a woman of distinguished merit andmodesty. Under her auspices Marc Antony receivedPLUT. VoL. VII. Afa??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?2PLUTARCH.his education, when, after the death of his father, shemarried Cornelius Lentulus, whom Cicero put to deathfor engaging in the conspiracy of Catiline. This wasthe origin of that lasting enmity which subsisted be-tween Cicero and Antony. The latter affirmed thathis mother J ulia was even obliged to beg the body ofCicero's wife, for interment. But this is not true ; fornone of those who suffered on the same occasion, underCicero, were refused this privilege. Antony was en-gaging in his person, and was unfortunate enough tofall into the good graces and friendship of Curio, aman who was devoted to every species of licentious-ness, and who, to render Antony the more dependenton him, led him into all the excesses of indulging inwine and revelry, and all the expenses that such indul-gences are attended with. Of course, he was soondeeply involved in debt, and owed at least two hun-dred and fifty talents, while he was a very young man.Curio was bound for the payment of this money; andhis father being informed of it, banished Antony fromhis house. Thus dismissed, he attached himself toClodius, that pestilent and audacious tribune, whothrew the state into such dreadful disorder; till, wearyof his mad measures, and fearful of his opponents, hepassed into Greece, where he employed himself inmilitary exercises, and the study of eloquence. TheAsiatic style was then much in vogue, and Antony fellnaturally into it; for it was correspondent with hismanners, which were vain, pompous, insolent, and as-suming.In Greece he received an invitation from Gabiniusthe proconsul, to make a campaign with him in Syria.This invitation he refused to accept as a private man;but being appointed to the command of the cavalry, heattended him. His first operation was against Aristo-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY. 3bulus, who had excited the Jews to revolt. He was thefirst who scaled the wall; aDd this he did in the highestpart. He drove Aristobulus from all his forts; and,afterwards, with a handful of men, defeated his nume-rous army in a pitched battle. Most of the enemywere slain, and Aristobulus and his son were takenprisoners. On the conclusion of this war, Gabiniuswas solicited by Ptolemy to carry his arms into Egypt,and restore him to his kingdom. The reward of thisservice was to be ten thousand talents. Most of theofficers disapproved of the expedition; and Gabiniushimself did not readily enter into it, though the moneypleaded strongly in its behalf. Antony, however, am-bitious of great enterprises, and vain of gratifying asuppliant king, used every means to draw Gabiniusinto the service, and prevailed. It was the generalopinion that the march to Pelusium was more dange-rous than the war that was to follow: for they were topass over a sandy and unwatered country, by the filthymarsh of Serbonis, whose stagnant ooze the Egyptianscall the exhalations of Typhon; though it is probablyno more than the drainings of the Red Sea, which isthere separated from the Mediterranean only by asmall neck of land.Antony being ordered thither with the cavalry, notonly seized the straits, but took the large city of Pelu-sium, and made the garrison prisoners. By this ope-ration he at once opened a secure passage for the army,and a fair prospect of victory for their general. Thesame love of glory which was so serviceable to hisown party, was, on this occasion, advantageous to theenemy; for when Ptolemy entered Pelusium, in therage of revenge, he would have put the citizens todeath, but Antony resolutely opposed it, and preventedhim from executing his horrid purpose. In the several??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?4-PLUTARCH.actions where he was concerned, he gave distinguishedproofs of his conduct and valor; hut especially in thatmanoeuvre where, by wheeling about and attacking theenemy in the rear, he enabled those who charged infront to gain a complete victory: for this action he re-ceived suitable honors and rewards.His humane care of the body of Archelaus, who fellin the battle, was taken notice of even by the commonmen. He had been his intimate friend, and connectedwith him in the rights of hospitality; and though hewas obliged, by his duty, to oppose him in the field,he no sooner heard that he had fallen than he orderedsearch to be made for his body, and interred it withregal magnificence. This conduct made him respectedin Alexandria, and admired by the Romans.Antony had a noble dignity of countenance, a grace-ful length of beard, a large forehead, an aquiline nose;and, on the whole, the same manly aspect that we seein the pictures and statues of Hercules. There was,indeed, an ancient tradition that his family was de-scended from Hercules, by a son of his called Anteon;and it was no wonder if Antony sought to confirm thisopinion, by affecting to resemble him in his air and hisdress. Thus, when he appeared in public, he worehis vest girt on the hips, a large sword, and over all acoarse mantle. That kind of conduct, which wouldseem disagreeable to others, rendered him the darlingof the army. He talked with the soldiers in their ownswaggering and ribald strain, ate and drank with themin public, and would stand to take his victuals at theircommon table. He was pleasant on the subject of hisamours, ready in assisting the intrigues of others, andeasy under the raillery to which he was subjectedby his own. His liberality to the soldiers, and to hisfriends, was the first foundation of his advancement,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.and continued to support him in that power which hewas otherwise weakening by a thousand irregularities.One instance of his liberality I must mention : he hadordered two hundred and fifty thousand drachmas(which the Romans call decies) to be given to one ofhis friends. His steward, who was startled at the ex-travagance of the sum, laid the silver in a heap, thathe might see it as he passed. He saw it, and inquiredwhat it was for. 'It is the sum,' answered the steward,'that you ordered for a present.' Antony perceivedhis envious design, and, to mortify him still more, saidcoolly, 'I really thought the sum would have madea better figure. It is too little: let it be doubled.'1This, however, was in the latter part of his life.Rome was divided into two parties. Pompey waswith the senate. The people were for bringing Caesarwith his army out of Gaul. Curio, the friend of An-tony, who had changed sides, and joined Caesar,brought Antony likewise over to his interest. Theinfluence he had obtained by his eloquence, and bythat profusion of money in which he was supported byCaesar, enabled him to make Antony tribune of thepeople, and afterwards augur. Antony was no soonerin power than Caesar found the advantage of his ser-vices. In the first place, he opposed the consul Mar-cellus, whose design was to give Pompey the commandof the old legions, and, at the same time, to empowerhim to raise new ones. On this occasion he obtained adecree, that the forces then on foot should be sent intoSyria, and join Bibulus in carrying on the war againstthe Parthians; and that none should give in theirnames to serve under Pompey. On another occasion,1 The same story is told of Alexander.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?6PLUTARCH.when the senate would neither receive Cwsar's letters,nor suffer them to be read, he read them by virtue ofJiis tribunitial authority; and the requests of Caesarappearing moderate and reasonable, by this means hebrought over many to his interest. Two questionswere at length put in the senate; one, 'WhetherPompey should dismiss bis army?' the other, ' Whe-ther Caesar should give up his?' There were but a fewvotes for the former; a large majority for the latter.Then Antony stood up, and put the question, 'Whe-ther both Caesar and Pompey should not dismiss theirarmies V This motion was received with great accla-mations, and Antony was applauded, and desired toput it to the vote. This being opposed by the consuls,the friends of Caesar made other proposals, whichseemed by no means unreasonable : but they were over-ruled by Cato; and Antony commanded, by Lentulusthe consul, to leave the house. He left them withbitter execrations; and disguising himself like a ser-vant, accompanied only by Quintus Cassius, he hireda carriage, and went immediately to Caesar. As soonas they arrived, they exclaimed that nothing was con-ducted at Rome, according to order or law; that eventhe tribunes were refused the privilege of speaking,and whoever would rise in defence of the right mustbe expelled, and exposed to personal danger.Caesar on this marched his army into Italy, andhence it was observed by Cicero in his Philippics, thatAntony was no less the cause of the civil war in Rome,than Helen had been of the Trojan war. There is,however, but little truth in this assertion. Caesar wasnot so much a slave to the impulse of resentment, as toenter on so desperate a measure, if it had not beenpremeditated. Nor would he have carried war into??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.7the bowels of his country, merely because he sawAntony and Cassius flying to him in a mean dress anda hired carriage. At the same time, these things mightgive some color to the commencement of those hostili-ties which had been long determined. Caesar's mo-tive was the same which had before driven Alexanderand Cyrus over the ruins of humankind--the insatiablehist of empire, the frantic ambition of being the firstman on earth, which he knew he could not be, whilePompey was yet alive.As soon as he had arrived at Rome, and had drivenPompey out of Italy, his first design was to attack hislegions in Spain, and having a fleet in readiness, to goafterwards in pursuit of Pompey himself, while, in themean time, Rome was left to the government of Le-pidus the pretor, and Italy and the army to the com-mand of Antony the tribune. Antony, by the sociabi-lity of his disposition, soon made himself agreeableto the soldiers; for he ate and drank with them, andmade them presents to the utmost of his ability. Toothers, his conduct was less acceptable. He was too in-dolent to attend to the cause of the injured, too violentand too impatient when he was applied to on business,and infamous -for his adulteries. In short, thoughthere was nothing tyrannical in the government ofCaesar, it was rendered odious by the ill conduct of hisfriends; and as Antony had the greatest share of thepower, so he bore the greatest part of the blame.Caesar, notwithstanding, on his return from Spain,connived at his irregularities; and, indeed, in the mili-tary appointment he had given him, he had not judgedimproperly; for Antony was a brave, skilful, andactive general.Ca?sar embarked at Brundusium, sailed over the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?8PLUTARCH.Ionian sea with a small number of troops, and sentback the fleet, with orders that Antony and Gabiniusshould put the army on board, and proceed as fast asposssible to Macedonia. Gabinius was afraid of thesea, for it was winter, and the passage was dangerous.He therefore marched his forces a long way roundby land. Antony, on the other hand, being apprehen-sive that Caesar might be surrounded and overcome byhis enemies, beat off Libo, who lay at anchor in themouth of the haven of Brundusium. By sending outseveral small vessels, he encompassed Libo's galleysseparately, and obliged them to retire. By this meanshe found an opportunity to embark about twenty thou-sand foot, and eight hundred horse; and with these heset sail. The enemy discovered and made up to him;but he escaped by favor of a strong gale from thesouth, which made the sea so rough that the pursuerscould not reach him. The same wind, however, at firstdrove him on a rocky shore, on which the sea bore sohard, that there appeared no hope of escaping ship-wreck: but after a little, it turned to the south-west,and blowing from land to the main sea, Antony sailedin safety, with the satisfaction of seeing the wrecks ofthe enemy's fleet scattered along the coast. The stormhad driven their ships on the rocks, and many of themwent to pieces. Antony made his advantage of thisdisaster; for he took several prisoners, and a consi-derable booty. He likewise made himself master ofthe town of Lissus; and, by the seasonable arrival ofhis reinforcement, the affairs of Caesar wore a morepromising aspect.Antony distinguished himself in every battle thatwas fought. Twice he stopped the army in its flight,brought them back to the charge, and gained the vie-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.9tory; so that, in point of military reputation, he wasinferior only to Caesar. What opinion Caesar had ofhis abilities appeared in the last decisive battle atPharsalia. He led the right wing himself, and gavethe left to Antony, as to the ablest of his officers.After this battle, Caesar being appointed dictator, wentin pursuit of Pompey, and sent Antony to Rome incharacter of general of the horse. This officer is nextin power to the dictator, and in his absence he com-mands alone: for, after the election of a dictator, allother magistrates, the tribunes only excepted, are di-vested of their authority.Dolabella, one of the tribunes, a young man, whowas fond of innovations, proposed a law for abolishingdebts, and solicited his friend Antony, who was everready to gratify the people, to join him in this mea-sure. On the other hand, Asinius and Trebellius dis-suaded him from it. Antony happened, at this time, tosuspect a criminal acquaintance between Dolabella andhis wife, whom, on that account, he dismissed, thoughshe was his first cousin, and daughter to Caius Anto-nius, who had been colleague with Cicero. In conse-quence of this he joined Asinius, and opposed Dola-bella. The latter had taken possession of the forum,with a design to pass his law by force; and Antonybeing ordered by the senate to repel force with force,attacked him, killed several of his men, and lost someof his own.By this action he forfeited the favor of the people.But this was not the only thing that rendered him ob-noxious; for men of sense and virtue, as Cicero ob-serves, could not but condemn his nocturnal revels,his enormous extravagance, his scandalous levity,his sleeping in the day, his walks to carry off the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?10PLUTARCH.qualms of debauchery, and his entertainments on themarriages of players and buffoons. Sergius the playerhad the greatest interest with him; and Cytheris, alady of the same profession, had the management of hisheart. She attended him in his excursions; and herequipage was by no means inferior to his mother's.The people were offended at the pomp of his travellingplate, which was more fit for the ornament of a tri-umph; at his erecting tents on the road, by grovesand rivers, for the most luxurious dinners; at his cha-riots, drawn by lions; and at his lodging his ladies, andfemale musicians in the houses of modest and soberpeople. This dissatisfaction at the conduct of Antony-could not but be increased by the comparative view ofCaesar. While the latter was supporting the fatiguesof a military life, the former was indulging himself inall the dissipation of luxury; and, by means of hisdelegated power, insulting the citizens.This conduct occasioned a variety of disturbances inRome, and gave the soldiers an opportunity to abuseand plunder 4he people. Therefore, when Caesar re-turned to Rome, he pardoned Dolabella; and beingcreated consul the third time, he took Lepidus, andnot Antony, for his colleague. Antony purchasedPompey's house; but, when he was required to makethe payment, he expressed himself in very angry terms;and this, he tells us, was the reason why he would notgo with Caesar into Africa. His former services hethought insufficiently repaid. Caesar, however, by hisdisapprobation of Antony's conduct, seems to havethrown some restraint on his dissolute manner of life.He now took it into his head to marry, and made choiceof Fulvia, the widow of the seditious Clodius, a womanby no means adapted to domestic employments, nor??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY. IIeven contented with ruling her husband as a privatenjan. Fulvia's ambition was to govern those that go-verned, and to command the leaders of armies. Itwas to Fulvia therefore that Cleopatra was obliged forteaching Antony due submission to female authority.He had gone through such a course of discipline, asmade him perfectly tractable when he came into herhands.He endeavored, however, to amuse the violent spiritof Fulvia, by many whimsical and pleasant follies.When Caesar, after his success in Spain, was on hisreturn to Rome, Antony, amongst others, went to meethim; but a report prevailing that Caesar was killed,and that the enemy was marching into Italy, he re-turned immediately to Rome, and, in the disguise of aslave, went to his house by night, pretending that hehad letters from Antony to Fulvia. He was intro-duced to her with his head muffled up; and, beforeshe received the letter, she asked, with impatience, ifAntony were well. He presented the letter to her insilence; and, while she was opening it, he threw hisarms around her neck, and kissed her. We mentionthis as one instance, out of many, of his pleasantries.When Caesar returned from Spain, most of the prin-cipal citizens went some days' journey to meet him;but Antony met with the most distinguished reception,and had the honor to ride with Caesar in the same cha-riot. After them came Brutus Albinus, and Octavius,the son of Caesar's niece, who was afterwards calledAugustus Caesar, and for many years was emperor ofRome. Caesar being created consul for the fifth time,chose Antony for his colleague; but as he intended toquit the consulship in favor of Dolabella, he acquaintedthe senate with his resolution. Antony, notwithstand-ing, opposed this measure, and loaded Dolabella with??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?12PLUTARCH.the most flagrant reproaches. Dolahella did not failto return the abuse; and Caesar, offended at their in-decent behavior, put off the affair till another time.When it was again proposed, Antony insisted that the. omens from the flight of birds were against the mea-sure. Thus Caesar was obliged to give up Dolabella,who was not a little mortified by his disappointment.It appears, however, that Caesar had as little regardfor Dolabella as he had for Antony; for when bothwere accused of designs against him, he said, contemp-tuously enough, 'It is not these fat sleek fellows thatI am afraid of, but the pale and the lean:' by whomhe meant Brutus and Cassius, who afterwards put himto death. Antony, without intending it, gave them apretence for that undertaking. When the Romanswere celebrating the Lupercalia, Caesar, in a triumphalhabit, sat on the rostrum to see the race. On this oc-casion many of the young nobility, and the magistracy,anoint with oil, and having white thongs in theirhands, run about and strike, as in sport, every onethey meet. Antony was of the number; but, regard-less of the ceremonies of the institution, he took agarland of laurel, and wreathing it in a diadem, ran tothe rostrum ; where, being lifted up by his companions,he would have placed it on the head of Caesar; inti-mating thereby the conveyance of regal power. Cae-sar, however, seemed to decline the offer, and wastherefore applauded by the people. Antony persistedin his design; and for some time there was a contestbetween them; while he that offered the diadem hadthe applause of his friends, and he that refused it theacclamations of the multitude. Thus, what is singularenough, while the Romans endured every thing thatregal power could impose, they dreaded the name ofking as destructive of their liberty. Caesar was much??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.13concerned at this transaction; and, uncovering hisneck, he offered his life to any one that would take it.At length the diadem was placed on one of his statues,but the tribunes took it off; on which the people fol-lowed them home with great acclamations. After-wards, however, Caesar showed that he resented this,by turning those tribunes out of office. The enterpriseof Brutus and Cassius derived strength and encourage-ment from these circumstances. To the rest of theirfriends, whom they had selected for the purpose, theywanted to draw over Antony. Trebonius, only, ob-jected to him. He informed them that, in their jour-ney to meet Caesar, he had been generally with him;that he had sounded him on this business by hints,which, though cautious, were intelligible; and that healways expressed his disapprobation, though he neverbetrayed the secret. On this it was proposed thatAntony should fall at the same time with Caesar, butBrutus opposed it. An action, undertaken in supportof justice and the laws, he very properly thought,should have nothing unjust attending it. Of Antony,however, they were afraid, both in respect of his per-sonal valor, and the influence of his office; and it wasagreed that, when Caesar was in the house, and theywere on the point of executing their purpose, Antonyshould be amused without by some pretended dis-course of business.When, in consequence of these measures, Caesar wasslain, Antony absconded in the disguise of a slave; butafter he found that the consjiirators were assembled inthe capitol, and had no farther designs of massacre, beinvited them to come down, and sent his son to them asan hostage. That night Cassius supped with him, andBrutus with Lepidus. The day following he assembledthe senate, when he proposed that an act of amnesty??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?14PLUTARCH.should be passed, and that provinces should be assignedto Brutus and Cassius. The senate confirmed this, and,at the same time, ratified the acts of Caesar. Thus An-tony acquitted himself in this difficult affair with thehighest reputation; and, by saving Rome from a civilwar, he proved himself a very able and valuable poli-tician. But the intoxication of glory drew him offfrom these wise and moderate counsels; and, from hisinfluence with the people, he felt that, if Brutus wereborne down, he should be the first man iu Rome. Withthis view, when Caesar's body was exposed in the forum,he undertook the customary funeral oration ; and whenhe found the people affected with his encomiums on thedeceased, he endeavored still more to excite their com-passion by all that was pitiable or aggravating in themassacre: for this purpose, in the close of his oration,he took the robe from the dead body, and held it up tothem, bloody as it was, and pierced through with wea-pons ; nor did he hesitate, at the same time, to call theperpetrators of the deed villains and murderers. Thishad such an effect on the people, that they immediatelytore up the benches and the tables in the forum, tomake a pile for the body. After they had duly dis-charged the funeral rites, they snatched the burningbrands from the pile, and went to attack the houses ofthe conspirators.Brutus and his party now left the city, and Caesar'sfriends joined Antony. Calphurnia, the relict of Cae-sar, intrusted him with her treasure, which amountedto four thousand talents. All Caesar's papers, whichcontained a particular account of his designs, were like-wise delivered up to him. Of these he made a very in-genious use; for, by inserting in them what names hethought proper, he made some of his friends magis-trates, and others senators; some he recalled from??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.15exile, and others he dismissed from prison, on pretencethat all these things were so ordered hy Caesar. Thepeople that were thus favored the Romans called Cha-ronites; hecause, to support their title, they had re-course to the registers of the dead. The power of An-tony, in short, was absolute. He was consul himself:his brother Caius was pretor, and his brother Luciustribune of the people. <Such was the state of affairs, when Octavius, whowas the son of Caesar's niece, and appointed his heirby will, arrived at Rome from Apollonia, where he re-sided when his uncle was killed. He first visited An-tony as the friend of his uncle, and spoke to him con-cerning the money in his hands, and the legacy ofseventy-five drachmas left to every Roman citizen.Antony paid little regard to him at first; and told himit would be madness for an unexperienced young man,without friends, to take on him so important an officeas that of being executor to Caesar.Octavius, however, was not thus repulsed. He stillinsisted on the money ; and Antony, on the other hand,did every thing to mortify and affront him. He op-posed him in his application for the tribuneship; andwhen he made use of the golden chair, which had beengranted by the senate to his uncle, he threatened that,unless he desisted to solicit the people, he would com-mit him to prison. But when Octavius joined Cicero,and the rest of Antony's enemies, and by their meansobtained an interest in the senate; when he continuedto pay his court to the people, and drew the veteransoldiers from their quarters, Antony thought it wastime to accommodate ; and for this purpose gave him ameeting in the capitol.An accommodation took place, but it was soon de-stroyed; for that night Antony dreamed that his right??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?16PLUTARCH.hand was thunderstruck; and, a few days after, he wasinformed that Octavius had a design on his life. Thelatter would have justified himself, but was not be-lieved; so that, of course, the breach became as wideas ever. They now went immediately over Italy, andendeavored to be beforehand with each other, in se-curing, by rewards and promises, the old troops thatwere in different quarters, and such legions as werestill on foot.Cicero, who had then considerable influence in thecity, incensed the people against Antony, and prevailedon the senate to declare him a public enemy; to sendthe rods and the rest of the pretorial ensigns to youngCaesar, and to commission Hirtius and Pansa, the con-suls, to drive Antony out of Italy. The two armiesengaged near Modena; and Caesar was present at thebattle. Both the consuls were slain; but Antony wasdefeated. In his flight he was reduced to great ex-tremities, particularly by famine. Distress, however,was to him a school of moral improvement; and An-tony, in adversity, was almost a man of virtue. Indeed,it is common for men under misfortunes to have a clearidea of their duty; but a change of conduct is not al-ways the consequence. On such occasions, they toooften fall hack into their former manners, through theinactivity of reason, and irifirmity of mind. But An-tony was even a pattern for his soldiers. From all thevarieties of luxurious living, he came with readiness todrink a little stinking water, and to feed on the wildfruits and roots of the desert. Nay, it is said, thatthey ate the very bark of the trees; and that, in pass-ing the Alps, they fed on creatures that had never beenaccounted human food.Antony's design was to join Lepidus, who com-manded the army on the other side of the Alps; and??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.17he had a reasonable prospect of his friendship fromthe good offices he had done him with Julius Caesar.When he came within a small distance of him he en-camped; but receiving no encouragement, he resolvedto hazard all on a single cast. His hair was uncombed,and his beard, which he had not shaven since his de-feat, was long. In this forlorn figure, with a mourningmantle thrown over him, he came to the camp of Lepi-dus, and addressed himself to the soldiers. While somewere affected with his appearance, and others with hiseloquence, Lepidus, afraid of the consequence, orderedthe trumpets to sound, that he might no longer beheard. This, however, contributed to heighten thecompassion of the soldiers; so that they sent Laeliusand Clodius in the dress of those ladies who followedthe army to assure Antony that, if he had- resolu-tion enough to attack the camp of Lepidus, he wouldmeet with many who were not only ready to receivehim, but, if he should desire it, to kill Lepidus.Antony would not suffer any violence to be offeredto Lepidus; but the day following, at the head of histroops, he crossed the river which lay between thetwo camps, and had the satisfaction to see Lepidus'soldiers all the while stretching out their hands to him,and making way through the intrenchments.When he had possessed himself of the camp of Lepi-dus, he treated him with great humanity. He salutedhim by the name of father; and though, in reality,every thing was in his own power, he secured to himthe title and the honors of general. This conductbrought over Munatius Plancus, who was at the headof a considerable force at no great distance. Thus An-tony was once more very powerful, and returned intoItaly with seventeen intire legions of foot, and tenthousand horse. Besides these, he left six legions as aPLUT. VoL. VII. B??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?18PLUTARCH.garrison in Gaul, under the command of Varius, oneof his convivial companions, whom they called Cotylon.Octavius, when he found that Cicero's object was torestore the liberties of the commonwealth, soon aban-doned him, and came to an accommodation with An-tony. They met, together with Lepidus, in a smallriver-island,1 where the conference lasted three days.The empire of the world was divided amongst themlike a paternal inheritance; and this they found nodifficulty in settling. But whom they should kill, andwhom they should spare, it was not so easy to adjust,while each was for saving his respective friends, andputting to death his enemies. At length their resent-ment against the latter overcame their kindness for theformer. Octavius gave up Cicero to Antony; and An-tony sacrificed his uncle Lucius Caesar to Octavius;while Lepidus had the privilege of putting to death hisown brother Paulus. Though others say that Lepi-dus gave up Paulus to them, though they had requiredhim to put him to death himself. I believe there neverwas any thing so atrocious, or so execrably savage asthis commerce of murder: for while a friend was givenup for an enemy received, the same action murderedat once the friend and the enemy; and the destructionof the former was still more horrible, because it hadnot even resentment for its apology.When this confederacy had taken place, the armydesired it might be confirmed by some alliance; andCaesar, therefore, was to marry Claudia the daughterof Fulvia, Antony's wife. As soon as this was deter-mined they marked down such as they intended toput to death, the number of which amounted to threehundred, When Cicero was slain, Antony ordered1 In the Rhine, not far from Bologna.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.19his head, and the hand with which he wrote his Phi-lippics, to be cut off; and when they were presented tohim he laughed, and exulted at the sight. After hewas satiated with looking on them, he ordered them tobe placed on the rostra in the forum: but this insulton the dead was, in fact, an abuse of his own goodfortune, and of the power it had placed in his hands.When his uncle Lucius Ca?sar was pursued by hismurderers, he fled for refuge to his sister; and whenthe pursuers had broken into the house, and wereforcing their way into his chamber, she placed herselfat the door, and stretching forth her hands, she cried,'You shall not kill Lucius Caesar till you have firstkilled me, the mother of your general.' By this meansshe saved her brother.This triumvirate was very odious to the Romans;but Antony bore the greater blame; for he was notonly older than Caesar, and more powerful than Lepi-dus; but when he was no longer under difficulties, hefell back into the former irregularities of his life. Hisabandoned and dissolute manners were the more ob-noxious to the people by his living in the house ofPompey the Great, a man no less distinguished by histemperance and modesty than by the honor of threetriumphs. They were mortified to see those doorsshut with insolence against magistrates, generals, andambassadors; while they were open to players, jug-glers, and sottish sycophants, on whom he spent thegreatest part of those treasures he had amassed byrapine. Indeed, the triumvirate were by no meansscrupulous about the manner in which they procuredtheir wealth. They seized and sold the estates of thosewho had been proscribed, and by false accusations de-frauded their widows and orphans. They burdenedthe people with insupportable impositions; and, being??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?20PLUTARCH."informed that large sums of money, the property bothof strangers and citizens, were deposited in the handsof the vestals, they took them away by violence. WhenCaesar found that Antony's covetousness was as bound-less as his prodigality, he demanded a division of thetreasure. The army too was divided. Antony andCaesar went into Macedonia against Brutus and Cas-sius ; and the government of Rome was left to Lepi-dus.When they had encamped in sight of the enemy,Antony opposite to Cassius, and Caesar to Brutus, Cae-sar effected nothing extraordinary, but Antony's effortswere still successful. In the first engagement Caesarwas defeated by Brutus; his camp was taken, and henarrowly escaped by flight; though, in his Commenta-ries, he tells us that, on account of a dream which hap-pened to one of his friends, he had withdrawn before thebattle. Cassius was defeated by Antony; and yet thereare those, too, who say that Antony was not presentat the battle, but only joined in the pursuit afterwards.As Cassius knew nothing of the success of Brutus, hewas killed at his own earnest intreaty, by his freed-man Pindarus. Another battle was fought soon after,in which Brutus was defeated; and, in consequence ofthat, slew himself. Caesar happened at that time tobe sick, and the honor of this victory likewise, ofcourse, fell to Antony. As he stood over the body ofBrutus, he slightly reproached him for the death ofhis brother Caius, whom, in revenge for the death ofCicero, Brutus had slain in Macedonia. It appeared,however, that Antony did not impute the death ofCaius so much to Brutus as to Hortensius; for he or-dered the latter to be slain on his brother's tomb. Hethrew his purple robe over the body of Brutus, andordered one of his freedmen to do the honors of his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY. 21funeral. "When he was afterwards informed that hehad not burned the robe with the body, and that hehad retained part of the money which was to be ex-pended on the ceremony, he commanded him to beslain. After this victory Caesar was conveyed toRome; and it was expected that his distemper wouldput an end to his life. Antony, having traversed someof the provinces of Asia for the purpose of raisingmoney, passed with a large army into Greece. Con-tributions, indeed, were absolutely necessary, when agratuity of five thousand drachmas had been promisedto every private man.Antony's behavior was at first very acceptable to theGrecians. He attended the disputes of their logicians,their public diversions, and religious ceremonies. Hewas mild in the administration of justice, and affectedto be called the friend of Greece; but particularly thefriend of Athens, to which he made considerable pre-sents. The Megarensians vying with the Athenians inexhibiting something curious, invited him to see theirsenate-house; and when they asked him how he likedit, he told them it was little and ruinous. He took thedimensions of the temple of Apollo Pythius, as if hehad intended to repair it; and, indeed, he promised asmuch to the senate.But when, leaving Lucius Censorinus in Greece, heonce more passed into Asia; when he had enrichedhimself with the wealth of the country; when hishouse was the resort of obsequious kings, and queenscontended for his favor by their beauty and munifi-cence; then, whilst Caesar was harassed with seditionsat Rome, Antony once more gave up his soul to luxury,and fell into all the dissipations of his former life. TheAnaxenores and the Zutlii, the harpers and pipers,Metrodorus the dancer, the whole corps of the Asiatic??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?22PLUTARCH.drama, who far outdid in buffoonery the poor wretchesof Italy; these were the people of the court, the folksthat carried all before them. In short, all was riotand disorder: and Asia, in some measure, resembledthe city mentioned by Sophocles, that was at oncefilled with the perfumes of sacrifices, songs, andgroans.When Antony entered Ephesus, the women in thedress of Bacchanals, and men and boys habited likePan and the satyrs, marched before him. Nothingwas to be seen through the whole city but ivy crowns,and spears wreathed with ivy, harps, flutes, and pipes,while Antony was hailed by the name of Bacchus;Bacchus! ever kind and free!And such, indeed, he was to some; but to others hewas savage and severe. He deprived many noble fa-milies of their fortunes, and bestowed them on syco-phants and parasites. Many were represented to bedead who were still living, and commissions weregiven to his knaves for seizing their estates. He gavehis cook the estate of a Magnesian citizen for dressingone supper to his taste: but when he laid a double im-post on Asia, Hybrias, the agent for the people, toldhim, with a pleasantry that was agreeable to his hu-mor, that ' if he doubled the taxes, he ought to doublethe seasons too, and supply the people with two sum-mers and two winters.' He added, at the same time,with a little more asperity, that, ' as Asia had alreadyraised two hundred thousand talents, if he had not re-ceived it, he should demand it of those who had; but,'said he, ' if you received it, and yet have it not, we areundone.' This touched him sensibly; for he was igno-rant of many things that were transacted under his au-thority; not that he was indolent, but unsuspecting.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.He had a simplicity in his nature, without much pene-tration: but when he found that faults had been com-mitted, he expressed the greatest concern and acknow-legement to the sufferers. He was prodigal in his re-wards, and severe in his punishments; but the excesswas rather in the former than in the latter. The in-sulting raillery of his conversation carried its remedyalong with it; for he was perfectly liberal in allowingthe retort, and gave and took with the same good hu-mor. This, however, had a bad effect on his affairs.He imagined that those who treated him with freedomin conversation would not be insincere in business.He did not perceive that his sycophants were artful intheir freedom; that they used it as a kind of poignantsauce to prevent the satiety of flattery; and that, bytaking these liberties with him at table, they knew wellthat, when they complied with his opinions in business,he would not think it the effect of complaisance, but aconviction of his superior judgment.Such was the frail, the flexible Antony, when thelove of Cleopatra came in to the completion of hisruin. This awakened every dormant vice, inflamedevery guilty passion, and totally extinguished thegleams of remaining virtue. It began in this manner:when he first set out on his expedition against theParthians, he sent orders to Cleopatra to meet him inCilicia, that she might answer some accusations whichhad been laid against her of assisting Cassius in thewar. Dellius, who went on this message, no soonerobserved the beauty and address of Cleopatra, than heconcluded that such a woman, far from having anything to apprehend from the resentment of Antony,would certainly have great influence over him. Hetherefore paid his court to the amiable Egyptian, andsolicited her to go, as Homer says, ' in her best attire,'??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?24PLUTARCH.into Cilicia; assuring her that she had nothing to fearfrom Antony, who was the most courtly general in theworld. Induced by his invitation, and in the confi-dence of that beauty which had before touched thehearts of Caesar and young Pompey, she entertainedno doubt of the conquest of Antony. When Caesarand Pompey admired her she was young and inex-perienced; but she was to meet Antony at an age whenbeauty, in its full perfection, called in the maturity ofthe understanding to its aid. Prepared, therefore,with such treasures, ornaments, and presents, as weresuitable to the dignity and affluence of her kingdom,but chiefly relying on her personal charms, she set offfor Cilicia.Though she had received many pressing letters ofinvitation from Antony and his friends, she held him insuch contempt, that she by no means took the mostexpeditious mode of travelling. She sailed along theriver Cydnus in a most magnificent galley. The sternwas covered with gold, the sails were of purple, andthe oars were silver. These, in their motion, kepttime to the music of flutes, and pipes, and harps. Thequeen, in the dress and character of Venus, lay undera canopy embroidered with gold of the most exquisiteworkmanship; while boys, like painted Cupids, stoodfanning her on each side of the sofa. Her maidswere of the most distinguished beauty, and, habitedlike the Nereides and the Graces, assisted in the steer-age and conduct of the vessel. The fragrance of burn-ing incense was difi"used along the shores, which werecovered with multitudes of people. Some followedthe procession, and such numbers went down from thecity to see it, that Antony was at last left alone on thetribunal. A rumor was soon spread that Venus wascome to feast with Bacchus, for the benefit of Asia.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY. 25Antony sent to invite her to supper; but she thoughtit his duty to wait on her; and, to show his politeness,on her arrival, he complied. He was astonished atthe magnificence of the preparations; but particularlyat that multitude of lights, which were raised or letdown together, and disposed in such a variety ofsquare and.circular figures, that they afforded one ofthe most pleasing spectacles that has been recorded inhistory. The day following Antony invited her to supwith him, and was ambitious to outdo her in the ele-gance and magnificence of the entertainment. But hewas soon convinced that he came short of her in both,and was the first to ridicule the meanness and vul-garity of his treat. As she found that Antony's humorsavored more of the camp than of the court, she fellinto the same coarse vein, and played on him withoutthe least reserve. Such was the variety of her powersin conversation: her beauty, it is said, was neitherastonishing nor inimitable; but it derived a force fromher wit, and her fascinating manner, which was ab-solutely irresistible. Her voice was delightfully me-lodious, and had the same variety of modulation asan instrument of many strings. She spoke most lan-guages; and there were but few of the foreign am-bassadors whom she answered by an interpreter. Shegave audience herself to the Ethiopians, the Troglo-dites, the Hebrews, Arabs, Syrians, Medes, and Par-thians. Nor were these all the languages she under-stood, though the kings of Egypt, her predecessors,could hardly ever attain to the Egyptian; and some ofthem forgot even their original Macedonian.Antony was so wholly engrossed with her charms, thatwhile his wife Fulvia was maintaining his interest atRome against Caesar, and the Parthian forces, assem-bled under the conduct of Labienus in Mesopotamia,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?26PLUTARCH.were ready to enter Syria, she led her amorous captivein triumph to Alexandria. There the veteran warriorfell into every idle excess of puerile amusement, andoffered at the shrine of luxury, what Antipho callsthe greatest of all sacrifices, 'the sacrifice of time.'This mode of life, they called ' the inimitable.' Theyvisited each other alternately every day; and the pro-fusion of their entertainments is almost incredible.Philotas, a physician of Amphissa, who was at thattime pursuing his studies in Alexandria, told mygrandfather Lamprias, that, being acquainted with oneof Antony's cooks, he was invited to see the prepara-tions for supper. When he came into the kitchen,besides an infinite variety of other provisions, he ob-served eight wild boars roasting whole; and expressedhis surprise at the number of the company for whomthis enormous provision must have been made. Thecook laughed, and said that the company did not ex-ceed twelve; but that, as every dish was to be roastedto a single turn, and as Antony was uncertain as tothe time when he would sup, particularly if an extra-ordinary bottle, or an extraordinary vein of conversa-tion was going round, it was necessary to have a suc-cession of suppers. Philotas added, that, being after-wards in the service of Antony's eldest son by Fulvia,he was admitted to sup with him when he did not supwith his father; and it once happened, that when ano-ther physician at table had tired the company with hisnoise and impertinence, he silenced him with the fol-lowing sophism: 'There are some degrees of a feverin which cold water is good for a man: every manwho has a fever has it in some degree; and thereforecold water is good for every man in a fever.' The im-pertinent was struck dumb with this syllogism; andAntony's son, who laughed at his distress, to reward??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.27Philotas for his good offices, pointing to a magnificentsideboard of plate, said, ' All that Philotas is yours!'Philotas acknowleged the kind offer, but thought ittoo much for such a boy to give. And afterwards,when a servant brought the plate to him in a chest,that he might put his seal on it, he refused, and, in-deed, was afraid, to accept it: on which the servantsaid, ' What are you afraid of? Do not you considerthat this is a present from the son of Antony, whocould easily give you its weight in gold? However,I would recommend it to you to take the value of it inmoney. In this plate there may be some curious piecesof ancient workmanship that Antony may set a valueon.' Such are the anecdotes which my grandfathertold me he had from Philotas.Cleopatra was not limited to Plato's four kinds offlattery. She had an infinite variety of it. Whe-ther Antony were in the gay, or the serious humor,still she had something ready for his amusement. Shewas with him night and day. She gamed, she drank,she hunted, she reviewed with him. In his nightrambles, when he was reconnoitring the doors andwindows of the citizens, and throwing out jests onthem, she attended him in the habit of a servant, whichhe also, on such occasions, affected to wear. Fromthese expeditions he frequently returned a suffererboth in person and character. But though some ofthe Alexandrians were displeased with this whimsicalhumor, others enjoyed it, and said, that 'Antonypresented his comic parts in Alexandria, and reservedthe tragic for Rome.' To mention all his follies wouldbe too trifling; but his fishing story must not beomitted. He was fishing one day with Cleopatra, andhad ill success, which, in the presence of his mistress,he looked on as a disgrace; he therefore ordered??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?28 PLUTARCH.one of the assistants to dive and put on his hook suchas had been taken before. This scheme he put inpractice three or four times, and Cleopatra perceivedit. She affected, however, to be surprised at his suc-cess ; expressed her wonder to the people about her;and, the day following, invited them to see fresh proofsof it. When the day following came the vessel wascrowded with people; and as soon as Antony had letdown his line, she ordered one of her divers immediatelyto put a salt fish on his hook. When Antony found hehad caught his fish, he drew up his line; and this, asmay be supposed, occasioned no small mirth amongstthe spectators. 'Go, general!' said Cleopatra, 'leavefishing to us petty princes of Pharus and Canopus;your game is cities, kingdoms, and provinces.'In the midst of these scenes of festivity and dissipa-tion Antony received two unfavorable messages; onefrom Rome, that his wife Fulvia, and his brother Lu-cius, after long dissensions between themselves, hadjoined to oppose Caesar, but were overpowered, andobliged to fly out of Italy. The other informed himthat Labienus and the Parthians had reduced Asia,from Syria and the Euphrates to Lydia and Ionia. Itwas with difficulty that even this roused him fromhis lethargy: but waking at length, and, literally,waking from a fit of intoxication, he set out againstthe Parthians, and proceeded as far as Phoenicia.However, on the receipt of some very moving lettersfrom Fulvia, he turned his course towards Italy, withtwo hundred ships. Such of his friends as had fledfrom thence he received; and from these he learnt,that Fulvia had been the principal cause of the dis-turbances in Rome. Her disposition had a naturaltendency to violence and discord; and, on this occa-sion, it was abetted by jealousy; for she expected that??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.29the disorders of Italy would call Antony from the armsof Cleopatra. That unhappy woman died at Sicyou,in her progress to meet her husband.This event opened an opportunity for a reconcilia-tion with Caesar; for when Antony came to Italy, andCaesar expressed no resentment against him, but threwthe whole blame on Fulvia, their respective friendsinterfered, and brought them to an accommodation.The east, within the boundaries of the Ionian sea, wasgiven to Antony; the western provinces to Caesar;and Lepidus had Africa. When they did not acceptof the consulship themselves, they were to dispose ofit as they thought proper, in their turns.After these matters were settled they thought ofmeans to secure this union which fortune had set onfoot. Caesar had a sister older than himself, namedOctavia, but they had different mothers. The motherof Octavia was Ancaria: Casar's mother was Attia.He had a great affection for this sister; for she was awoman of extraordinary merit. She had been alreadymarried to Caius Marcellus; but a little before thishad buried her husband; and, as Antony had lost hiswife, there was an opening for a fresh union. His con-nexion with Cleopatra he did not affect to deny; buthe absolutely denied that he was married to her; and,in this circumstance, indeed, his prudence prevailedover his love. His marriage with Octavia was uni-versally wished. It was the general hope, that a wo-man of her beauty and distinguished virtues wouldacquire such an influence over Antony, as might in theend, be salutary to the state. Conditions being mu-tually agreed on, they proceeded to solemnise thenuptials at Rome; and the law which permits nowidow to marry till the expiration of ten months after??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?30PLUTARCH.the decease of her husband was dispensed with by thesenate.Sextus, the son of Pompey, who was then in posses-sion of Sicily, had not only made great ravages inItaly, but had covered the sea with such a number ofpiratical vessels, under the command of Menas andMenecrates, that it was no longer safe for other shipsto pass. He had been favorable, notwithstanding, toAntony; for he had given a kind reception to his mo-ther and his wife Fulvia, when they were obliged tofly from Rome. It was judged proper, therefore, toaccommodate matters with him; and for this purposea meeting was held at the promontory of Misenum bythe mole that runs into the sea. Pompey was attendedby his fleet; Antony and Caesar by an army of foot.At this interview it was settled that Pompey shouldkeep Sicily and Sardinia, on condition that he shouldclear the sea of pirates, and send a certain quantity ofcorn to Rome. When these things were determined,they mutually invited each other to supper ; but it fellto the lot of Pompey to give the first entertainment.When Antony asked him where they should sup--'There,' said he, pointing to the admiral-galley of sixoars, ' that is the only patrimonial mansion-house thatis left to Pompey; and it implied, at the same time, asarcasm on Antony, who was then in possession of hisfather's house. However, he entertained them verypolitely, after conducting them over a bridge from thepromontory to the ship that rode at anchor. Duringthe entertainment, while the raillery ran briskly onAntony and Cleopatra, Menas came to Pompey, andtold him secretly that, if he would permit him to cutthe cable, he would not only make him master ofSicily and Sardinia, but of the whole Roman empire.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.31Pompey, after a moment's deliberation, answered, thathe should have done it without consulting him. 'Wemust now let it alone,' said he, 'for I cannot breakmy oath of treaty.' The compliment of the entertain-ment was returned by his guests, and he then retiredto Sicily.Antony, after the accommodation, sent Ventidiusinto Asia, to stop the progress of the Parthians. Allmatters of public administration were conducted withthe greatest harmony between him and Octavius; and,in compliment to the latter, he took on himself theoffice of high-priest to Caesar the dictator. But, alas!in their contests at play, Caesar was generally superior,and Antony was mortified. He had in his house a for-tune-telling gipsy, who was skilled in the calculationof nativities. This man, either to oblige Cleopatra, orfollowing the investigation of truth, told Antony thatthe star of his fortune, however glorious in itself, waseclipsed and obscured by Caesar's, and advised him, byall means, to keep at the greatest distance from thatyoung man. 'The genius of your life,' said he, 'isafraid of his: when it is alone, its port is erect andfearless; when his approaches, it is dejected and de-pressed.' Indeed, there were many circumstances thatseemed to justify the conjurer's doctrine; for in everykind of play, whether they cast lots, or cast the die,Antony was still the loser. In their cock-fights, andquail-fights, it was still Caesar's cock, and Caesar'squail. These things, co-operating with the conjurer'sobservations, had such an effect on Antony, that hegave up the management of domestic affairs to Cae-sar, and left Italy. Octavia, who had by this timebrought him a daughter, he took with him into Greece.He wintered in Athens, and there he learnt that hisaffairs in Asia, under Ventidius, were successful; that??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?32PLUTARCH.the Parthians were routed, and that Labienus andPharnapates, the ablest generals of Orodes, fell in thebattle. In honor of this victory he gave an enter-tainment to the Greeks, and treated the Athenians withan exhibition of the gymnastic games, in which he tookthe master's part himself. The robes and ensigns ofthe general were laid aside; the rods, the cloak, andthe slippers of the gymnasiarch were assumed; andwhen the combatants had fought sufficiently he partedthem himself.When he went to the war he took with hini a crownof the sacred olive; and, by the direction of some ora-cle or other, a vessel of water filled out of the Clepsy-dra.' In the mean time Pacorus, son of the king ofParthia, made an incursion into Syria, but was routedby Ventidius in Cyrrhestica; and, with the greatestpart of his army, fell in the battle. This celebratedvictory made ample amends for the defeat of Crassus.The Parthians had now been thrice conquered, andwere confined within the bounds of Media and Meso-potamia. Ventidius would not pursue the Parthiansany farther, for fear of exciting the envy of Antony;he therefore turned his arms against the revolters, andbrought them back to their duty. Amongst these wasAntiochus, the king of Commagene, whom he besiegedin the city of Samosata. That prince, at first, offeredto pay a thousand talents, and to submit himself to theRoman empire; on which Ventidius told him that hemust send proposals to Antony, for he was then at nogreat distance; and he had not commissioned Venti-dius to make peace with Antiochus, that something atleast might be done by himself. But while the siege1 The Clepsydra was a fountain belonging to the citadel atAthens; so called, because it was sometimes full of water,and sometimes empty.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.33was thus prolonged, and the people of Samosata de-spaired of obtaining terms, that despair produced adegree of courage which defeated every effort of thebesiegers; and Antony was at last reduced to the dis-graceful necessity of accepting three hundred talents.After he had done some little towards settling theaffairs of Syria, he returned to Athens, and sent Ven-tidius to Rome, to enjoy the reward of his merit in atriumph. He was the only general that ever triumphedover the Parthians. His birth was obscure, but hisconnexions with Antony brought him into great ap-pointments; and, by making the best use of them, heconfirmed what was said of Antony and Octavius Cae-sar, that they were more successful by their lieutenantsthan when they commanded in person. This observa-tion, with regard to Antony in particular, might bejustified by the success of Sossius and Canidius. Theformer had done great things in Syria; and the latter,whom he left in Armenia, reduced the whole country;and, after defeating the kings of Iberia and Albania,penetrated as far as Mount Caucasus, and spread theterror of Antony's name and power through those bar-barous nations.Soon after this, on hearing some disagreeable reportsconcerning the designs or the conduct of Cfesar, hesailed for Italy with a fleet of three hundred ships;and, being refused the harbor of Brundusium, he madefor Tarentum. There he was prevailed on by his wifeOctavia, who accompanied him, and was then pregnant athird time, to send her to her brother; and she was for-tunate enough to meet him on her journey, attended byhis two friends, Mecaenas and Agrippa. In conferencewith him, she in treated him to consider the peculiarityof her situation, and not to make the happiest womanin the world the most unfortunate. 'The eyes of all,'PLUT. VoL. VII. c??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?34 PLUTARCH.said she, 'are necessarily turned on me, who am thewife of Antony, and the sister of Caesar; and shouldthese chiefs of the empire, misled by hasty counsels,involve the whole in war, whatever may be the event,it will be unhappy for me.' Caesar was softened bythe intreaties of his sister, and proceeded with peace-able views to Tarentmn. His arrival afforded a gene-ral satisfaction to the people. They were pleased tosee such an army on the shore, and such a fleet in theharbor, in the mutual disposition for peace, and no-thing but compliments and expressions of kindnesspassing between the generals. Antony first invitedCaesar to sup with him; and, in compliment to Octa-via, he accepted the invitation. At length it wasagreed that Caesar should give up to Antony two le-gions for the Parthian service; and that Antony, inreturn, should leave a hundred armed galleys withCaesar. Octavia, moreover, engaged Antony to giveup twenty light ships to Caesar, and procured from herbrother a thousand foot for her husband. Mattersbeing thus accommodated, Caesar went to war withPompey for the recovery of Sicily; and Antony, leav-ing under his protection his wife, and his children,both by the present and the former marriage, sailedfor Asia.On his approach to Syria, the love of Cleopatra,which had so loBg been dormant in his heart, andwhich better counsels seemed totally to have sup-pressed, revived again, and took possession of his soul.The unruly steed, to which Plato compares certainpassions, once more broke loose; and, in spite of ho-nor, interest, and prudence, Antony sent Fonteius Ca-pita to conduct Cleopatra into Syria.On her arrival, he made her the most magnificentpresents. He gave her the provinces of Phoenicia,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.Ccelosyria, Cyprus, great part of Cilicia, that districtof Judaea which produces the balm, and that part ofArabia Nabathea which lies on the ocean. These ex-travagant gifts were disagreeable to the Romans: for,though he had often conferred on private persons con-siderable governments and kingdoms, though he haddeprived many princes of their dominions, and be-headed Antigonus of Judaea, the first king that eversuffered in such a manner, yet nothing so much dis-turbed the Romans as his enormous profusion in favorof that woman: nor were they less offended at his giv-ing the surnames of the sun and moon to the twins hehad by her.But Antony knew well how to give a fair appear-ance to the most disreputable actions. The greatnessof the Roman empire, he said, appeared more in givingthan in receiving kingdoms; and that it was proper forpersons of high birth and station to extend and securetheir nobility, by leaving children and successors bornof different princes ; that his ancestor Hercules trustednot to the fertility of one woman, as if he had fearedthe penalties annexed to the law of Solon, but, byvarious connexions, became the founder of many fa-milies.After Orodes was slain by his son Phraates, whotook possession of the kingdom, many of the Parthianchiefs fled to Antony; and, amongst the rest, Moneses,a man of great dignity and power. Antony, thinkingthat Moneses, in his fortune, resembled Themistocles,and comparing his own wealth and magnificence tothat of the kings of Persia, gave him three cities, La-rissa, Arethusa, and Hierampolis, which was beforecalled Bombyce. But when Phraates sent Monesesassurances of his safety, he readily dismissed him. Onthis occasion he formed a scheme to deceive Phraates.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.He pretended a disposition for peace, and requiredonly that the Roman staudards and ensigns which hadbeen taken at the defeat of Crassus, and such of theprisoners as still survived, might be restored. Hesent Cleopatra into Egypt; after which he marchedthrough Arabia and Armenia; where, as soon as hisown troops were joined by the allies, he reviewed hisarmy. He had several princes in alliance with him;but Artavasdes, king of Armenia, was the most power-ful, for he furnished six thousand horse, and seventhousand foot. At this review there appeared sixtythousand Roman foot, and ten thousand horse; who,though chiefly Gauls and Spaniards, were reckonedas Romans. The number of the allies, including thelight-armed and the cavalry, amounted to thirty thou-sand.This formidable armament, which struck terror intothe Indians beyond Bactria, and alarmed all Asia, hisattachment to Cleopatra rendered perfectly useless.His impatience to return and spend the winter in her;>rnis made him take the field too early in the season,and precipitated all his measures. As a man who isunder the power of enchantment can only act as theimpulse of the magic directs him, his eye was conti-nually drawn to Cleopatra; and to return to her was agreater object than to conquer the world. He oughtcertainly to have wintered in Armenia, that he mightgive a proper respite and refreshment to his men, aftera march of a thousand miles. In the early part of thespring he should have made himself master of Media,before the Parthian troops were drawn out of garrison:but his impatience put him on the march ; and leavingArmenia on the left, he passed through the province ofAtropatene, and laid waste the country. In his haste,he left behind him the battering-engines, amongst??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.37which was a ram eighty feet long; and these followedthe camp on three hundred carriages. Had any da-mage happened to these, it would have been impos-sible to repair them in this upper part of Asia, wherethere is no timber of height or strength sufficient forthe purpose. However, they were brought after himunder the conduct of Statianus ; and, in the mean time,he laid siege to the large city of Phraata, the residenceof the king of Media's wives and children. Here heperceived his error in leaving the engines behind;for want of which he was obliged to throw up a mountagainst the wall; and that required considerable timtand labor.In the mean time Phraates came up with a nume-rous army; and being informed that Antony had leftbehind him his machines, he sent a large detachmentto intercept them. This party fell on Statianus, who,with ten thousand of his men, was slain on the spot.Many were taken prisoners, among whom was kingPolemo; and the machines were seized by the enemy,and destroyed.This miscarriage greatly discouraged the army; andArtavasdes, though he had been the promoter of thewar, withdrew his forces in despair. The Parthians,on the other hand, encouraged by their success, cameup with the Romans while they were employed in thesiege, and treated them with the most insolent menacesand contempt. Antony, who knew that despair andtimidity would be the consequence of inaction, led outten legions, three pretorian cohorts heavy armed, andthe whole body of cavalry, on the business of foraging.He was persuaded at the same time that this was theonly method of drawing the enemy after him, and bring-ing them to a battle. After one day's progress, he ob-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?38PLUTARCH.serred the enemy in motion, and .watching an oppor-tunity to fall on him in his march. Hereon he put up,in his camp the signal for battle; but, at the same time,struck his tents, as if his intention was not to fight, butto retire. Accordingly he passed the army of the bar-barians, which was drawn up in form of a crescent: buthe had previously given orders to the horse to chargethe enemy, full speed, as soon as their ranks werewithin reach of the legionary troops. The Parthianswere struck with astonishment at the order of the Ro-man army, when they observed them pass at regularintervals without confusion, and brandish their pikesin silence.When the signal was given for battle, the horseturned short, and fell with loud shouts on the enemy.The Parthians received the attack with firmness, thoughthey were too close in with them for the use of theirbows. But when the infantry came to the charge, theirshouts, and the clashing of their arms, so frightenedthe enemy's horses, that they were no longer manage-able; and the Parthians fled without once engaging.Antony pursued them closely, in hopes that this actionwould, in a great measure, terminate the war. Butwhen the infantry had followed them fifty furlongs,and the cavalry at least a hundred and fifty, he foundthat he had not slain above eighty of the enemy, andthat thirty only were taken prisoners. Thus, the littleadvantage of their victories, and the heavy loss of theirdefeats, as in the recent instance of the carriages, wasa fresh discouragement to the Romans.The day following they returned with their baggageto the camp before Phraata. In their march they metwith some straggling troops of the enemy, afterwardswith greater parties, and at last with the whole body,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.which having easily rallied, appeared like a fresh armyand harassed them in such a manner, that it was withdifficulty they reached their camp.The Median garrison, in the absence of Antony,had made a sally; and those who were left to defendthe mount had quitted their post and fled. Antony,at his return, punished the fugitives by decimation:that is, he divided them into tens; and, in each di-vision, put one to death, on whom the lot happened tofall. Those that escaped had their allowance in barleyinstead of wheat. ? *Both parties now found their difficulties in the war.Antony had the dread of famine before him, for hecould not forage without a terrible slaughter of his men;and Phraates, who knew the temper of the Parthians,was apprehensive that, if the Romans persisted incarrying on the siege, as soon as the autumnal equinoxwas past, and the winter set in, he should be desertedby his army, which would not at that time endure theopen field. To prevent this, be had recourse to strata-gem. He ordered his officers not to pursue the Romanstoo close when they were foraging, but to permit themto carry off provisions. He commanded them at thesame time to compliment them on their valor, and toexpress his high opinion of the Roman bravery. Theywere instructed likewise, as opportunity might offer, toblame the obstinacy of Antony, which exposed so manybrave men to the severities of famine and a wintercampaign, who must suffer of course, notwithstandingall the Parthians could do for them, while Phraatessought for nothing more than peace, though he wasstill defeated in his benevolent intentions.Antony, on these reports, began to conceive hopes;hut he would not offer any terms before he was satisfiedwhether they came originally from the king. The??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?40PLUTARCH.enemy assured him that such were the sentiments ofPhraates; and, being induced to believe them, he sentsome of his friends to demand the standards and theprisoners that came into their hands on the defeat ofCrassus; for he thought, if he demanded nothing, itmight appear that he was pleased with the privilegeof retreating. The Parthian answered, that thestandards and prisoners could not be restored; butthat Antony, if he thought proper, was at liberty toretreat in safety.After some few days had been spent in making upthe baggage, he began his march. On this occasion,though he had the happiest eloquence in addressinghis soldiers, and reconciling them to every situationand event, yet, whether it was through shame, orsorrow, or both, he left that office to Domitius Mno-barbus. Some of them were offended at this as anact of contempt. But the greater part understood thecause, and, pitying their general, paid him still greaterattention.Antony had determined to take his route through aplain and open country; but a certain Mardian, whowas well acquainted with the practices of the Par-tisans, and had approved his faith to the Romans atthe battle when the machines were lost, advised him totake the mountains on his right, and not to expose hisheavy-armed troops in an open country to the attacksof the Parthian bowmen and cavalry. Phraates, hesaid, amused him with fair promises, merely to drawhim oft' from the siege; but if he would take him forhis guide, he would conduct him by a way that wasnearer, and better furnished with necessaries. Antonydeliberated some time on this. He would not appearto doubt the honor of the Parthians after the trucethey had agreed to; and yet he could not but approve??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.41of a way which was nearer, and which lay through aninhabited country. At last he required the necessarypledges of the Mardian's faith, which he gave in suffer-ing himself to be bound till he should have conductedthe army into Armenia. In this condition he led theRomans peaceably along for two days: but on thethird, when Antony, expecting nothing less than theParthians, was marching forward in disorderly se-curity, the Mardian observing the mounds of a riverbroken down, and the waters let out into the plainwhere they were to pass, concluded that the Parthianshad done this to retard their march, and advised An-tony to be on his guard; for the enemy, he said, wasat no great distance. Whilst Antony was drawing uphis men, and preparing such of them as were armedwith darts and slings to make a sally against the enemy,the Parthians came on him, and, by surrounding hisarmy, harassed it on every part. The light-armedRomans, indeed, made an incursion on them, and,galling them with their missive weapons, obliged themto retreat; but they soon returned to the charge, till aband of the Gaulish cavalry attacked and dispersedthem; so that they appeared no more that day.Antony, on this, found what measures he was totake; and, covering both wings and the rear with suchtroops as were armed with missive weapons, his armymarched in the form of a square. The cavalry hadorders to repel the attacks of the enemy, but not topursue them to any great distance. The Parthians,of course, when in four successive days they couldmake no considerable impression, and found them-selves equally annoyed in their turn, grew more re-miss, and, finding an excuse in the winter season, be-gan to think of a retreat. On the fifth day, FlaviusGallus, a general officer of great courage and valor,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?42PLUTARCH.requested Antony, that he would indulge him with anumber of light-armed troops from the rear, togetherwith a few horse from the front; and with these heproposed to perform some considerable exploit. Thesehe obtained, and in repelling the attacks of the Par-thians, he did not, like the rest, retreat by degrees to-wards the body of the army, but maintained his ground,and fought rather on the offensive than on the defensive.When the officers of the rear observed that he wasseparated from the rest, they sent to recall him ; but hedid not obey the summons. It is said, however, thatTitius the questor turned back tbe standard, and in-veighed against Gallus for leading so many brave mento destruction. Gallus, on the other hand, returnedhis reproaches, and commanding those who were abouthim to stand, he made his retreat alone. Gallus badno sooner made an impression on the enemy's frontthan he was surrounded. In this distress he sent forassistance ; and here the general officers, and Canidius,the favorite of Antony, amongst the rest, committed amost capital error. Instead of leading the whole armyagainst the Parthians, as soon as one detachment wasoverpowered, they sent another to its support; andthus, by degrees, they would have sacrificed great partof the troops, had not Antony come hastily from thefront with the heavy-armed, and urging on the thirdlegion through the midst of the fugitives, stopped theenemy's pursuit.In this action no fewer than three thousand wereslain, and five thousand brought back wounded to thecamp. Amongst the last was Gallus, who had fourarrows shot through his body, and soon after died ofhis wounds. Antony visited all that had suffered onthis unhappy occasion, and consoled them with tears ofreal grief and affection: while the wounded soldiers,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?. ANToNY.'43embracing the hand of their general, intreated him notto attend to their sufferings, but to his own health andquiet: 'while our general is safe, all,' said they, ' iswell.' It is certain that there was not in those days abraver or a finer army. The men were tall, stout, able? and willing to endure the greatest toils. Their re-spect and ready obedience to their general was won-derful. Not a man in the army, from the first of-ficer to the meanest soldier, but would have preferredthe favor of Antony to his own life and safety. In allthese respects they were at least equal to the armies ofancient Rome. A variety of causes, as we have ob-served, concurred to produce this: Antony's noblebirth, bis eloquence, his candor, his liberality andmagnificence, and the familiar pleasantry of his con-versation. These were the general causes of the affec-tion he found in his army; and, on this particular oc-casion, his sympathising with the wounded, and attend-ing to their wants, made them totally forget their suf-ferings.The Parthians, who had before begun to languish intheir operations, were so much elevated with this ad-vantage, and held the Romans in such contempt, thatthey even spent the night by their camp, in hopes ofseizing the baggage while they deserted their tents.At break of day numbers more came up, to theamount, as it is said, of forty thousand horse; for theParthian king had sent even his body-guard, so confi-dent was he of absolute victory : as to himself, he neverwas present at any engagement.Antony, being now about to address his soldiers, calledfor mourning apparel, that his speech might be moreaffecting; but as his friends would not permit this, heappeared in his general's robe. Those that had beenvictorious he praised, those who had fled he re-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?44PLUTARCH.proached; the former encouraged him by every testi-mony of their zeal; the latter, offering themselveseither to decimation or any other kind of punishmentthat he might think proper to inflict on them, intreatedhim to forego his sorrow and concern. On this heraised his hands to heaven, and prayed to the gods,'that if his happier fortune was to be followed by fu-ture evil, it might affect only himself, and that hisarmy might be safe and victorious.'The day following they marched out in better andfirmer order, and the Parthians, who thought they hadnothing to do but to plunder, when they saw theirenemy in fresh spirits, and in a capacity for renewingthe engagement, were extremely disconcerted. How-ever, they fell on the Romans from the adjacent decli-vities, and galled them with their arrows as they weremarching slowly forward. Against these attacks thelight-armed troops were covered by the legionaries,who, placing one knee on the ground, received thearrows on their shields. The rank that was behindcovered that which was before in a regular gradation;so that this curious fortification, which defended themfrom the arrows of the enemy, resembled the roof of ahouse.The Parthians, who thought that the Romans restedon their knees only through weariness and fatigue,threw away their bows, and came to close engagementwith their spears. On this the Romans leaped up witha loud shout, cut to pieces those who came first to theattack, and put all the rest to flight. This method ofattack and defence being repeated every day, theymade but little progress in their march, and were, be-sides, distressed for want of provisions; they couldnot forage without fighting; the corn they could getwas but little, and even that they had not instruments??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.45to grind. The greatest part of them had been left be-hind; for many of the beasts of burden were dead, andmany were employed in carrying the sick and wounded.It is said that a bushel of wheat, Attic measure, wassold for fifty drachmas, and a barley loaf for its weightin silver. Those who sought for roots and potherbsfound few that they had been accustomed to eat, and intasting unknown herbs, they met with one that broughton madness and death. He that had eaten of it im-mediately lost all memory and knowlege; but, at thesame time, would busy himself in turning and movingevery stone he met with, as if he was on some veryimportant pursuit. The camp was full of unhappymen bending to the ground, and thus digging np andremoving stones, till at last they were carried oft' bya bilious vomiting, when wine, the only remedy, wasnot to be had. Thus, while numbers perished, and theParthians still continued to harass them, Antony issaid frequently to have cried out, ' O the Ten Thou-sand!' alluding to the army that Xenophon led fromBabylon both a longer way, and through more nu-merous conflicts, and yet led in safety.The Parthians, when they found that they could notbreak throngh the Roman ranks, nor throw them intodisorder, but were frequently beaten in their attacks,begun once more to treat their foragers in a peaceablemanner. They showed them their bows unstrung, andinformed them that they had given up the pursuit,and were going to depart. A few Medes, they said,might continue the route a day or two longer, but theywould give the Romans no trouble, as their only pur-pose was to protect some of the remoter villages.These professions were accompanied with many kindsalutations; insomuch, that the Romans conceivedfresh hopes and spirits; and, because the way over the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.mountains was said to be destitute of water, Antonyonce more was desirous of taking his route throughthe plains. When he was going to put this scheme inexecution, one Mithridates, cousin to that Moneseswho had formerly sought his protection, and been pre-sented by him with three cities, came from the enemy'scamp, and desired he might be permitted to speak withsome person that understood the Syrian or the Parthianlanguage. Alexander of Antioch, a friend of Antony's,went out to him, and after the Parthiau had informedhim who he was, and attributed his coming to the kind-ness of Moneses, he asked him whether he did not seeat a great distance before him a range of high hills.'Under those hills,' said he, 'the whole Parthianarmy lies in ambuscade for you: for at the foot of themountains there is a spacious plain; and there, when,deluded by their artifices, you have left the way overthe heights, they expect to find you. In the mountainroads, indeed, you have thirst and toil to contend withas usual; but, should Antony take the plains, he mustexpect the fate of Crassus.'After he had given this information he departed;and Antony, on the occasion, assembled a council, andamongst the rest his Mardian guide, who concurredwith the directions of the Parthian. The way overthe plains, he said, was hardly practicable, were thereno enemy to contend with: the windings were longand tedious, and difficult to be made out. The ruggedway over the mountains, on the contrary, had no otherdifficulty in it than to endure thirst for ene day. An-tony therefore changed his mind; and, ordering eachman to take water along with him, took the mountainroad by night. As there was not a sufficient numberof vessels, some conveyed their water in helmets, andothers in bladders.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.47The Parthians were informed of Antony's motions,and, contrary to custom, pursued him in the night.About sunrise they came up with the rear, weary as itwas with toil and watching; for that night they hadtravelled thirty miles. In this condition they had tocontend with an unexpected enemy; and being at onceobliged to fight and continue their march, their thirstbecame still more insupportable. At last the frontcame up to a river, the water of which was cool anddear; but being salt and acrimonious, it occasioned apain in the stomach and bowels, that had been heatedand inflamed with thirst. The Mardian guide had, in-deed, forewarned them of this ; but the poor fellows,rejecting the information that was brought them, drankeagerly of the stream. Antony, running- amongst theranks, intreated them to forbear but a little. He toldthem that there was another river at no great distance,the water of which might be drank with safety; andthat the way was so extremely rocky and uneven, thatit was impossible for the enemy's cavalry to pursue.At the same time he sounded a retreat to call off suchas were engaged with the enemy, and gave the signalfor pitching their tents, that they might at least havethe convenience of shade.While the tents were fixing, and the Parthians, asusual, retiring from the pursuit, Mithridates cameagain; and Alexander being sent out to him, he ad-vised that the Romans, after a little rest, should riseand make for the river, because the Parthians did notpropose to carry their pursuit beyond it. Alexanderreported this to Antony; and Mithridates being pre-sented with as many phials and cups of gold as hecould conceal in. his garments, once more left thecamp. Antony, while it was yet day, struck his tents,and marched unmolested by the enemy: but so dread-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?48PLUTARCH.ful a night as followed he had never passed. Thosewho were known to be possessed of gold or silver wereslain and plundered, and the money that was conveyedin the baggage was made a prey of. Last of all, An-tony's baggage was seized, and the richest bowls andtables were cut asunder and divided amongst the plun-derers. The greatest terror and distraction ran throughthe whole army; for it was concluded that the inroadsof the enemy had occasioned this flight and confusion.Antony sent for one of his freedmen, called Kbamnus,and made him swear that he would stab him and cutoff his head, whenever he should command him, thathe might neither fall alive into the hands of the enemy,nor be known when dead. While his friends wereweeping around him, the Mardian guide gave himsome encouragement, by telling him that the river wasat hand, as he could perceive by the cool freshness ofthe air that issued from it; and that, of course, thetroubles of his journey would soon be at an end, as thenight nearly was. At the same time, he was informedthat all these disorders had been occasioned by theavarice of the soldiers; and he therefore ordered thesignal for encamping, that he might rectify his disor-dered army.It was now daylight, and as soon as the troops werebrought to a little order, the Parthians once more be-gan to harass the rear. The signal was therefore givento the light troops to engage, and the heavy-armedreceived the arrows under a roof of shields as before.The Parthians, however, durst not come any more toclose engagement; and when the front had advanced alittle farther, the river was in sight. Antony firstdrew up the cavalry on the bank to carry over theweak and wounded. The combat was now over, andthe thirsty could enjoy their water in quiet. At sight??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.of the river the Parthians unstrung their bows, and,with the highest encomiums on their bravery, badetheir enemies pass over in peace. They did so; andafter the necessary refreshments, proceeded on theirmarch, without much confidence in the Parthian praiseor professions. Within six days from the last battlethey arrived at the river Araxes, which divides Mediafrom Armenia. This river, on account of the depthand strength of its current, seemed difficult to pass;and a rumor, moreover, ran through the army, thatthe enemy was there in ambuscade to attack them asthey fordpd it. However, they passed over in safety;and when they set foot in Armenia, with the avidity ofmariners when they first come on shore, they kissedthe ground in adoration, and embraced each other witha pleasure that could only express itself in tears. Theill consequences of their former extremities, however,discovered themselves even here; for as they nowpassed through a country of plenty and profusion,their too great indulgences threw them into the dropsyand the cholic. Antony, on reviewing his army, foundthat he had lost twenty thousand foot and four thou-sand horse, more than half of which had not died inbattle, but by sickness. They had been twenty-sevendays in their return from Phraata, and had beaten theParthians in eighteen engagements; but these victo-ries were by no means complete, because they couldnot prosecute their advantages by pursuit.Hence it is evident that Artavasdes deprived An-tony of the fruits of his Parthian expedition: for hadhe been assisted by the sixteen thousand horse whichhe took with him out of Media (who were armed likethe Parthians, and accustomed to fight with them),after the Romans had beaten them in set battles, thiscavalry might have taken up the pursuit, and harassedPLUT. VOL. VII. D??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.them in such a manner, that they could not so oftenhave rallied, and returned to the charge. All there-fore were exciting Antony to revenge himself on Ar-tavasdes: but he followed better counsels, and in hispresent weak and indigent condition, he did not thinkproper to withhold the usual respect and honors hehad paid him. But when he came into Armenia onanother occasion, after having drawn him to a meetingby fair promises and invitations, he seized and carriedhim bound to Alexandria, where be led him in tri-umphal procession. The Romans were offended atthis triumph and at Antony, who had thus transferredthe principal honors of their country to Egypt, for thegratification of Cleopatra. These things, however, hap-pened in a later period of Antony's life.The severity of the winter, and perpetual snows,were so destructive to the troops, that in his marchhe lost eight thousand men. Accompanied by a smallparty, he went down to the sea coast, and in a fort be-tween Berytus and Sidon, called the White Hair, hewaited for Cleopatra. To divert his impatience on herdelay, he had recourse to festivity and intoxication;and he would frequently, over his cups, start up frombis seat, and run, leaping and dancing, to look out forher approach. At length she came, and brought withher a large quantity of money and clothing for thearmy. Some however have asserted that she broughtnothing but the clothes, and that Antony supplied themoney, though he gave her the credit of it.There happened at this time a quarrel betweenPhraates and the king of the Medes, occasioned, as itis said, by the division of the Roman spoils, and thelatter was apprehensive of losing his kingdom. Hetherefore sent to Antony an offer of his assistanceagainst the Parthians. Antony, who concluded that??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.51he had failed of conquering the Parthians only throughwant of cavalry and bowmen, and would here seemrather to confer than to receive a favor, determinedonce more to return to Armenia, and, after joiningthe king of the Medes at the river Araxes, to renewthe war.Octavia, who was still at Rome, now expressed adesire of visiting Antony, and Caesar gave her his per-mission; not according to the general opinion, merelyto oblige her, but that the ill treatment and neglectwhich he concluded she would meet with might givehim a pretence for renewing the war. When she ar-rived at Athens, she received letters from Antony,commanding her to continue there, and acquaintingher with his new expedition. These letters mortifiedher, for she suspected the expedition to be nothingmore than a pretence; however, she wrote to him, anddesired he would send his commands where she shouldleave the presents she had brought. These presentsconsisted of clothing for the army, beasts of burden,money, and gifts for his officers and friends. Besidesthese, she had brought two thousand picked men, fullyequipped and armed for the general's cohort. Octavia'sent this letter by Niger, a friend of Antony's, whodid not fail to pay her the compliments she deserved,but represented her to Antony in the most agreeablelight.Cleopatra dreaded her rival. She was apprehensivethat if she came to Antony, the respectable gravity ofher manners, added to the authority and interest ofCaesar, would carry off her husband. She thereforepretended to be dying for the love of Antony; and, togive a color to her pretence, she emaciated herself byabstinence. At his approach she taught her eye toexpress an agreeable surprise, and when he left her.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.she put on the look of languishment and dejection.Sometimes she would endeavor to weep; and then, asif she wished to hide the tear from her tender Antony,she affected to wipe it off unseen.Antony was all this while preparing for his Medianexpedition, and Cleopatra's creatures and dependantsdid not fail to reproach his unfeeling heart, whichcould suffer the woman whose life was wrapped up inhis, to die for his sake. Octavia's marriage, they said,was a mere political convenience; and it was enoughfor her that she had the honor of being called his wife:poor Cleopatra, though queen of a mighty nation, wascalled nothing more than his mistress; yet even withthis, for the sake of his society, she could be content;but of that society, whenever she should be deprived,it would deprive her of life. These insinuations sototally unmanned him, that through fear of Cleopatra'sputting an end to her life, he returned to Egypt, andput off the Mede till summer, though at that time theParthian affairs were said to be in a seditious and dis-orderly situation. At length, however, he went intoArmenia; and after entering into alliance with theMede, and betrothing one of Cleopatra's sons to adaughter of his who was very young, he returned, thathe might attend to the civil war.When Octavia returned from Athens, Caesar lookedon the treatment she had met with as a mark of thegreatest contempt, and he therefore ordered her toretire and live alone. However, she refused to quither husband's house, and moreover intreated Caesar byno means to have recourse to arms merely on her ac-count. 'It would be infamous,' she said, 'for twochiefs of the Roman empire to involve the people in acivil war, one for the love of a woman, and the otherout of jealousy.' By her own conduct she added??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNV.53weight to her expostulations. She kept up the dignityof Antony's house, and took the same care of hischildren, as well those that he had hy Fulvia as herown, that she could possibly have taken, had he beenpresent. Antony's friends who were sent to Rome tosolicit honors or transact business, she kindly enter-tained, and used her best offices with Caesar to obtainwhat they requested. Yet even by this conduct shewas hurting Antony, contrary to her inclination. Hisinjurious treatment of such a woman excited a generalindignatiou; and the distribution he had made to hischildren in Alexandria carried with it something soimperious and so disparaging to the Romans, that itincreased that indignation not a little. The manner ofdoing it was extremely obnoxious: he summoned thepeople to the place of public exercise, and orderingtwo golden chairs to be placed on a tribunal of silver,one for himself, and the other for Cleopatra, besideslower seats for the children, he announced her queenof Egypt, Cyprus, Africa, and Coelosyria, and nomi-nated Caesario, her son by Caesar the dictator, her col-league. The sons she had by him he entitled Kings ofKings, and to Alexander he gave Armenia and Media,together with Parthia, when it should be conquered.To Ptolemy he gave Phoenicia, Syria, and Cilicia. Atthe same time the children made their appearance,Alexander in a Median dress, with the turban andtiara; and Ptolemy in a long cloak and slippers, witha bonnet encircled by a diadem. The latter was dressedlike the successors of Alexander; the former, like theMedian and Armenian kings. When the children sa-luted their parents, one was attended by Armenian,the other by Macedonian guards. Cleopatra on this,and on other public occasions, wore the sacred robe of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?54PLUTARCH.Isis, and affected to give audience to the people in thecharacter and name of the New Isis.Caesar expatiated on these things in the senate, andby frequent accusations, incensed the people againstAntony. Antony did not fail to recriminate by hisdeputies. In the first place, he charged Caesar withwresting Sicily out of the hands of Pompey, and notdividing it with him. His next charge was, that Caesarhad never returned the ships he had borrowed of him:a third, that after reducing his colleague Lepidus tothe condition of a private man, he had taken to himselfhis army, his province, and his tributes: lastly, thathe had distributed almost all the lands in Italy amonghis own soldiers, and had left nothing for his. To theseCaesar made answer, that Lepidus was reduced, froman incapacity of sustaining his government; that whathe had acquired by war he was ready to divide withAntony, and at the same time he expected to shareArmenia with him; that his soldiers had no right tolands in Italy, because Media and Armenia, which bytheir bravery they had added to the Roman empire,had been allotted to them.Antony being informed of these things in Armenia,immediately sent Canidius to the sea coast with six-teen legions. In the mean time he went to Ephesus,attended by Cleopatra. There he assembled his fleet,which consisted of eight hundred ships of burden,whereof Cleopatra furnished two hundred, besidestwenty thousand talents, and provisions for the wholearmy. Antony, by the advice of Domitius and someother friends, ordered Cleopatra to return to Egypt,and there to wait the event of the war. But the queen,apprehensive that a reconciliation might take place,through the mediation of Octavia, by means of large??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.6T>bribes drew over Canidius to her interest. She pre-vailed on him to represent to Antony, that it was un-reasonable to refuse so powerful an auxiliary the pri-vilege of being present at the war; that her presencewas even necessary to animate and encourage theEgyptians, who made so considerable a part of hisnaval force; nor was Cleopatra, in point of abilities,inferior to any of the princes his allies; since she hadnot only been a long time at the head of a considerablekingdom, but by her intercourse with him, had learntthe administration of the greatest affairs. These re-monstrances, as the Fates had decreed every thing forCaesar, had the desired effect, and they sailed togetherfor Samos, where they indulged in every species ofluxury: for at the same time that the kings, governors,states, and provinces, between Syria, the Mceotis, Ar-menia, and Lauria, were commanded to send their con-tributions to the war, the whole tribe of players andmusicians were ordered to repair to Samos; and whilealmost the whole world besides was venting its anguishin groans and tears, that island alone was piping anddancing. The several cities sent oxen for sacrifice,and kings contended in the magnificence of their pre-sents and entertainments. So that it was natural tosay, ' What kind of figure will these people make intheir triumph, when their very preparations for warare so splendid VWhen these things were over, he gave Priene for theresidence of the players and musicians, and sailed forAthens, where he once more renewed the farce ofpublic entertainments. The Athenians had treatedOctavia, when she was at Athens, with the highest re-spect; and Cleopatra, jealous of the honors she hadreceived, endeavored to court the people by everymark of favor. The people in return decreed her??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH,public honors, and sent a deputation to wait on herwith the decree. At the head of this deputation wasAntony himself, in the character of a citizen of Athens,and he was prolocutor on the occasion.In the mean time he sent some of his people to turnOctavia out of his house at Rome. When she left it,it is said she took with her all his children, except theeldest by Fulvia, who attended him, and deplored theseverity of her fate with tears, under the apprehensionthat she would be looked on as one of the causes ofthe civil war. The Romans pitied her sufferings, butstill more the folly of Antony, particularly such ashad seen Cleopatra; for she was by no means pre-ferable to Octavia, either on account of her youth orbeauty.When Caesar was informed of the celerity and mag-nificence of Antony's preparations, he was afraid ofbeing forced into the war that summer. This wouldhave been very inconvenient for him, as he was in wantof almost every thing, and the levies of money occa-sioned a general dissatisfaction. The whole body ofthe people were taxed one fourth of their income, andthe sons of freedmen one eighth. This occasioned thegreatest clamor and confusion in Italy, and Antonycertainly committed a very great oversight in neg-lecting the advantage. By his unaccountable delayshe gave Caesar an opportunity both to complete hispreparations, and appease the minds of the people.When the money was demanded, they murmured andmutinied; but after it was once paid, they thought ofit no longer.Titius and Plancus, men of consular dignity, andAntony's principal friends, being ill used by Cleopatraon account of their opposing her stay in the army,abandoned him and went over to Caesar. As they??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.knew the contents of Antony's will, they presentlymade him acquainted with them. This will was lodgedin the hands of the vestals; and when Csesar demandedit they refused to send it; adding, that if he was de-termined to have it, he must come and take it himself.Accordingly he went and took it. First of all he readit over to himself, and remarked such passages as weremost liable to censure. Afterwards he read it in thesenate, and this gave a general offence. It seemed tothe greatest part an absurd and unprecedented thingthat a man should suffer in his life for what he hadordered to be done after his death. Caesar dwelt par-ticularly on the orders he had given concerning hisfuneral: for in case he died at Rome, he had directedhis body to be carried in procession through the forum,and afterwards conveyed to Alexandria to Cleopatra.Calvisius, a retainer of Caesar's, also accused him ofhaving given to Cleopatra the Pergamenian library,which consisted of two hundred thousand volumes;and added, that once, when they supped in public,Antony rose and trod on Cleopatra's foot by way ofsignal for some rendezvous. He asserted, moreover,that he suffered the Ephesians in his presence to callCleopatra sovereign; and that when he was presidingat the administration of public affairs, attended byseveral tetrarchs and kings, he received love-lettersfrom her inclosed in onyx and crystal, and there pe-rused them. Besides, when Furnius, a man of greatdignity, and one of the ablest of the Roman orators,was speaking in public, Cleopatra was carried throughthe forum in a litter; on which Antony immediatelystarted up, and no longer paying his attention to thecause, accompanied her, leaning on the litter as hewalked.The veracity of Calvisius, in these accusations, was,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?58PLUTARCH.nevertheless, suspected. The friends of Antony so-licited the people in his behalf, and despatched Ge-minius, one of their number, to put him on his guardagainst the abrogation of his power, and his being de-clared an enemy to the Roman people. Geminiussailed into Greece, and, on his arrival, was suspectedby Cleopatra as an agent of Octavius. On this ac-count he was contemptuously treated, and the lowestseats were assigned him at the public suppers. Thishowever he bore for some time with patience, in hopesof obtaining an interview with Antony: but being pub-licly called on to declare the cause of his coming, heanswered, 'That one part of the cause would requireto be communicated at a sober hour, but the other partcould not be mistaken, whether a man were drunk orsober; for it was clear that all things would go wellif Cleopatra retired into Egypt.' Antony was ex-tremely chagrined; and Cleopatra said, 'You havedone very well, Geminius, to confess without beingput to the torture.' Geminius soon after withdrew,and returned to Rome. Many more of Antony's friendswere driven off by the creatures of Cleopatra, whenthey could no longer endure their insolence and scur-rility. Amongst the rest were Marcus Silanus, andDellius the historian. The latter informs us that Cleo-patra had a design on his life, as he was told by Glau-cus the physician; because he had once affronted herat supper, by saying, that while Sarmentus was drink-ing Falernian at Rome, they were obliged to take upwith vinegar. Sarmentus was a boy of Caesar's, oneof those creatures whom the Romans call deliciae.When Caesar had made his preparations, it was de-creed that war should be declared against Cleopatra;for that Antony could not be said to possess that powerwhich he had already given up to a woman. Caesar??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY. 59observed, that he was like a man under enchantment,who has no longer any power over himself. It wasnot he with whom they were going to war, but Mardionthe slave, and Pothinus; Iris, Cleopatra's woman, andCharmion; for these had the principal direction of af-fairs. Several prodigies are said to have happenedprevious to this war. Pisaurum, a colony of Antony'son the Adriatic, was swallowed up by an earthquake.Antony's statue in Alba was covered with sweat formany days, which returned though it was frequentlywiped off. While he was at Patra;, the temple of Her-cules was set on fire by lightning: and at Athens thestatue of Bacchus was carried by a whirlwind fromthe Gigantomachia into the theatre. These things con-cerned Antony the more nearly, as he affected to be adescendant of Hercules, and an imitator of Bacchus;insomuch, that he was called the younger Bacchus.The same wind threw down the colossal statues of Eu-menes and Attalus, called the Antonii, while the restwere unmoved. And in Cleopatra's royal galley,which was called Antonias, a terrible phenomenonappeared. Some swallows had built their nests in thestern, and others drove them away aud destroyed theiryoung.On the commencement of the war, Antony had nofewer than five hundred armed vessels, magnificentlyadorned, and furnished with eight or ten banks of oars.He had, moreover, a hundred thousand foot, and twelvethousand horse. The auxiliary kings, who fought underhis banners were, Bocchus of Africa, Tarcondemus ofthe Upper Cilicia, Archelaus of Cappadocia, Phila-delphus of Paphlagonia, Mithridates of Commagene,and Adallas of Thrace. Those who did not attend inperson, but sent supplies, were Polemo of Pontus,Malchus of Arabia, Herod of Judea, aud Amyntas,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?60PLUTARCH.king of Lycaonia and Galatia. Besides these he hadsupplies also from the king of the Medes. Caesar hadtwo hundred and fifty men of war, eighty thousandfoot, and an equal number of horse with the enemy.Antony's dominions lay from the Euphrates and Ar-menia, to the Ionian sea and Illyria: Caesar's extendedfrom Illyria to the western ocean, and from that againto the Tuscan and Sicilian seas. He had likewise allthat part of Africa which lies opposite to Italy, Gaul,and Spain, as far as the pillars of Hercules. The restof that country, from Cyrene to Ethiopia, was in thepossession of Antony.But such a slave was he to the will of a woman, thatthough much superior at land, to gratify her, he puthis whole confidence in the navy; notwithstanding thatthe ships had not half their complement of men, and theofficers were obliged to press and pick up in Greecevagrants, ass-drivers, reapers, and boys. Nor couldthey make up their numbers even with these, but manyof the ships were still almost empty. Caesar's ships,which were not high-built or splendidly set off forshow, but tight good sailers, well manned and equipped,continued in the harbors of Tarentum and Brundusium.From thence he sent to Antony, desiring he would meethim with his forces, that no time might be lost; offer-ing at the same time to leave the ports and harbors freefor his landing, and to withdraw his army a day's journeyon horseback, that he might make good his encamp-ment. To this Antony returned a haughty answer, andthough he was the older man, challenged Caesar tosingle combat; or if he should decline this, he mightmeet him at Pharsalia, and decide it where Caesar andPompey had done before. Caesar prevented this; forwhile Antony made for Actium, which is now calledNicopolis, he crossed the Ionian, and seized on Toryne,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.Gla place in Epirus. Antony was distressed on findingthis, because he was without his infantry; but Cleo-patra made a jest of it, and asked him if it was sovery dreadful a thing that Caesar was got into theLadle.Antony, as soon as it was daylight, perceived theenemy making up to him; and fearing that his ill-manned vessels would be unable to stand the attack*he armed the rowers, and placed them on the decks tomake a show, with the oars suspended on each side ofthe vessels: he proceeded in this mock form of battletowards Actium. Caesar was deceived by the strata-gem, and retired. The water about Caesar's camp wasboth scarce and bad, and Antony had the address tocut off the little that they had.It was much about this time that, contrary to the in-clination of Cleopatra, he acted so generous a part byDomitius. The latter, even when he had a fever onhim, took a small boat and went over to Caesar: An-tony, though he could not but resent this, sent afterhim his baggage, his friends and servants; and Do-mitius, as if it had been for grief that his treacherywas discovered, died very soon after. Amyntas andDeiotarus likewise went over to Caesar.Antony's fleet was so very unsuccessful, and so unfitfor service, that he was obliged at last to think of hisland-forces; and Canidius, who had been retained inthe interest of Cleopatra, now changing his mind,thought it necessary that she should be sent away, andthat Antony should retire into Thrace or Macedonia todecide it in the field. These places were thought ofthe rather, because Dicomes, king of the Getae, hadoffered to assist Antony with a large army. To giveup the sea to Caesar, who, in his Sicilian wars, had ac-quired so much experience on it, he said, would be no??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.disgrace; but to give up the advantage which so ablea general as himself might make of his land-forces,and waste the strength of so many legions in uselessdraughts for the sea service, would be infinitely ab-surd. Cleopatra, however, prevailed for the decisionby sea; though her motive was not the superior chanceof victory, but, in case of being vanquished, the betteropportunity to escape.There was a neck of land that lay between Antony'scamp and his fleet, along which he used to go fre-quently from one to the other. Caesar was informedby a domestic how easy it might be to seize Antony inthis passage, and he sent a party to lie in wait for thatpurpose. They were so near carrying their point, thatthey seized the person who went before Antony, andhad they not been too hasty, he must have fallen intotheir hands, for it was with the greatest difficulty thathe made his escape by flight.After it was determined to decide the affair by sea,they set fire to all the Egyptian vessels except sixty.The best and largest ships from three ranks of oars toten were selected, and these had their proper comple-ment of men, for they were supplied with twenty thou-sand foot and two thousand archers. On this a veteranwarrior, an experienced officer in the infantry, who hadoften fought under Antony, and whose body was coveredwith scars, cried, pointing to those scars, 'Why willyou, general, distrust these honest wounds, and restyour hopes on those villanous wooden bottoms 1 Letthe Egyptians and Phoenicians skirmish at sea; butgive us at least the land, for there it is that we have"learnt to conquer or to die.' Antony made no answer,but seemed to encourage him by the motions of hishand and head; though, at the same time, he had nogreat confidence himself; for when the pilots would??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.G3have left the sails behind, he ordered them to takethem all on board, pretending indeed, that it should bedone to pursue the enemy's flight, not to facilitate hisown.On that and the three following days the sea ran toohigh for an engagement: but on the fifth the weatherwas fine and the sea calm. Antony and Poplicola ledthe right wing, Ccelius the left, and Marcus Octaviusand Marcus Justeius commanded the centre. Caesarhad given his left wing to Agrippa, and led the righthimself. Antony's land-forces were commanded byCanidius, and Caesar's remained quiet on the shore,under the command of Taurus. As to the generalsthemselves, Antony was rowed about in a light vessel,ordering his men, on account of the weight of theirvessels, to keep their ground and fight as steadily as ifthey were at land. He ordered bis pilots to stand asfirm as if they were at anchor, in that position to re-ceive the attacks of the enemy, and by all means toavoid the disadvantage of the straits. Caesar, when heleft his tent before day, to review his fleet, met a manwho was driving an ass. On asking his name, the mananswered, ' My name is Eutychus, and the name of myass is Nicon.'1 The place where he met him was after-wards adorned with trophies of the beaks of ships, andthere he placed the statue of the ass and his driver inbrass. After having reviewed the whole fleet, andtaken his post in the right wing, he attended to thefleet of the enemy, which he was surprised to findsteady and motionless as if it lay at anchor: for sometime he was of opinion that it was so, and for thatreason, he kept back his fleet at the distance of eightfurlongs. About noon there was a brisk gale from the1 Good fortune and victory.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?64PLUTARCH.sea, and Antony's forces being impatient for the com-bat, and trusting to the height and bulk of their ves-sels, which they thought would render them invincible,put the left wing in motion. Caesar rejoiced at thesight of this, and kept back his right wing, that hemight the more effectually draw them out to the opensea, where his light galleys could easily surround theheavy half-manned vessels of the enemy.The attack was not made with any violence or im-petuosity; for Antony's ships were too heavy for thatkind of rapid impression, which, however, is very ne-cessary for the breach of the enemy's vessels. On theother hand, Caesar's ships durst neither encounter headto head with Antony's, on account of the strength androughness of their beaks, nor yet attack them on thesides, since by means of their weight they would easilyhave broken their beaks, which were made of largesquare pieces of timber fastened to each other withiron cramps. The engagement therefore was like abattle at land, rather than a sea-fight, or, more pro-perly, like the storming of a town; for there weregenerally three or more ships of Caesar's about one ofAntony's, assaulting it with pikes, javelins, and fire-brands, while Antony's men, out of their woodentowers1 threw weapons of various kinds from engines.Agrippa opened his left wing with a design to surroundthe enemy, and Poplicola, in his endeavor to preventhim, was separated from the main body, which threw itinto disorder, while at the same time it was attackedwith great vigor by Arruntius.2 When things were inthis situation, and nothing decisive was yet effected,Cleopatra's sixty ships on a sudden hoisted their sails,1 His ships are so called on account of their tallness.* Arruntius must have commanded Caesar's centre, thoughthat circumstance is not mentioned.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.65and fairly took to flight through the midst of the com-batants; for they were placed in the rear of the large-vessels, and by breaking their way through them theyoccasioned no small confusion. The enemy saw themwith astonishment making their way with a fair windfor the Peloponnesus. Antony, on this occasion, forgotboth the general and the man; and as some author haspleasantly observed, that ' a lover's soul lives in thebody of his mistress,' so, as if he had been absolutelyincorporated with her, he suffered her to carry himsoul and body away. No sooner did he see her vesselhoisting sail than, forgetting every other object, for-getting those brave friends that were shedding theirblood in his cause, he took a five-oared galley, and,accompanied only by Alexander the Syrian and Scel-lius, followed her who was the first cause, and now theaccomplisher of his ruin. Her own destruction wascertain, and he voluntarily involved himself in herfate.When she saw him coming, she put up a signal inher vessel, on which he soon went aboard: neither ofthem could look each other in the face, and Antonysat down at the head of the ship, where he remainedin sombre silence, holding his head between his hands.In the mean time Caesar's light ships that were in pur-suit of Antony came in sight. On this he ordered hispilot to tack about and meet them; but they all de-clined the engagement, and made off, except Euryclesthe Lacedaemonian, who shook his lance at him in amenacing manner on the deck. Antony, standing atthe head of his galley, cried, ' Who art thou that thuspursuest Antony?' He answered, ' I am Eurycles, theson of Lachares, and follow the fortunes of Caesar torevenge my father's death.' This Lachares Antonyhad beheaded for a robbery. Eurycles however didPLUT. VoL. VII. E??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.not attack Antony's vessel, but fell on the other admi-ral-galley (for there were two of that rank), and by theshock turned her round. He took that vessel andanother which contained Antony's most valuable plateand furniture. When Eurycles was gone, Antony re-turned to the same pensive posture; and continuingthus for three days, during which, either throughshame or resentment, he refused to see Cleopatra, hearrived at Taenarus. There the women who attendedthem first brought them to speak to each other, thento dine together, and not long after, as it may be sup-posed, to sleep together. At last, several of his trans-ports, and some of his friends who had escaped fromthe defeat, came up with him, and informed him thathis fleet was totally destroyed, but that his land-forceswere yet unhurt. Hereon he sent orders to Canidiusimmediately to march his army through Macedoniainto Asia. As for himself, he determined to sail fromTaenarus into Africa; and dividing one ship-load oftreasure amongst his friends, he desired them to pro-vide for their own safety. They refused the treasure,and expressed their sorrow in tears; while Antony,with the kindest and most humane consolations in-treated them to accept it, and dismissed them withletters of recommendation to his agent at Corinth,whom he ordered to give them refuge till they couldbe reconciled to Caesar. This agent was Theophilus,the father of Hipparchus, who had great interest withAntony; but was the first of his freedmen that wentover to Caesar. He afterwards settled at Corinth.In this posture were the affairs of Antony. Afterhis fleet at Actium had long struggled with Caesar's, ahard gale, which blew right a-head of the ships, ob-liged them to give out about four in the afternoon.About five thousand men were slain in the action; and??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.G7Caesar, according to bis own account, took three hun-dred ships. Antony's flight was observed by few, andto those who had not seen it, it was at first incredible.They could not possibly believe that a general, whohad nineteen legions and twelve thousand horse, a ge-neral to whom vicissitude of fortune was nothing new,would so basely desert tbem. His soldiers had an in-expressible desire to see him; and, still expecting thathe would appear in some part or other, gave the strong-est testimony of their courage and fidelity. Nay, whenthey were even convinced that he had irrecoverablyfled, they continued embodied for seven days, andwould not listen to the ambassadors of Caesar. At last,however, when Canidins, who commanded them, fledfrom the camp by night, and when they were aban-doned by their principal officers, they surrendered toCaesar.After this great success Caesar sailed for Athens.The cities of Greece he found in extreme poverty; forthey had been plundered of their cattle and everything else before the war. He therefore not only ad-mitted them to favor, but made a distribution amongstthem of the remainder of the corn which had beenprovided for the war. My great-grandfather, Nicar-chus, used to relate, that as the inhabitants of Chaero-nea had no horses, they were compelled to carry acertain quantity of corn on their shoulders to the seacoast as far as Anticyra, and were driven by soldierswith stripes, like so many beasts of burden. This,however, was done but once; for when the corn wasmeasured a second time, and they were preparing tocarry it, news came of Antony's defeat, and this savedthe city from farther hardships: for the commissariesand soldiers immediately took to flight, and left the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?68PLUTARCH.poor inhabitants to share the corn amongst them-selves.When Antony arrived in Libya he sent Cleopatrafrom Paraetonium into Egypt, and retired to a melan-choly desert, where he wandered up and down, withonly two attendants. One of these was Aristocratesthe Greek rhetorician: the other was Lucilius; con-cerning whom it has been mentioned in another placethat, to favor the escape of Brutus at the battle ofPhilippi, he assumed his name, and suffered himselfto be taken. Antony saved him ; and he was so grate-ful, that he attended him to the last.When Antony was informed that he who commandedhis troops in Libya had gone over to the enemy, heattempted to lay violent hands on himself; but he wasprevented by his friends, who conveyed him to Alex-andria, where he found Cleopatra engaged in a verybold enterprise.Between the Red sea and the Egyptian there is anisthmus which divides Asia from Africa, and which,in the narrowest part, is about three hundred furlongsin breadth. Cleopatra had formed a design of drawingher galleys over this part into the Red sea; and pur-posed, with all her wealth and forces, to seek someremote country, where she might neither be reduced toslavery nor involved in war. However, the first gal-leys that were carried over, being burnt by the Ara-bians of Petra, and Antony not knowing that his land-forces were dispersed, she gave up this enterprise, andbegan to fortify the avenues of her kingdom. An-tony, in the mean time, forsook the city and the societyof his friends, and retired to a small house which hehad built himself near Pharos, on a mound he had castup in the sea. In this place, sequestered from all com-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.0!)merce with mankind, he affected to live like Timon,because there was a resemblance in their fortunes. Hehad been deserted by his friends, and their ingratitudehad put him out of humor with his own species.This Timon was a citizen of Athens, and lived aboutthe time of the Peloponnesian war, as appears fromthe comedies of Aristophanes and Plato, in which heis exposed as the hater of mankind. Yet, though hehated mankind in general, he caressed the bold andimpudent boy Alcibiades; and being asked the reasonof this by Apemantus, who expressed some surprise atit, he answered, it was because he foresaw that hewould plague the people of Athens. Apemantus wasthe only one he admitted to his society, and he was hisfriend in point of principle. At the feast of sacrificesfor the dead, these two dined by themselves; and whenApemantus observed that the feast was excellent, Ti-mon answered, 'it would be so if you were not here.'Once, in an assembly of the people, he mounted therostrum, and the novelty of the thing occasioned anuniversal silence and expectation; at length he said,'People of Athens, there is a fig-tree in my yard, onwhich many worthy citizens have hanged themselves;and as I have determined to build on the spot, Ithought it necessary to give this public notice, thatsuch as choose to have recourse to this tree for theaforesaid purpose may repair to it before it is cutdown.' He was buried at Halae, near the sea; andthe water surrounded his tomb in such a manner, thathe was even then inaccessible to mankind. The fol-lowing epitaph is inscribed on his monument:At last, I've bid the knaves farewell:Ask not my name----but go--to hell.It is said that he wrote this epitaph himself. That??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?70PLUTARCH.which is commonly repeated was written by Callima-chus:My name is Timon: knaves begone!Curse me, but come not near my stone!These are some of the many anecdotes we have con-cerning Timon.Canidius himself brought Antony news of the de-fection of his army. Soon after he heard that Herodof Judiea was gone over to Caesar with some legionsand cohorts; that several other powers had desertedhis interest; and, in short, that he had no foreign as-sistance to depend on. None of these things howeverdisturbed him; for, at once abandoning his hopes andhis cares, he left his Timonian retreat, and returnedto Alexandria; where, in the palace of Cleopatra, heonce more entertained the citizens with his usual festi-Tity and munificence. He gave the toga virilis to An-tyllus, his son by Fulvia; and admitted Cleopatra'sson by Caesar into the order of young men. The en-tertainments on this occasion were infinitely pompousand magnificent, and lasted many days.Antony and Cleopatra had before established a so-ciety, called 'the Inimitable Livers,' of which theywere members; but they now instituted another, byno means inferior in splendor or luxury, called ? theCompanions in Death.' Their friends were admittedinto this, and the time passed in mutual treats anddiversions. Cleopatra, at the same time, was makinga collection of poisonous drugs; and being desirous toknow which was least painful in the operation, shetried them on the capital convicts. Such poisons aswere quick in their operation she found to be attendedwith violent pain and convulsions ; such as were milderwere slow in their eflFect: she therefore applied herselfto the examination of venomous creatures, and caused??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.71different kinds of them to be applied to different per-sons under her own inspection. These experimentsshe repeated daily ; and at length she found that thebite of the asp was the most eligible kind of death;for it brought on a gradual kind of lethargy, in whichthe face was covered with a gentle sweat, and thesenses sunk easily into stupefaction; and those whowere thus affected showed the same uneasiness at be-ing disturbed or awaked that people do in the pro-foundest natural sleep.They both sent ambassadors to Caesar in Asia. Cleo-patra requested Egypt for her children; and Antonyonly petitioned that he might be permitted to live as aprivate man in Egypt, or, if that were too much, thathe might retire to Athens. Deserted as they were byalmost all their friends, and hardly knowing in whomto confide, they were forced to send Euphronius, theirchildren's tutor, on this embassy. Alexis of Laodicea,who, by means of Timogenes, became acquainted withAntony at Rome, a man of great skill in the Greeklearning, and one of Cleopatra's chief agents in keep-ing Antony from Octavia, he had before despatchedto Judaea, to detain Herod in his interest. This mangave up Antony; and, relying on Herod's interest,had the confidence to appear before Caesar. The inte-rest of Herod, however, did not save him; for he wasimmediately carried in chains into his own country,and there put to death. Thus Antony had, at least,the satisfaction of seeing him punished for his perfidy.Caesar absolutely rejected Antony's petition; but heanswered Cleopatra, that she might expect every favorfrom him, provided she either took off Antony, or ba-nished him her dominions. At the same time he sentThyreus to her, who was one of his freedmen, andwhose address was not unlikely to carry his point,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?72PLUTARCH.particularly as he came from a young conqueror to thecourt of a vain and ambitious queen, who had still thehighest opinion of her personal charms. As this am-bassador was indulged with audiences longer and morefrequent than usual, Antony grew jealous, and havingfirst ordered him to be whipped, he sent him back toCaesar with letters, wherein he informed him that hehad been provoked by the insolence of his freedman ata time when his misfortunes made him but too proneto anger. 'However,' added he, ' you have a freed-man of mine, Hipparchus, in your power, and if itwill be any satisfaction to you, use him in the samemanner.' Cleopatra, that she might make some amendsfor her indiscretion, behaved to him afterwards withgreat tenderness and respect. She kept her birth-dayin a manner suitable to their unhappy circumstances;but his was celebrated with such magnificence, thatmany of the guests who came poor, returned wealthy.After Antony's overthrow Agrippa wrote severalletters to Caesar to inform him that his presence wasnecessary at Rome. This put oft' the war for sometime; but as soon as the winter was over Caesarmarched against Antony by the route of Syria andsent his lieutenants on the same business into Africa.When Pelusium was taken, it was rumored that Se-leucus had delivered up the place with the connivanceor consent of Cleopatra: whereon the queen, in orderto justify herself, gave up the wife and children ofSeleucus into the hands of Antony. Cleopatra haderected near the temple of Isis some monuments ofextraordinary size and magnificence. To these sheremoved her treasure, her gold, silver, emeralds,pearls, ebony, ivory, and cinnamon, together with alarge quantity of flax, and a number of torches. Caesarwas under some apprehensions about this immense??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.73wealth, lest, on some sudden emergency, she shouldset fire to the whole: for this reason he was continuallysending messengers to her with assurances of gentleand honorable treatment, while in the mean time hehastened to the city with his army.When he arrived he encamped near the Hippodrome;on which Antony made a brisk sally, routed the ca-valry, drove them back into their trenches, and re-turned to the city with the complacency of a conqueror.As he was going to the palace he met Cleopatra, whom,armed as he was, he kissed without ceremony, and atthe same time he recommended to her favor a bravesoldier, who had distinguished himself in the engage-ment. She presented the soldier with a cuirass andhelmet of gold, which he took, and the same nightwent over to Caesar. After this Antony challengedCaesar to fight him in single combat; but Caesar onlyanswered, that ' Antony might think of many otherways to end his life.' Antony, therefore, concludingthat he could not die more honorable than in battle,determined to attack Caesar at the same time both bysea and land. The night preceding the execution ofthis design he ordered his servants at supper to ren-der him their best services that evening, and fill thewine round plentifully; for the day following theymight belong to another master, whilst he lay extendedon the ground, no longer of consequence either to themor to himself. His friends were affected, and wept tohear him talk thus; which, when he perceived, he en-couraged them by assurances that his expectations ofa glorious victory were at least equal to those of anhonorable death. At the dead of night, when uni-versal silence reigned through the city, a silence thatwas deepened by the awful thought of the ensuing day,on a sudden was beard the sound of musical instru-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?74PLUTARCH.ments, and a noise which resembled the exclamationsof bacchanals. This tumultuous procession seemedto pass through the whole city, and to go out at thegate which led to the enemy's camp. Those who re-flected on this prodigy, concluded that Bacchus, thegod whom Antony affected to imitate, had then for-saken him.As soon as it was light he led his infantry out of thecity, and posted them on a rising ground, from whencehe saw his fleet advance towards the enemy. Therehe stood waiting for the event; but as soon as the twofleets met they hailed each other with their oars in avery friendly manner, (Antony's fleet making the firstadvances,) and sailed together peaceably towards thecity. This was no sooner done than the cavalry de-serted him in the same manner, and surrendered toCa?sar. His infantry were routed; and, as he retiredto the city, he exclaimed that Cleopatra had betrayedhim to those with whom he was fighting only for hersake.The unhappy queen, dreading the effects of his anger,fled to her monument, and having secured it as muchas possible with bars and bolts, she gave orders thatAntony should be informed she was dead. Believingthe information to be true, he cried, ' Antony, whydost thou delay? What is life to thee, when it istaken from her, for whom alone thou couldst wish tolive V He then went to his chamber, and opening hiscoat of mail, he said, ' I am not distressed, Cleopatra,that thou art gone before me, for I shall soon be withthee; but I grieve to think that I, who have been sodistinguished a general, should be inferior in magna-nimity to a woman.' He was then attended by a faith-ful servant, whose name was Eros. He had engagedthis servant to kill him, whenever he should think it??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.necessary, and he now demanded that service. Erosdrew his sword, as if he designed to kill him; but,suddenly turning about, he slew himself, and fell athis master's feet!' This, Eros, was greatly done,' saidAntony; ' thy heart would not permit thee to kill thymaster, but thou hast taught him what to do by thyexample.' He then plunged his sword into his bowels,and tbrew himself on a couch that stood by. Thewound, however, was not so deep as to cause immediatedeath; and the blood stopping as he lay on the couch,he came to himself, and intreated those who stood byto put him out of his pain. They all fled nevertheless,and left him to his cries and torments, till Diomedes,secretary to Cleopatra, came with her request that hewould come to her in the monument. When Antonyfound that she was still living, it gave him fresh spirits,and he ordered his servants to take him up. Accord-ingly they carried him in their arms to the door of themonument. Cleopatra would not suffer the door to beopened, but a cord being let down from a window,Antony was fastened to it, and she, with her two wo-men, all that were admitted into the monument, drewhim up. Nothing, as they who were present observed,could possibly be more affecting than that spectacle.Antony, covered with blood, and in the agonies ofdeath, hoisted up by the rope, and stretching out hishands to Cleopatra, while he was suspended, for a con-siderable time, in the air! for it was with the greatestdifficulty they drew him up, though Cleopatra herselfexerted all her strength, straining every nerve, anddistorting every feature with the violence of the effort;while those who stood below endeavored to animateand encourage her, and seemed to partake in all thetoil, and all the emotions that she felt. When shehad drawn him up, and laid him on a bed, as she stood??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?76PLUTARCH.over him, she rent her clothes, beat and wounded herbreast, and wiping the blood from his disfigured coun-tenance, she called him her lord, her emperor, her hus-band! Her whole soul was absorbed in his misfor-tunes; and she seemed totally to have forgot that shehad any miseries of her own. Antony endeavored tosoothe her as well as he was able, and called for wine;either because he was thirsty, or because he thought itmight sooner put him out of his pain. When he haddrank, he advised her to consult her own affairs andher safety, so far as might be consistent with honor, andto place her confidence in Proculeius rather than in theother friends of Caesar. As to himself, he said thatshe ought rather to rejoice in the remembrance of hispast happiness, than to bewail his present misfortunes,since in his life he had been illustrious, and was notinglorious in his death. He had conquered like a Ro-man, and it was only by a Roman that he was con-quered. A little before he expired Proculeius arrivedfrom Caesar: for after Antony had stabbed himself,and was conveyed to Cleopatra, Dercetaeus, one of hisguards, privately carried off his bloody sword, andahowed it to Caesar. When Caesar beheld this tokenof Antony's death, he retired to the inner part of histent, and shed some tears in remembrance of a manwho had been his relation, his colleague in government,and his associate in so many battles and importantaffairs. He then called his friends together, and readthe letters which had passed between him and Antony;wherein it appeared that, though Caesar had stillwritten in a rational and equitable manner, the an-swers of Antony were insolent and contemptuous.After this he despatched Proculeius with orders totake Cleopatra alive, if it were possible, for he wasextremely solicitous to save the treasures in the monu-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.77ment, which would only so greatly add to the gloryof his triumph. However, she refused to admit himinto the monument, and would only speak to himthrough the holted gate. The suhstance of this con-ference was, that Cleopatra made a requisition of thekiugdom forherchildren, while Proculeius, on the otherhand, encouraged her to trust every thing to Caesar.After he had reconnoitered the place, he sent an ac-count of it to Caesar; on which Gallus was despatchedto confer with Cleopatra. The thing was thus con-certed: Gallus went up to the gate of the monument,and drew Cleopatra into conversation, while, in themean time, Proculeius applied a ladder to the window,where the women had taken in Antony; and havinggot in with two servants, he immediately made forthe place where Cleopatra was in conference with Gal-lus. One of her women discovered him, and screamedaloud, 'Wretched Cleopatra, you are taken alive!'She turned ahout, and, seeing Proculeius, the sameinstant attempted to stah herself; for to this intent shealways carried a dagger ahout with her. Proculeius,however, prevented her, and, expostulating with her,as he held her in his arms, he intreated her not to beso injurious to herself or to Ca;sar; that she would notdeprive so humane a prince of the glory of his cle-mency, or expose him hy her distrust to the imputa-tion of treachery or cruelty. At the same time .betook the dagger from her, and shook her clothes, lestshe should have poison concealed about her. Caesaralso sent his freedman Epaphroditus with orders totreat her with the greatest politeness, but, by all means,to bring her alive.Caesar entered Alexandria conversing with Arius thephilosopher; and that he might do bim honor beforethe people, he led him by the hand. When he entered??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?78PLUTARCH.the gymnasium, he ascended a tribunal which hadbeen erected for him, and gave assurances to the citi-zens, who prostrated themselves before him, that thecity should not be hurt. He told them he had differentmotives for this. In the first place, it was built byAlexander; in the next place, he admired it for itsbeauty and magnitude; and, lastly, he would spare it,were it but for the sake of his friend Arius, whowas born there. Caesar gave him the high honor ofthis appellation, and pardoned many at his request.Amongst these was Philostratus, one of the most acuteand eloquent sophists of his time. This man, withoutany right, pretended to be a follower of the academics;and Caesar, from a bad opinion of his morals, rejectedhis petition; on which the sophist followed Arius upand down in a mourning cloak, with a long whitebeard, crying constantly,* The wise, if really such, will save the wise.'Caesar heard and pardoned him, not so much out offavor, as to save Arius from the impertinence and envyhe might incur on his account.Antyllus, the eldest son of Antony by Fulvia, wasbetrayed by his tutor Theodorus, and put to death.While the soldiers were beheading him the tutor stolea jewel of considerable value, which he wore abouthis neck, and concealed it in his girdle. When he wascharged with it, he denied the fact; but the jewel wasfound on him, and he was crucified. Caesar appointeda guard over Cleopatra's children and their governors,and allowed them an honorable support. Caesario, thereputed son of Caesar the dictator, had been sent byhis mother, with a considerable sum of money, throughEthiopia into India. But Rhodon, his governor, aman of the same principles with Theodorus, persuading??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.him that Caesar would certainly make him king ofEgypt, prevailed on him to turn back. While Caesarwas deliberating how he should dispose of him, Ariusis said to have observed that there ought not, by anymeans, to be too many Caesars. However, soon afterthe death of Cleopatra he was slain.Many considerable princes begged the body of An-tony, that they might have the honor of giving itburial; but Caesar would not take it from Cleopatra,who interred it with her own hands, and performedthe funeral rites with great magnificence; for she wasallowed to expend what she thought proper on the oc-casion. The excess of her affliction, and the inflamma-tion of her breast, which was wounded by the blowsshe had given it in her anguish, threw her into a fever.She was pleased to find an excuse in this for abstainingfrom food, and hoped, by this means, to die withoutinterruption. The physician in whom she placed herprincipal confidence was Olympus; and, according tohis short account of these transactions, she made useof his advice in the accomplishment of her design.Caesar, however, suspected it; and that he might pre-vail on her to take the necessary food and physic, hethreatened to treat her children with severity. This hadthe desired effect, and her resolution was overborne.A few days after, Caesar himself made her a visit ofcondolence and consolation. She was then in an un-dress, and lying negligently on a couch; but when theconqueror entered the apartment, though she had no-thing on but a single bed-gown, she arose and threwherself at his feet. Her face was out of figure, herhair in disorder, her voice trembling, her eyes sunk,and her bosom bore the marks of the injuries she haddone it. In short, her person gave you the image ofher mind; yet, in this deplorable condition, there??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?80PLUTARCH.were some remains of that grace, that spirit and vi-vacity which had so peculiarly animated her formercharms, and still some gleams of her native elegancemight be seen to wander over her melancholy coun-tenance.When Caesar had replaced her on her couch, andseated himself by her, she endeavored to justify thepart she took against him in the war, alleging the ne-cessity she was under, and her fear of Antony. Butwhen she found that these apologies had no weightwith Caesar, she had recourse to prayers and intreaties,as if she had been really desirous of life; and, at thesame time, she put into his hands an inventory of hertreasure. Seleucus, one of her treasurers, who waspresent, accused her of suppressing some articles inthe account; on which she started up from her couch,caught him by the hair, and gave him several blows onthe face. Caesar smiled at this spirited resentment,and endeavored to pacify her: 'But how is it to beborne,' said she, ' Caesar, if while even you honor mewith a visit in my wretched situation, I must be af-fronted by one of my own servants? Supposing thatI have reserved a few trinkets, they were by no meansintended as ornaments for my own person in thesemiserable fortunes, but as little presents for Octaviaand Livia, by whose good offices I might hope to findfavor with you.' Caesar was not displeased to hearthis, beeause he flattered himself that she was willingto live. He therefore assured her that, whatever shehad reserved, she might dispose of at her pleasure;and that she might, in every respect, depend on themost honorable treatment. After this he took hisleave, in confidence that he had brought her to hispurpose; but she deceived him.There was in Caesar's train a young nobleman, whose.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY.81name was Cornelius Dolabella. He was smitten withthe charms of Cleopatra, and having engaged to com-municate to her every thing that passed, he sent herprivate notice that Caesar was about to return intoSyria, and that, within three days, she would be sentaway with her children. When she was informed ofthis, she requested of Caesar permission to make herlast oblations to Antony. This being granted, she wasconveyed to the place where he was buried; and kneel-ing at his tomb, with her women, she thus addressedthe manes of the dead: 'It is not long, my Antony,since with these hands I buried thee. Alas! theywere then free; but thy Cleopatra is now a prisoner,attended by a guard, lest, in the transports of hergrief, she should disfigure this captive body, which isreserved to adorn the triumph over thee. These arethe last offerings, the last honors she can pay thee ; forshe is now to be conveyed to a distant country. No-thing could part us while we lived; but in death weare to be divided. Thou, though a Roman, liest buriedin Egypt; and I, an Egyptian, must be interred inItaly, the only favor I shall receive from thy country.Yet, if the gods of Rome have power or mercy left,(for surely those of Egypt have forsaken us,) let themnot suffer me to be led in living triumph to thy dis-grace! No!--hide me, hide me with thee in the grave;for life, since thou hast left it, has been misery tome.'Thus the unhappy queen bewailed her misfortunes;and, after she had crowned the tomb with flowers, andkissed it, she ordered her bath to be prepared. Whenshe had bathed, she sat down to a magnificent supper;soon after which, a peasant came to the gate with asmall basket. The guards inquired what it contained;and the man who brought it, putting by the leavesPLUT. VOL. VII. F??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?82PLUTARCH.which lay uppermost, showed them a parcel of figs.As they admired their size and beauty, he smiled, andbade them take some; but they refused, and, not sus-pecting that the basket contained any thing else, it wascarried in. After supper Cleopatra sent a letter toCffisar, and, ordering every body out of the monu-ment, except her two women, she made fast the door.When Caesar opened the letter, the plaintive style inwhich it was written, and the strong request that shemight be buried in the same tomb with Antony, madehim suspect her design. At first he was for hastening toher himself, but he changed his mind, and despatchedothers. Her death however was so sudden, that thoughthey who were sent ran the whole way, alarmed theguards with their apprehensions, and immediately brokeopen the doors, they found her quite dead, lying onher golden bed, and dressed in all her royal ornaments.Iras, one of her women, lay dead at her feet, andCharmion, hardly able to support herself, was adjust-ing her mistress's diadem. One of Caesar's messengerssaid angrily, ' Charmion, was this well done?'--' Per-fectly well,' said she, ' and worthy a descendant of thekings of Egypt.' She had no sooner said this thanshe fell down dead.It is related by some that an asp was brought inamongst the figs, and hid under the leaves; and thatCleopatra had ordered it so that she might be bit with-out seeing it; that, however, on removing the leaves,she perceived it, and said, ' This is what I wanted:' onwhich she immediately held out her arm to it. Otherssay that the asp was kept in a water-vessel, and thatshe vexed and pricked it with a golden spindle till itseized her arm. Nothing of this however could beascertained; for it was reported likewise that she car-ried about with her a certain poison in a hollow bodkin??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ANToNY,8;?that she wore in her hair; yet there was neither anymark of poison on her body, nor was there any serpentfound in the monument, though the track of a reptilewas said to have been discovered on the sea-sands op-posite to the windows of Cleopatra's apartment. Others,again, have affirmed that she had two small punctureson her arm, apparently occasioned by the sting of theasp; and it is clear that Caesar gave credit to this; forher effigy, which he carried in triumph, had an asp onthe arm.'Such are the accounts we have of the death of Cleo-patra; and though Caesar was much disappointed byit, he admired her fortitude, and ordered her to beburied in the tomb of Antony, with all the magnificencedue to her quality. Her women, too, were by hisorders interred with great funeral pomp. Cleopatradied at the age of thirty-nine, after having reignedtwenty-two years, the fourteen last in conjunction withAntony. Antony was fifty-three, some say fifty-six,when he died. His statues were all demolished, butCleopatra's remained untouched; for Archibius, afriend of hers, gave Caesar a thousand talents for theirredemption.Antony left by his three wives seven children,8whereof Antyllus, the eldest, only was put to death.Octavia took the rest, and educated them with herown. Cleopatra, his daughter by Cleopatra, was mar-ried to Juba, one of the politest princes of his time1;and Octavia made Antony, his son by Fulvia, so con-1 This may be a matter of doubt. There would, of course,be aa asp on the diadem of the effigy, because it was peculiarto the kings of Egypt; and this might give rise to the reportof an asp being on the arm.2 By Fulvia, he bad Antyllus and Antony; by Cleopatra, liehad Cleopatra, Ptolemy, and Alexander; and by Octavia, An-tonia, major and minor.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?84PLUTARCH.siderable with Caesar, that, after Agrippa and the sonsof Livia, he was generally allowed to hold the firstplace in his favor. Octavia by her first husband Mar-cellus had two daughters and a son named Marcellus.One of these daughters she married to Agrippa; andthe son married a daughter of Caesar's. But as he diedsoon after, and Octavia observing that her brother wasat a loss whom he should adopt in his place, she pre-vailed on him to give his daughter Julia to Agrippa,though her own daughter must necessarily be divorcedto make way for her. Caesar and Agrippa havingagreed on this point, she took back her daughter andmarried her to Antony. Of the two daughters thatOctavia had by Antony, one was married to Domi-tius jEnobarbus, and the other, Antonia, so muchcelebrated for her beauty and virtue, married Drusus,the son of Livia, and son-in-law to Caesar. Of thisline came Germanicus and Claudius. Claudius wasafterwards emperor; and so likewise was Caius theson of Germanicus, who, after a short but infamousreign, was put to death together with his wife anddaughter. Agrippina, who had Lucius Domitius byjEnobarbus, was afterwards married to Claudius Cae-sar. He adopted Domitius, whom he named NeroGermanicus. This Nero, who was emperor in ourtimes, put his own mother to death, and, by the mad-ness of his conduct, went near to ruin the Roman em-pire. He was the fifth in descent from Antony.DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED.As Demetrius and Antony both passed through avariety of fortune, we shall consider, in the first place,their respective power and celebrity. These were,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DEMETRIUS AND ANToNY CoMPARED. 85hereditary to Demetrius; for Antigonus, the mQstpowerful of Alexander's successors, had reduced allAsia during his son's minority. On the other hand,the father of Antony was, indeed, a man of character,but not of a military character; yet though he had nopublic influence or reputation to bequeath to his son,that son did not hesitate to aspire to the empire of Cae-sar; and, without any title either from consanguinityor alliance, he effectually invested himself with all thathe had acquired: at least, by his own peculiar weight,after he had divided the world into two parts, he tookthe better for himself. By his lieutenants he conqueredthe Parthians, and drove back the barbarous nationsabout Caucasus, as far as the Caspian sea. Even theless reputable parts of his conduct are so many testi-monies of his greatness. The father of Demetriusthought it an honor to marry him to Phila the daughterof Antipater, though there was a disparity in theiryears; while Antony's connexion with Cleopatra wasconsidered as a degrading circumstance; though Cleo-patra, in wealth and magnificence, was superior to allthe princes of her time, Arsaces excepted. Thus hehad raised himself to such a pitch of grandeur, thatthe world in general thought him intitled even to morethan he wished.In Demetrius' acquisition of empire there was no-thing reprehensible. He extended it only to nationsinured to slavery, and desirous of being governed.But the arbitrary power of Antony grew on the exe-crable policy of a tyrant, who once more reduced toslavery a people that had shaken off the yoke. Con-sequently the greatest of his actions, his conquest ofBrutus and Cassius, is darkened with the ingloriousmotive of wresting its liberty from Rome. Demetrius,during his better fortunes, consulted the liberties of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ISOPLUTARCH.Greece, and removed the garrisons from the cities;while Antony made it his boast that he had destroyedthe assertors of his country's freedom in Macedonia.Antony is praised for his liberality and munificence;in which, however, Demetrius is so far his superior, thathe gave more to his enemies than the former did to hisfriends. Antony was honored for allowing a magnifi-cent funeral to Brutus; but Demetrius buried everyenemy he had slain, and sent back his prisoners toPtolemy, not only with their own property, but withpresents.Both were insolent in prosperity, and fell with toomuch ease into luxury and indulgence. But we neverfind Demetrius neglecting his affairs for his pleasures.In his hours of leisure, indeed, he had his Lamia;whose office it was, like the fairy in the fable, to lullhim to sleep, or amuse him in his play. When hewent to war, his spear was not bound about with ivy;his helmet did not smell of perfume; he did not comein the foppery of dress out of the chambers of the wo-men; the riots of Bacchus and his train were hushed;and he became, as Euripides says, the minister ofMars. In short, he never lost a battle through theindulgence of luxury. This could not be said of An-tony. As in the pictures of Hercules we see Omphalestealing his club and his lion's skin, so Cleopatra fre-quently disarmed Antony; and, while he should havebeen prosecuting the most necessary expeditions, ledhim to dancing and dalliance on the shores of Canopusand Taphosiris. So, likewise, as Paris came from bat-tle to the bosom of Helen, and even from the loss ofvictory to her bed, Antony threw victory itself out ofhis hands to follow Cleopatra.Demetrius, being under no prohibition of the laws,but following the examples of Philip and Alexander,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DEMETRIUS AND ANToNY CoMPARED. 87Lysimachus and Ptolemy, married several wives, andtreated them all with the greatest honor. Antony,though it was a thing unheard of amongst the Romans,had two wives at the same time. Besides, he banishedher who was properly his wife, and a citizen, from hishouse, to indulge a foreigner, with whom he couldhave no legal connexion. From their marriages, ofcourse, one of them found no inconvenience; the othersuffered the greatest evils.With regard to their behavior to their parents andrelations, that of Demetrius is irreproachable; butAntony sacrificed his uncle to the sword of Caesar,that he might be empowered in his turn to cut offCicero. A crime the latter was, which could never bemade pardonable, had Antony even saved, and not sa-crificed an uncle by the means! They are both ac-cused of perfidy; in that one of them threw Artabazusinto prison, and the other killed Alexander. Antonyhowever has some apology in this case; for he hadbeen abandoned and betrayed by Artabazus in Media.But Demetrius was suspected of laying a false accusa-tion against Alexander; and of punishing, not the of-fender, but the injured.There is this difference, too, in their military opera-tions; that Demetrius gained every victory himself,and many of Antony's laurels were won by his lieute-nants.Both lost their empire by their own fault, but bydifferent means. The former was abandoned by hispeople; the latter deserted his, even whilst they werefighting for him. The fault of Demetrius was, thatby his conduct he lost the affection of his army: thefault of Antony, his desertion and neglect of that af-fection. Neither of them can be approved in theirdeath; but Demetrius much less than Antony; for he??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?88PLUTARCH.suffered himself to fall into the hands of the enemy,and, with a spirit that was truly base, endured an im-prisonment of three years. There was a deplorableweakness, and many disgraceful circumstances attendingthe death of Antony; but he effected it at last withoutfalling into the enemy's hands.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?r??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DION.As we learn from Simonides, my dear Senecio, thatthe Trojans were by no means offended at the Corin-thians for joining the confederates in the Grecian war,because the family of Glaucus, their own ally, wasoriginally of Corinth, so neither the Greeks nor theRomans have reason to complain of the academy, whichhas been equally favorable to both. This will appearfrom the lives of Brutus and Dion; for, as one wasthe scholar of Plato, and the other educated in hisprinciples, they came like wrestlers from the samepalaestra, to engage in the greatest conflicts. Both,by their conduct, in which there was a great similarity,confirmed that observation of their master, that 'powerand fortune most concur with prudence and justice toeffect any thing great in a political capacity:' but, asHippomachus the wrestler said, that he could distin-guish his scholars at a distance, though they were onlycarrying meat from the market; so the sentiments ofthose who have had a polite education must have asimilar influence on their manners, and give a peculiargrace and propriety to their conduct.Accident, however, rather than design, gave a simi-larity to the lives of these two great men; and bothwere cut off by an untimely death, before they couldcarry the purposes, which they had pursued with somuch labor, into execution. The most singular cir-cumstance attending their death was, that both had adivine warning of it, in the appearance of a frightfulspectre. There are those, indeed, who say, that noman in his senses ever saw a spectre; that these arethe delusive visions of women and children; or of men??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?90PLUTARCH.whose intellects are affected by some infirmity of thebody; and who believe that their absurd imaginationsare of divine inspiration. But if Dion and Brutus,men of firm and philosophic minds, whose understand-ings were not affected by any constitutional infirmity;if such men could pay so much credit to the appear-ance of spectres, as to give an account of them to theirfriends, I see no reason why we should depart fromthe opinion of the ancients, that men had their evilgenii, who disturbed them with fears, and distressedtheir virtue, lest, by a steady and uniform pursuit ofit, they should hereafter obtain a happier allotmentthan themselves. These things however I must referto another occasion; and in this twelfth book of pa-rallel lives, of which Dion and Brutus are the subjects,I shall begin with the more ancient.After Dionysius the elder had seized the govern-ment of Sicily he married the daughter of Hermo-crates, a Syracusan. But as the monarchic powerwas yet but ill established, she had the misfortuneto be so much abused by an outrageous faction, thatshe put an end to her life. When Dionysius wasconfirmed in his government he married two wives atthe same time. One was Doris, a native of Locris;the other, Aristomache, the daughter of Hipparinus,who was a principal person in Syracuse, and colleaguewith Dionysius when he was first appointed generalof the Sicilian forces. It is said that he married thesewives on the same day. It is not certain which hemarried first, but he was impartial in his kindness tothem; for both attended him at his table, and alter-nately partook of his bed. As Doris had the disad-vantage of being a foreigner, the Syracusans soughtevery means of obtaining the preference for their coun-trywoman; but it was more than equivalent to this??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:37 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.91disadvantage that she had the honor of giving Diony-sius his eldest son. Aristomache, on the contrary, wasa long time barren, though the king was extremely de-sirous of having children by her; and put to death themother of Doris, on a supposition that she had pre-vented her conceptions by potions.Dion, the brother of Aristomache, was well receivedat court; not only on her account, but from the regardwhich Dionysius had for his merit and abilities: andthat prince.gave his treasurer an order to supply himwith whatever money he wanted; but, at the sametime, to keep an account of what he received.But whatever the talents and the virtues of Dionmight be originally, it is certain that they received thehappiest improvement under the auspices of Plato.Surely the gods, in mercy to mankind, sent that divinephilosopher from Italy to Syracuse, that, through thehumane influence of his doctrine, the spirit of libertymight once more revive, and the inhabitants of thatcountry be rescued from tyranny.Dion soon became the most distinguished of hisscholars. To the fertility of his genius, and the excel-lence of his disposition, Plato himself has given testi-mony ; and he did the greatest honor to that testimonyin his life: for though he had been educated in servileprinciples under a tyrant, though he had been famili-arised to dependence on the one hand, and to the in-dulgence of pomp and luxury, as the greatest happi-ness, on the other, yet he was no sooner acquaintedwith that philosophy which points out the road to vir-tue, than his whole soul caught the enthusiasm, and,with the simplicity of a young man who judges of thedispositions of others by his own, he concluded thatPlato's lectures would have the same effect on Diony-sius: for this reason he solicited, and at length per-suaded the tyrant to hear him. When Plato was??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.admitted, the discourse turned on virtue in general.Afterwards they came to fortitude in particular; andPlato made it appear that tyrants have, of all men,the least pretence to that virtue. Justice was the nexttopic: and when Plato asserted the happiness of thejust, and the wretched condition of the unjust, thetyrant was stung; and being unable to answer his ar-guments, he expressed his resentment against thosewho seemed to listen to him with pleasure. At last hewas extremely exasperated, and asked the philosopherwhat business he had in Sicily. Plato answered, 'thathe came to seek an honest man.'--' And so, then,' re-plied the tyrant, 'it seems you have lost your labor.'Dion was in hopes that his anger would have endedhere; but while Plato was hastening to be gone heconveyed him aboard a galley, in which Pollis, theLacedaemonian, was returning to Greece. Dionysiusurged Pollis either to put Plato to death in his pas-sage, or, at least, to sell him as a slave: 'for, accord-ing to his own maxim,' said he, 'this man cannot beunhappy; a just man, he says, must be happy in astate of slavery, as well as in a state of freedom.'Pollis therefore carried him to ./Egina, and sold himthere: for the people of that place, being at war withthe Athenians, had made a decree, that whatever Athe-nian was taken on their coast he should be sold. Dion,notwithstanding, retained his interest with Dionysius,had considerable employments, and was sent ambassa-dor to Carthage. Dionysius had a high esteem forhim, and he therefore permitted him to speak his sen-timents with freedom. An instance of this we have inthe retort he made on the tyrant's ridiculing the go-vernment of Gelo: ' Gelo,' said Dionysius, 'is [g-eZoi]the laughing-stock of Sicily.' While others admiredand applauded this witticism, Dion answered, 'Youobtained the crown by being trusted on Gelo's ac-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.93count, who reigned with great humanity ; but you havereigned in such a manner, that, for your sake, no manwill be trusted hereafter. Gelo made monarchy ap-pear the best of governments; but you have convincedus that it is the worst.' Dionysius had three childrenby Doris, and four by Aristomacbe ; whereof two weredaughters, Sophrosyne and Arete. The former of thesewas married to his eldest son Dionysius; the latter tohis brother Thearides; and, after his death, to her un-cle Dion. In the last illness of Dionysius, Dion wouldhave applied to him in behalf of the children of Ari-stomache, but the physicians were beforehand withhim. They wanted to ingratiate themselves with hissuccessor; and when he asked for a sleeping-dose,Timaeus tells us, they gave him so effectual a one, thathe awaked no more.When his son Dionysius came to the throne, in thefirst council that he held, Dion spoke with so muchpropriety on the present state of affairs, and on themeasures which ought to be taken, that the rest ap-peared to be mere children in understanding. By thefreedom of his counsels he exposed, in a strong light,the slavish principles of those who, through a timorousdisingenuity, advised such measures as they thoughtwould please their prince, rather than such as mightadvance his interest. But what alarmed them mostwas the steps he proposed to take with regard to theimpending war with Carthage; for he offered either togo in person to Carthage, and settle an honorablepeace with the Carthaginians, or, if the king wererather inclined for war, to fit out and maintain fiftygalleys at his own expense.Dionysius was pleased with the magnificence of hisspirit; but the courtiers felt that it made them appearlittle. They agreed that, at all events, Dion was to be??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?94PLUTARCH.crushed, and they spared no calumny that malice couldsuggest. They represented to the king that he cer-tainly meant to make himself master by sea, and bythat means to obtain the kingdom for his sister's chil-dren. There was, moreover, another and an obviouscause of their hatred to him, in the reserve of his man-ners, and of the sobriety of his life. They led theyoung and ill-educated king through every species ofdebauchery, the shameless panders to his wrong di-rected passions. Yet while folly rioted, tyranny slept:its rage was dissolved in the ardor of youthful indul-gences, as iron is softened in the fire; and that lenitywhich the Sicilians could not expect from the virtueof their prince, they found in his weakness. Thus thereins of that monarchy, which Dionysius vainly calledadamantine, fell gradually from the loose and disso-lute hand that held them. This young prince, it issaid, would continue the scene of intoxication forninety days without intermission; during which timeno sober person was admitted to his court, where allwas drunkenness and buffoonery, revelry and riot.Their enmity to Dion, who had no taste for theseenjoyments, was a thing of course: and, as he refusedto partake with them in their vices, they resolved tostrip him of his virtues. To these they gave-the namesof such vices as are supposed in some degree to re-semble them. His gravity of manners they calledpride; his freedom of speech, insolence; his decliningto join in their licentiousness, contempt. It is true,there was a natural haughtiness in bis deportment,and an asperity that was unsociable and difficult ofaccess: so that it is not to be wondered if he foundno ready admission to the ears of a young king,already spoiled by flattery. Many, even of his ownparticular friends, who admired the integrity and gene-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.rosity of his heart, could not but condemn those for-bidding manners, which were so ill adapted to socialand political intercourse: and Plato himself, when hewrote to him some time after, warned him, as it wereby the spirit of prophecy, 'To guard against that aus-terity which is the companion of solitude.' However,the necessity of the times, and the feeble state ofthe monarchy, rendered it necessary for the king,though contrary to his inclination, to retain him in thehighest appointments; and this Dion himself very wellknew.As he was willing to impute the irregularities ofDionysius to ignorance and a bad education, he endea-vored to engage him in a course of liberal studies, andto give him a taste for those sciences which have atendency to moral improvement. By this means hehoped that he should induce him to think of virtuewithout disgust, and at length to embrace its preceptswith pleasure. The young Dionysius was not na-turally the worst of princes; but his father being ap-prehensive that if his mind were improved by scienceand the conversation of wise and virtuous men, hemight some time or other think of depriving him of hiskingdom, kept him in close confinement; where,through ignorance and want of other employment, heamused himself with making little chariots, candle-sticks, wooden chairs, and tables. His father, indeed,was so suspicious of all mankind, and so wretchedlytimorous, that he would not suffer a barber to shave him;but bad his hair singed off with a live coal by one of hisown attendants. Neither his brother nor his son wereadmitted into his chamber in their own clothes, but werefirst stripped and examined by the sentinels, and afterthat were obliged to put on such clothes as were pro-vided for them. When his brother Leptines was once??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?96PLUTARCH.describing the situation of a place, he took a spearfrom one of the guards to trace the plan; on whichDionysius was extremely offended, and caused the sol-dier who had given up his spear to be put to death.He was afraid, he said, of the sense and sagacity ofhis friends; because he knew they must think it moreeligible to govern than to obey. He slew Marsyas,whom he had advanced to a considerable military com-mand, merely because Marsyas dreamed that he killedhim; for he concluded that this dream by night wasoccasioned by some similar suggestion of the day.Yet even this timorous and suspicious wretch wasoffended with Plato, because he would not allow himto be the most valiant man in the world!When Dion, as we have before observed, consideredthat the irregularities of young Dionysius were chieflyowing to his want of education, he exhorted him ear-nestly to apply himself to study, and by all means tosend for Plato, the prince of philosophers, into Sicily.'When he comes,' said he, 'apply to him withoutloss of time. Conformed by his precepts to that divineexemplar of beauty and perfection, which called theuniverse from confusion into order, you will at oncesecure your own happiness, and the happiness of yourpeople. The obedience they now render you throughfear, by your justice and moderation you will improveto a principle of filial duty; and of a tyrant, you willbecome a king. Fear and force, and fleets and armies,are not, as your father called them, the adamantinechains of government; but that attention, that affec-tion, that respect, which justice and goodness for everdraw after them. These are the milder but the strongerbonds of empire. Besides, it is surely a disgrace fora prince, who in all the circumstances of figure andappearance is distinguished from the people, not to rise??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.97above them at the same time, in the superiority of hisconversation, and the cultivation of his mind.'As Dion frequently solicited the king on this subject,and occasionally repeated some of Plato's arguments,he conceived at length a violent inclination to hear himdiscourse. He therefore sent several letters of invita-tion to him at Athens, which were seconded by theintreaties of Dion. The Pythagorean philosophers inItaly requested at the same time that he would under-take the direction of this young prince, whose mindwas misguided by power, and reclaim him by the solidcounsels of philosophy. Plato, as he owns himself,was ashamed to be a philosopher in theory, and notin practice; and flattering himself that if he couldrectify the mind of the prince, he might by the samemeans remedy the disorders of the kingdom, he yieldedto their request.The enemies of Dion, now fearing an alteration inDionysius, advised him to recall from exile one Phi-listus, who was, indeed, a man of learning, but em-ployed his talents in defence of the despotic policy;and this man they intended to set in opposition toPlato and his philosophy. Philistus, from the be-ginning, had been a principal instrument in promotingthe monarchic government, and kept the citadel, ofwhich he was governor, a long time for that party. Itis said that he had an unlawful desire for the motherof the elder Dionysius, and that the tyrant himselfwas not ignorant of it. Be this as it may, Leptines,who had two daughters by a married woman, whom hehad corrupted, gave one of them in marriage to Phi-listus: but this being done without consulting Diony-sius, he was offended; imprisoned Leptine's mistress,and banished Philistus. The latter fled to his friendsat Adria, where, it is probable, he composed the great-PLUT. VoL. VII. G??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?98PLUTARCH.est part of his history; for he did not return to Sicilyduring the reign of that Dionysius. After his death,as we have observed, Dion's enemies occasioned himto be recalled. His arbitrary principles were suitablefor their purpose, and he began to exercise them im-mediately on his return.At the same time calumnies and impeachmentsagainst Dion were, as usual, brought to the king.He was accused of holding a private correspondencewith Theodoses and Heraclides, for the subversion ofthe monarchy; and indeed it is probable that he en-tertained some hopes from the arrival of Plato, oflessening the excessive power of Dionysius, or at leastof making him moderate and equitable in the use of it.Besides, if he continued obstinate, and were not tobe reclaimed, he was determined to depose him, andrestore the commonwealth to the Syracusans; for hepreferred even the popular form of government to anabsolute monarchy, where a well regulated aristocracycould not be procured.Such was the state of affairs when Plato came intoSicily. At first he was received with the greatest ap-pearance of kindness, and he was conveyed from thecoast in one of the king's most splendid chariots. EvenDionysius himself sacrificed to the gods in acknow-legement of his safe arrival, and of the honor and hap-piness they had by that means conferred on his king-dom. The people had the greatest hopes of a speedyreformation. They observed an unusual decorum inthe entertainments at court, and a sobriety in the con-duct of the courtiers; while the king answered all towhom he gave audience in a very obliging manner.The desire of learning and the study of philosophywere become general; and the several apartments ofthe royal palace were like so many schools of geomu-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DION.99tricians, full of the dust in which the students describetheir mathematical figures. Not long after this, at asolemn sacrifice in the citadel, when the herald prayedas usual for the long continuance of the government,Dionysius is said to have cried, ' how long will youcontinue to curse me?' This was an inexpressible morti-fication to Pbilistus and his party: if Plato, said they,has already made such a change in the king, his influ-ence in time will be irresistible.They now no longer made their attacks on Dionseparately, or in private. They united in exclaimingagainst him, that he had fascinated the king with thedelusions of eloquence and philosophy, in order to ob-tain the kingdom for his sister's children. They repre-sented it as a matter of the greatest indignity, thatafter the whole force of the Athenians had vainly in-vaded Sicily, and were vanquished and destroyed,without so much as being able to take Syracuse, theyshould now, by means of one sophist, overturn theempire of Dionysius. It was with indignation they be-held the deluded monarch prevailed on by his insinua-tions to part with his guard of ten thousand spearmen,to give up a navy of four hundred galleys, to disbandan army of ten thousand horse, and many times thatnumber of foot, in order that he might pursue an idealhappiness in the academy, and amuse himself withtheorems of geometry, while the substantial enjoymentsof wealth and power were left to Dion and the childrenof Aristomache.By means of these suggestions Dion first incurredthe suspicion, and soon after the open displeasure ofDionysius. A letter of his was likewise intercepted,and privately carried to the king. It was addressed tothe Carthaginian agents, and directed them not to havetheir audience of the king concerning the conclusion??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?100PLUTARCH.of the peace, unless he were present, and then every-thing should be settled as they wished. Timaeus in-forms us, that after Dionysius had showed this letterto Philistus, and consulted him on it, he overreachedDion by a pretence of reconciliation, and told him thathe was desirous their good understanding might be re-newed. After this, as he was one day walking alonewith him by the wall of the castle, near the sea, heshowed him the letter, and accused him of conspiringwith the Carthaginians against him. When Dion at-tempted to speak in his own defence, Dionysius refusedto hear him; and having forced him on board a vessel,which lay there for the purpose, commanded the sailorsto set him ashore in Italy.When this was publicly known, it was generally con-demned as tyrannical and cruel. The court was in dis-tress for the ladies of Dion's family; but the citizensreceived fresh courage from the event; for they werein hopes that the odium which it would bring on Dio-nysius, and the general discontent that his governmentoccasioned, might contribute to bring about a revolu-tion. Dionysius perceived this with some anxiety, andthinking it necessary to pacify the women and the restof Dion's friends, he told them that he was not goneinto exile, but only sent out of the way for a time, thathis obstinacy might not draw on him a heavier punish-ment. He also allowed his friends two ships, that theymight convey to him, in Peloponnesus, as much of histreasure, and as many of his servants, as they shouldthink fit; for Dion was a man of considerable property,and little inferior to the king in wealth or magnificence.The most valuable part of his effects, together with pre-sents from the ladies, and others of his acquaintance,his friends conveyed to him; and the splendor of hisfortune gained him great respect among the Greeks.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.101At the same time they conceived a high idea of thepower of the tyrant, when an exile from his kingdomcould make such an appearance.Dionysius now removed Plato into the citadel, undercolor of kindness; but in reality to set a guard on him,lest he should follow Dion, and proclaim to the worldhow injuriously he had been treated.As wild beasts become tame and tractable by use, sothe tyrant, by frequent conversation with the philoso-pher, began at last to conceive an affection for him;yet even that affection had something of the tyrant init; for he required of Plato, in return, that he shouldexclusively confine his regard and admiration to him.On condition that he would prefer his friendship to thatof Dion, he was willing to give up the whole adminis-tration into his hands. This extravagant affection gavePlato no small trouble; for it was accompanied withpetulance and jealousy, as the love which subsists be-tween the different sexes has its quarrels and reconcili-ations. He expressed the strongest desire to becomePlato's scholar, and to proceed in the study of philoso-phy; but he expressed it with reluctance in the presenceof those who wanted to divert him from his purpose,and seemed as if he was in pursuit of something heought to be ashamed of.As a war broke out about this time, he found it ne-cessary to dismiss Plato; but he promised him, beforehis departure, to recall Dion the ensuing summer:however, he did not keep his promise, but made thewar he was engaged in his apology, and remitted tohim the produce of his estate. At the same time hedesired Plato to acquiesce in his apology, assuring himthat he would send for Dion on the commencement ofthe peace; and he intreated, in the mean while, that??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?102PLUTARCH.Dion would be peaceable, and not say or do any thingthat might hurt his character among the Greeks. ThisPlato endeavored to effect, by keeping Dion in theacademy in pursuit of philosophy.At Athens, Dion lived with an acquaintance, whosename was Callippus. But a piece of pleasure-ground,which he purchased, he gave, on his departure, to Speu-sippus, with whom he had most usually conversed.Speusippus, as Timon, in his poems called Syllis, in-forms us, was a facetious companion, and had a turn forraillery; and Plato was desirous that Dion's severityof manners might be softened by the pleasantry of hisconversation. When Plato exhibited a cborus of boysat Athens, Dion took on himself the management, anddefrayed the expense. Plato was desirous that thismunificence might procure him popularity, and on thataccount he readily gave up the honor of conducting theaffair himself.Dion likewise visited other cities, and conversedwith the principal statesmen, by whom he was publiclyentertained. In his manners there was now no longerany thing pompous or affected; there was nothing thatsavored of the dissolute luxury of a tyrant's court; hisbehavior was modest, discreet, and manly; and his phi-losophical discourses were learned and ingenious. Thisprocured him popular favor and public honors; andthe Lacedaemonians, without regard to the resentmentof Dionysius, though at the very time they had receivedsuccors from him against the Thebans, made him freeof their city. We are told that Dion accepted an invi-tation from Ptoeodorus, the Megarensian, who was aman of considerable power and fortune; and when hefound his door crowded with people on business, andthat it was difficult to have access to him, he said to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.103his friends, who expressed their dissatisfaction on theoccasion, ' Why should this affront us? we did this,and more than this, at Syracuse.'Dion's popularity in Greece soon excited the jealousyof Dionysius, who therefore stopped his remittances,and put his estate in the hands of his own stewards.However, that his reputation might not suffer, throughPlato's means, amongst the philosophers, he retaineda number of learned men in his court; and being de-sirous to outshine them all in disputation, he frequentlywas under a necessity of introducing, without the leastpropriety, the arguments he had learnt from Plato. Henow wished for that philosopher again, and repentedthat he had so ill availed himself of his instructions.Like a tyrant, therefore, whose desires, however ex-travagant, are immediately to be complied with, he wasviolently bent on recalling him. To effect this, he thoughtof every expedient, and at length prevailed on Archy-tas, and the rest of the Pythagorean philosophers, topledge themselves for the performance of his promises,and to persuade him to return to Sicily; for it was Platothat first introduced those philosophers to Dionysius.On their part, they sent Archidemus to Plato, andDionysius, at the same time, sent some galleys withseveral of his friends to join in their request. Thetyrant likewise wrote to him, and told him in plainterms, that Dion must expect no favor from him, ifPlato should not come into Sicily; but on his arrival,he might depend on every thing he desired. Dion wasalso solicited by his sister and wife to prevail withPlato to gratify the tyrant, that he might no longerhave an apology for the severity of his treatment.Plato, therefore, as he says himself, set sail the thirdtime for Sicily:To brave Charybdis' dreadful gulf once more!??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?104PLUTARCH.His arrival was not only a satisfaction to Dionysius,but to all Sicily; the inhabitants of which did not failto implore the gods that Plato might overcome Phi-listus, and that the tyranny might expire under theinfluence of his philosophy. Plato was in high favorwith the women in particular, and with Dionysius hehad such credit as no other person could boast; for hewas allowed to come to him without being searched.When Aristippus, the Cyrenean, observed that theking frequently offered Plato money, and that Platoas constantly refused it, he said, 'that Dionysius wasliberal without danger of exhausting his treasury; forto those who wanted, and would take money, he wassparing in his offers, but profuse where he knew itwould be refused.'After the first civilities were over, Plato took an op-portunity to mention Dion ; but the tyrant put him off,till, at last, expostulations and animosities took place.These, however, Dionysius was industrious to conceal,and endeavored to bring over Plato from the interestof Dion by repeated favors and studied civilities. Thephilosopher, on the other hand, did not immediatelypublish his perfidy, but dissembled his resentment.While things were thus circumstanced, Helicon ofCyzicus, one of Plato's followers, foretold an eclipseof the sun; and as it happened, according to his pre-diction, the king, in admiration of his learning, re-warded him with a talent of silver. On this Aristip-pus, jesting among the rest of the philosophers, toldthem he had something extraordinary, likewise, toprognosticate. Being intreated to make it known, ' Iforesee,' said he, ' that in a short time there will be aquarrel between Dionysius and Plato.' Soon after thisDionysius sold Dion's estate, and converted the moneyto his own use. Plato was removed from his apart-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.105merit in the palace gardens, and placed within the pur-lieus of the guards, who had long hated, and evensought to kill him, on a supposition that he advisedthe tyrant to lay d own his government, and disbandhis army.Archytas, who had engaged for Plato's safety, whenhe understood his danger, sent a galley to demandhim ; and the tyrant, to palliate his enmity, previousto his departure made pompous entertainments. Atone of them, however, he could not help saying, ' Isuppose, Plato, when you return to your companionsin the academy, my faults will often be the subject ofyour conversation.'--' I hope,' answered Plato, ' weshall never he so much at a loss for subjects in theacademy, as to talk of you.' Such are the circum-stances which have been mentioned concerning Plato'sdeparture; but they are not perfectly consistent withPlato's own account.Dion being offended, not only with these things,but with some intelligence he had before received con-cerning his wife, which is alluded to in Plato's letterto Dionysius, openly declared himself his enemy. Theaffair was this: Plato, on his return to Greece, wasdesired by Dionysius privately to consult Dion, whetherhe would be averse to his wife's marrying another man;for there was a report, whether true, or the inventionof his enemies, that his matrimonial state was not agree-able to him, and that there was a coolness betwixt himand Arete. After Plato had consulted Dion on theaffair, he wrote to Dionysius, and though he spoke inplain terms of other matters, he mentioned this in amanner that could only be intelligible to the king. Hetold him that he had talked with Dion on the business,and that he would certainly resent it if any such at-tempt were made.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?106PLUTARCH.While any prospect of an accommodation remainedDionysius took no farther steps in the affair; but whenthat prospect was gone, and Plato once more had leftSicily in displeasure, he compelled Arete to marry Ti-mocrates; and, in this instance, he fell short even ofthe justice and lenity of his father. When Philoxenus,who had married his sister Theste, was declared hisenemy, and fled through fear out of Sicily, Dionysiussent for his sister, and reproached her with being privyto her husband's escape, without letting him know it.Theste answered without fear or hesitation, ' Do youthink me, Dionysius, so bad a wife, or so weak a wo-man, that if I had known of my husband's flight, Iwould not have accompanied him, and shared in theworst of his fortunes? Indeed I was ignorant of it.And I assure you, that I should esteem it a higherhonor to be called the wife of Philoxenus the exile,than the sister of Dionysius the tyrant.' The king, itis said, admired her spirited answer; and the Syra-cusans honored her so much, that she retained herprincely retinue after the dissolution of the tyranny;and the citizens, by public decree, attended the so-lemnity of her funeral. This is a digression, but itmay have its use.Dion now thought of nothing but war. Plato, how-ever, was against it; partly on account of the hospi-table favors he had received from Dionysius, and partlybecause of the advanced age of Dion. Speusippus,and the rest of his friends, on the other hand, en-couraged him to rescue from slavery his native Si-cily, that stretched forth her hands towards him, andwould certainly receive him with every expression ofjoy. Speusippus, when he attended Plato into Sicily,had mixed more with the people, and learnt their sen-timents with regard to the government. At first, id.t??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.deed, they were reserved, and suspected him for anemissary of the tyrant*s: but by degrees he obtainedtheir confidence. In short, it was the voice, the prayerof the people, that Dion would come, though withouteither army or navy, to their relief, and lend themonly his name and his presence against the tyrant.Dion was encouraged by these representations; andthe more effectually to conceal his intentions, he raisedwhat forces he was able by means of his friends. Hewas assisted in this by many statesmen and philoso-phers, amongst whom was Endemus, the Cyprian, (onoccasion of whose death Aristotle wrote his dialogueon the soul,) and Timonides, the Leucadian. Theseengaged in his interest Miltas the Thessalian, who wasskilled in divination, and had been his fellow-acade-mician. But of all those whom the tyrant had banished,which were no fewer than a thousand, no more thantwenty-five gave in their names for the service. Therest, for want of spirit, would not engage in the cause.The general rendezvous was in the island of Zacyn-thus; and here, when the little army was assembled,it did not amount to eight hundred men. But theywere men who had signalised themselves in the greatestengagements; they were in perfect discipline, andinured to hardship; in courage and conduct they hadno superiors in the army: in short, they were suchmen as were likely to serve the cause of Dion, in ani-mating, by their example, those who came to his stan-dard in Sicily.Yet these men, when they understood that they wereto be led against Dionysius, were disheartened, andcondemned the rash resentment of Dion ; the conse-quence of which they looked on as certain ruin. Norwere they less offended with their commanders, andthose who had enlisted them, because they had con^??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?108PLUTARCH.cealed the design of the service. But when Dion, ina public speech, after showing them the feeble state ofDionysius' government, told them that he consideredthem rather as so many officers whom he carried tohead the people of Sicily, already prepared to revolt,than as private men; and when Alcimenes, who, inbirth and reputation, was the principal man in Achaia,had concurred in the address of Dion, and joined inthe expedition, they then were satisfied.It was now about midsummer, the Etesian windsprevailed at sea, and the moon was at the full, whenDion prepared a magnificent sacrifice to Apollo, andmarched in procession to the temple, with his menunder arms. After the sacrifice he gave them a feastin the race-ground of the Zacynthians. They wereastonished at the quantity of gold and silver plate thatwas exhibited on this occasion, so far above the ordi-nary fortunes of a private man; and they concludedthat a person of such opulence would not, at a lateperiod of life, expose himself to dangers without afair prospect of success, and the certain support offriends. After the usual prayers and libations themoon was eclipsed. This was nothing strange to Dion,who khew the variations of the ecliptic, and that thisdefection of the moon's light was caused by the inter-position of the earth between her and the sun. Butas the soldiers were troubled about it, Miltas, the di-viner, took on him to give it a proper turn, and assuredthem that it portended the sudden obscurity of some-thing that was at present glorious; that this gloriousobject could be no other than Dionysius, whose lustrewould be extinguished on their arrival in Sicily. Thisinterpretation he communicated in as public a manneras possible: but from the prodigy of the bees, a swarmof which settled on the stern of Dion's ship, he inti-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.109mated to his friends bis apprehensions that the greataffairs which Dion was then prosecuting, after florish-ing a while, would come to nothing. Dionysius too,they said, had many prodigies on this occasion. Aneagle snatched a javelin from one of his guards, and,after flying aloft with it, dropt it in the sea. Thewaters of the sea, at the foot of the citadel, were freshfor one whole day, as plainly appeared to every onewho tasted them. He had pigs farrowed perfect in alltheir other parts, but without ears. The diviners in-terpreted this as an omen of rebellion and revolt: thepeople, they said, would no longer give ear to themandates of the tyrant. The freshness of the sea-water imported that the Syracusans, after their harshand severe treatment, would enjoy milder and bettertimes. The eagle was the minister of Jove, and thejavelin an ensign of power and government: thus thefather of the gods had destined the overthrow andabolition of the tyranny. These things we have fromTheopompus.Dion's soldiers were conveyed in two transports.These were accompanied by another smaller vessel,and two more of thirty oars. Besides the arms ofthose who attended him, he took with him two thou-sand shields, a large quantity of darts and javelins,and a considerable supply of provisions, that nothingmight be wanting in the expedition; for they put offto the main sea, because they did not think it safe tocoast it along, being informed that Philistus was sta-tioned off Japygia to watch their motions. Havingsailed with a gentle wind about twelve days, on thethirteenth they arrived at Pachynus, a promontory inSicily. There the pilot advised Dion to land his menimmediately; for if they once doubled the cape, theymight continue at sea a long time before they could??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?110PLUTARCH.have a gale from the south at that season of the year.But Dion, who was afraid of making a descent toonear the enemy, and chose rather to make good hislanding in some remoter part of the island, doubledthe cape notwithstanding. They had not sailed farbefore a strong gale from the north, and a high sea,drove them quite off Sicily. At the same time therewas a violent storm of thunder and lightning, for itwas about the rising of Arcturus; and it was accom-panied with such dreadful rains, and the weather wasin every respect so tempestuous, that the affrightedsailors knew not where they were, till they foundthemselves driven by the violence of the storm to Cer-cina, on the coast of Africa. This craggy island wassurrounded with such dangerous rocks, that they nar-rowly escaped being dashed to pieces ; but by workinghard with their poles they kept clear, with much diffi-culty, till the storm abated. They were then informedby a vessel, which accidentally came up with them,that they were at the head of what is called the GreatSyrtis.1 In this horrible situation they were fartherdisheartened by finding themselves becalmed; but,after beating about for some time, a gale sprung iipsuddenly from the south. On this unexpected change,as the wind increased on them, they made all theirsail, and, imploring the assistance of the gods, oncemore put off to sea in quest of Sicily. After an easypassage of five days, they arrived at Minoa, a smalltown in Sicily,2 belonging to the Carthaginians. Sy-nalus, a friend of Dion's, was then governor of theplace; and, as he knew not that this little fleet be-longed to Dion, he attempted to prevent the landingof his men. The soldiers leapt out of the vessels in1 Not far from Tripoli. >> On the south coast.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN,111arms, but killed none that opposed them; for Dion,on account of his friendship with Synalus, had for-bidden them. However, they ran in one body withthe fugitives into the town, and thus made themselvesmasters of it. When Dion and the governor met, mu-tual salutations passed between them, and the formerrestored him his town unhurt. Synalus, in return,entertained his soldiers, and supplied him with neces-saries.It happened that Dionysius, a little before this, hadsailed with eighty ships for Italy, and this absence ofhis gave them no small encouragement; insomuch,that when Dion invited his men to refresh themselvesfor some time after their fatigues at sea, they thoughtof nothing but making a proper use of the present mo-ment, and called on him, with one voice, to lead themto Syracuse. He therefore left his useless arms andbaggage with Synalus, and, having engaged him totransmit them to him at a proper opportunity, marchedfor Syracuse. Two hundred of the Agrigentine ca*valry, who inhabited the country about Ecnomus, im-mediately revolted, and joined him in his march, andthese were followed by the inhabitants of Gela.The news of his arrival soon reaching Syracuse, Ti-mocrates, who had married Dion's wife, and was ap-pointed regent in the absence of Dionysius, immedi-ately despatched letters to acquaint him with the event.In the mean while he applied himself to prevent alltumults in the city; for the people were greatly ani-mated on the report of Dion's arrival, though the un-certainty they were under as yet kept them quiet. Asingular accident happened to the courier who wasdespatched with letters for Dionysius. As he waspassing through the territory of Rhegium to Caulonia,where the tyrant then was, he met an acquaintance of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?112 PLUTARCH.his returning home with a newly offered sacrifice; andhaving taken a little of the flesh for his own use,1 hemade the best of his way. At night, however, he foundit necessary to take a little rest, and retired to sleep ina wood by the side of the road. A wolf, allured bythe smell of the flesh, came up while he was asleep,and carried it off, together with the bag of letters towhich it was fastened. When the courier awaked, hesought a long time to no purpose for his dispatches;and, being determined not to face Dionysius withoutthem, he absconded. Thus it was a considerable timeafter, and from other hands, that Dionysius was in-formed of Dion's arrival in Sicily.Dion, in his march, was joined by the Camarinaeans,and many revolters from the territory of Syracuse.The Leontines and Campanians, who, with Timocrates,guarded the Epipolae, being misled by a report design-edly propagated by Dion, that he intended to attacktheir cities first, quitted their present station, and wentto take care of their own concerns. Dion being in-formed of this, while he lay near Acrae, decamped inthe night, and came to the river Anapus, which is atthe distance of ten furlongs from the city. There hehalted, and sacrificed by the river, addressing his pray-ers to the rising sun. The diviners informed him thatthe gods gave a promise of victory; and as he hadhimself assumed a garland at the sacrifice, all thatwere present immediately did the same. He was nowjoined by about five thousand, who were indeed illfurnished with arms; but their courage supplied thatdeficiency. When he gave orders to march, Libertywas the word ; and they rushed forward with the high-est acclamations of joy. The most considerable citi-? To carry home part of the victim, and to give part of it toany person that the bearer met, were acts of religion.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.113zens of Syracuse, dressed all in white, met him at thegates. The populace fell with great fury on Diony-sius' party; but, in particular, they seized his spies;a set of wretches bated by gods and men, who wentabout the city to collect the sentiments of the inha-bitants, in order to communicate them to the tyrant.These were the first that suffered, being knocked downwherever they were met. When Dimocrates foundthat he could not join the garrison in the citadel, hefled on horseback out of the city, and spread a generalterror and dismay where he passed ; magnifying all thewhile the forces of Dion, that it might not appear aslight effort against which he was unable to defend theplace.Dion now made his public entry info the town: hewas dressed in a magnificent suit of armor, his brotherMegacles marching on the right hand, and Calippusthe Athenian on the left, with garlands on their heads.He was followed by a hundred foreign soldiers, whowere his body guard; and after these marched therest of the army in proper order, under the conduct oftheir respective officers. The Syracusans looked onthis procession as sacred. They considered it as thetriumphal entry of Liberty, which would once moreestablish the popular government, after a suppressionof forty-eight years.When Dion entered at the Menitidian gate silencewas commanded by sound of trumpet, and he orderedfreedom to be proclaimed to the Syracusans and therest of the Sicilians, in the name of Dion and Me-gacles, who came to abolish tyranny. Being desirousto address the people in a speech, he marched up tothe Acradina. As he passed through the streets, thepeople prepared their victims on tables placed beforetheir doors, scattered flowers on his head, and offeredPLUT. VoL. Ml. H??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?114PLUTARCH.up their prayers to him as to their tutelar deity. Atthe foot of the citadel, under the pentapylae, therewas a lofty sun-dial,1 which had been placed thereby Dionysius. From the eminence of this buildinghe addressed the citizens, and exhorted them earnestlyto assert their liberties. The people, in their turn,nominated Dion and his brother pretors of the city,and, at their request, appointed them twenty col-leagues, half of whom were of those who returnedwith Dion from exile.At first it was considered by the soothsayers as agood omen that Dion, when he addressed the people,had under his feet the stately edifice which Dionysiushad erected ; but on reflection that this edifice, on whichhe had been declared general, was a sun-dial, theywere apprehensive that his present power and grandeurmight be subject to decline.Dion, in the next place, took the castle of Epipolae,released the prisoners who were confined there, and in-vested it with a strong wall. Seven days after thisevent Dionysius arrived from Italy, and entered thecitadel from the sea. Dion, at the same time, receivedfrom Synalus the arms and ammunition he had leftwith him. These he distributed amongst the citizens,as far as they would go; the rest armed themselves aswell as they were able; and all expressed the utmostalacrity for the service. Dionysius, at first, sentagents in a private manner to Dion, to try what termsmight be made with them. Dion refused to hear anyovertures in private. The Syracusans, he told them,were now a free people; and what they had to offer1 Pherecydes was the first who invented dials to mark thehour of the day, about three hundred years after the time ofHomer: but before his time the Phoenicians had contrived adial in the isle of Scyros, which described the solstices.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN,115must be addressed to them in public. On this theymade specious proposals to the citizens, promised theman abatement of their taxes, and an exemption fromserving in the wars, even though those wars should beundertaken by their own approbation. The Syracu-sans held these proposals in derision; and Dion an-swered, that it would be in vain for Dionysius to speakof terms without resigning, in the first place, the regalgovernment; and that if he took this measure, hemight depend on all the good offices so near a relationmight be iuclined to do him; at least in every thingthat was just and reasonable. Dionysius seemed toconsent to these terms; and again sent his agents todesire that a deputation of the Syracusans would attendhim in the citadel, in order to settle articles for thepublic tranquillity. He assured them that he had suchto offer them as they could not but accept; and that,on the other hand, he was equally willing to come intosuch as they had to offer him. Dion therefore se-lected a number of the citizens for this deputation;and the general report from the citadel was, thatDionysius would resign his authority in a voluntarymanner.This however was no more than a stratagem toamuse the Syracusans. The deputies no sooner ar-rived than they were imprisoned; and early nextmorning, after he had plied the mercenaries with wine,he ordered them to sally out and attack the wall whichhad been built by Dion. This unexpected assault wascarried on with great vigor by the barbarians. Theybroke through the works, and falling with great impe-tuosity, and loud shouts, on the Syracusans, soon putthem to flight. Dion's foreign troops took the alarm,and hastened to their relief; but the precipitate flightof the citizens disordered their ranks, and rendered it??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?110PLUTARCH.difficult for them to give any effectual assistance. Dionperceiving that in this tumult his orders could not beheard, instructed them by his example, and chargedthe thickest of the enemy. The battle, where he foughtin person, was fierce and bloody. He was known tothe enemy as well as to his own party; and they rushedwith the utmost violence to the quarter where hefought. His age, indeed, rendered him unfit for suchan engagement, but he maintained the fight with greatvigor, and cut in pieces many of the enemy that at-tacked him. At length he was wounded in the headwith a lance; his shield was pierced through in manyplaces with the darts and spears that were levelledagainst him; and his armor no longer resisting theblows he received in this close engagement, he fell tothe ground. He was immediately carried off by hissoldiers, and leaving the command to Timonides, herode about the city to rally the fugitives. Soon afterhe brought a detachment of foreign soldiers, which hehad left to guard the Acradina, as a fresh reserveagainst the enemy. This however was unnecessary:they had placed their whole hopes of retaking the cityin their first sally, and finding so powerful a resistance,fatigued with the action, they retreated into the ci-tadel. As soon as they began to fall back the Greek.soldiers bore hard on them, and pursued them to thewalls. Dion lost seventy-four men, and a very greatnumber of the enemy fell in this action. The victorywas so important, that the Syracusans rewarded eachof the foreign soldiers with a hundred minae, and Dionwas presented by his army with a crown of gold.Soon after this messengers came from Dionysius withletters to Dion from the women of his family. Be-sides these, there was one inscribed 'Hipparinus tohis father Dion:' for this was the name of Dion's son.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.117Timaeus says, indeed, that he was called Aretaeus, fromhis mother Arete; but I think credit is rather to begiven to Timonides, who was his friend and fellowsoldier. The rest of the letters, which were readopenly before the Syracusans, contained various soli-citations and in treaties from the women. The letter'which appeared to come from Hipparinus, the people,out of respect to the father, would not have suffermlto be opened in public; but Dion insisted that itshould be so. It proved to be a letter from Dionysinshimself, directed indeed to Dion, but in reality ad-dressed to the people of Syracuse; for though it car-ried the air of request and apology, it had an obvioustendency to render Dion obnoxious to the citizens.He reminded him of the zeal he had formerly shownfor his service; he threatened him through his dearestconnexions, his sister, his son, and his wife; and hismenaces were followed by the most passionate in-treaties, and the most abject lamentations. But themost trying part of his address was that where he in-treated Dion not to destroy the government, and givethat freedom to his inveterate enemies by means ofwhich they would prosecute him to death, but to retainthe regal power himself, for the protection of his fa-mily and friends.This letter did not produce those sentiments in thepeople which it should naturally have done. Insteadof exciting admiration of that noble firmness and mag-nanimity, which could prefer the public utility to thetenderest private connexions, it occasioned jealousiesand fears. The people saw, or thought they saw, thatDion was under an absolute necessity of being favorableto Dionysius. They already began to wish for anothergeneral, and it was with peculiar satisfaction they heardof the arrival of Heraclides. This Heraclides, who bad??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?118PLUTARCH.been banished by the tyrant, had once a distinguishedcommand in the army, and was a man of considerablemilitary abilities, but irresolute, inconstant, and parti-cularly unsteady when he had a colleague in command.He had, some time before, had a difference with Dionin Peloponnesus, and therefore resolved on his ownstrength to make war on Dionysius. When he arrivedat Syracuse, he found the tyrant close besieged, andthe Syracusans elated with their success. His firstobject therefore was to court the people, and for thiapurpose he had all the necessary talents; an insinuat-ing address, and that kind of flattery which is so grate-ful to the multitude. This business was the more easyto him, as the forbidding gravity of Dion was thoughttoo haughty for a popular state: besides, the Syracu-sans, already insolent with success, assumed the spiritof a free people, though they had not, in reality, theirfreedom. Thus they convened themselves without anysummons, and appointed Heraclides their admiral:indeed, when Dion remonstrated against that proceed-ing, and showed them that by thus constituting Hera-clides admiral, they superseded the office of general,which they had before conferred on him, with somereluctance they deprived Heraclides of the commissionthey had given him. When this affair was settled,Dion invited Heraclides to his house, and gently ex-postulated with him on the impropriety of attendingto a punctilio of honor, at a time when the least inat-tention to the common cause might be the ruin of thewhole. He then called an assembly, appointed Hera-clides admiral, and prevailed with the citizens to allowhim such a guard as they had before granted to him-self. Heraclides treated Dion with all the appearanceof respect, acknowleged his obligations to him, andseemed attentive to his commands; but in private, he??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.119corrupted the people, aud encouraged a spirit of mu\tiny and dissatisfaction; so that Dion was involved incontinual disturbances and disquiet. If he advisedthat Dionysius should be permitted to make his retreatin safety, he was censured as designing to favor andprotect him; if, to avoid those suspicions, he was forcontinuing the siege, he was accused of protracting thewar, that he might the longer retain his command, andkeep the citizens in subjection.There was in the city one Sosis, infamous for hisinsolence and villany, who thought the perfection of ,liberty was the licentiousness of speech. This fellowopenly attacked Dion, and told the people in publicassembly that they had only changed the inattentionof a drunken and dissolute tyrant for the crafty vigi-lance of a sober master. Immediately after this he leftthe assembly, and next day was seen running nakedthrough the streets, as if from somebody that pursuedhim, with his head and face covered with blood. Inthis condition he ran into the market-place, and toldthe people that he had been assaulted by Dion's foreignsoldiers; at the same time showing them a wound inhis head, which, he said, they had given him. Dion,on this, was generally condemned, and accused of si-lencing the people by sanguinary methods: he came,however, before this irregular and tumultuous assem-bly, in his own vindication, and made it appear thatthis Sosis was brother to one of Dionysius' guards,and that he had been engaged by him to raise a tumultin the city; the only resource the tyrant had now leftbeing that of exciting dissensions amongst the people.The surgeons also, who examined the wound, foundthat it was not occasioned by any violent blow. Thewounds made by weapons are generally deepest in themiddle; but this was both superficial, and of an equal??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?120PLUTARCH.depth from one end to the other: besides, being dis-continuous, it did not appear to be the effect of oneincision, but to have been made at different times, pro-bably as he was best able to endure the pain. At thesame time there were some who deposed, that havingseen Sosis running naked and wounded, and being in-formed by him that he was flying from the pursuit ofDion's foreign soldiers, who had just then woundedhim, they hasted to take the pursuers; that, however,they could meet with no such persons, but found arazor lying under a hollow stone, near the place fromwhence they had observed him come. All these cir-cumstances made strongly against him: but when hisown servants gave evidence, that he went out of hishouse alone before daylight, with a razor in his hand,Dion's accusers withdrew. The people, by a generalvote, condemned Sosis to die, and were once more re-conciled to Dion.Nevertheless, their jealousy of his soldiers remained;and as the war was now principally carried on by sea,Philistus being come to the support of Dionysius, witha considerable fleet from Japygia, they did not see thenecessity of retaining in their service those Greekswho were no seamen, and must depend for protectionon the naval force. Their confidence in their ownstrength was likewise greatly increased by an advan-tage they had gained at sea against Philistus, whomthey used in a very barbarous manner. Ephorusrelates that, after his ship was taken, he slew him-self. But Timonides, who attended Dion from thebeginning of the war, writing to Speusippus the philo-sopher, gives the story thus: Philistus' galley havingrun aground, he was taken prisoner alive; and afterbeing disarmed and stripped, was exposed naked, thoughan old man, to every kind of insult. They afterwards??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.121cut off his head, and ordered their children to draghis body through the Acradina, and throw it into thequarry. Timsus represents the indignity offered hisremains to he still greater. 'The boys,' he says, 'tieda rope about his lame leg, and so dragged him throughthe city; the Syracusans, in the mean while, insultingover his carcass, when they saw him tied by the leg whohad said, 'It would ill become Dionysius to fly fromhis throne by the swiftness of his horse, which he oughtnever to quit till he was dragged from it by the heels."Philistus, however, tells us that this was not said toDionysius by himself, but by another. It is plain, atthe same time, that Timaeus takes every occasion, fromPhilistus' known adherence to arbitrary power, toload him with the keenest reproaches. Those whomhe injured are in some degree excusable, if, in theirresentment, they treated him with indignities afterdeath. But wherefore should his biographers, whomhe never injured, and who have had the benefit of hisworks; wherefore should they exhibit him, with allthe exaggerations of scurrility, in those scenes of dis-tress to which fortune sometimes reduces the best ofmen? On the other hand, Ephorus is no less extrava-gant in his encomiums on Philistus. He knows wellhow to throw into shades the foibles of the human cha-racter, and to give an air of plausibility to the mostindefensible conduct; but, with all his eloquence, withall his art, he cannot rescue Philistus from the impu-tation of being the most strenuous assertor of arbitrarypower, of being the fondest follower and admirer ofthe luxury, the magnificence, the alliance of tyrants.On the whole, he who neither defends the principles ofPhilistus, nor insults over his misfortunes, will bestdischarge the duty of the historian.After the death of Philistus, Dionysius offered to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?122PLUTARCH.surrender the citadel to Dion, together with the arms,provisions, and soldiers, and an advance of five months'pay, on condition that he might be permitted to retireinto Italy, and there enjoy the revenues of Gyata, afruitful tract of country in the territory of Syracuse,reaching from the sea to the middle of the country.Dion refusing to negotiate on his own account, re-ferred the ambassadors to the Syracusans; and, asthey expected that Dionysius would shortly come aliveinto their hands, they were dismissed without audieuce.On this the tyrant, leaving his eldest son Apollocratesto defend the citadel, embarked with his most valuabletreasures and a few select friends, and, sailing with afair wind, escaped Heraclides the admiral.The tyrant's escape greatly exasperated the peopleagainst Heraclides; and, in order to appease them, heproposed by Hippo, one of the orators, that thereshould be an equal division of lands; alleging, thatequality was the first foundation of civil liberty, andthat poverty and slavery were synonymous terms. Atthe same time that he supported Hippo in the promo-tion of this scheme, he encouraged the faction againstDion, who opposed it. At length he prevailed withthe people not only to pass this law, but to make adecree that the pay of the foreign soldiers should bestopped, and new commanders chosen, that they mightno longer be subject to the severe discipline of Dion.Thus, like the patient who, after a lingering sickness,makes too rash a use of the first returns of health, andrejects the sober and gradual regimen of his physician,the citizens, who had long labored under the yoke ofslavery, took too precipitate steps to freedom, and re-fused the salutary counsels and conduct of their deli-verer.It was about the midst of summer when the assembly??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.123was summoned for the election of new officers; and,for the space of fifteen days, there were the mostdreadful thunders, and the most alarming prodigies.The religious fears that these prodigies excited madethese people decline the choosing of officers. Whenthe weather grew more serene the orators again ex-horted them to proceed to the business; but no soonerhad they begun than a draught-ox, which had neitherreceived any provocation from the driver, nor could beterrified by the crowds and noise to which he had beenaccustomed, suddenly broke from his yoke, and run-ning furiously into the assembly, drove the people ingreat disorder before him: from thence, throwing downall that stood in his way, he ran over that part of thecity which afterwards fell into the enemy's hands.The Syracusans, however, regardless of these things,elected five-and-twenty officers, among whom was He-raclides. At the same time they privately endeavoredto draw off Dion's men; promising, if they would de-sert him, to make them citizens of Syracuse. But thesoldiers were faithful to their general, and, placinghim in the middle of a battalion, marched out of thecity. They did not, on this occasion, offer any vio-lence to the inhabitants, but they severely reproachedthem for their baseness and ingratitude. The small-ness of their number, and their declining to act offen-sively, put the citizens on the view of cutting them offbefore they escaped out of the city; and with this de-sign they fell on their rear. Dion was here in a greatdilemma: he was under the necessity either of fightingagainst his countrymen, or of suffering himself and hisfaithful soldiers to be cut in pieces. He therefore in-treated the Syracusans to desist: he stretched forthhis hands to them, and pointed to the citadel full ofsoldiers, who were happy in being spectators of these??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.dissensions amongst their enemies. But the torrent ofthe populace, agitated and driven forward by the se-ditious breath of the orators, was not to be stopped bypersuasion. He therefore commanded his men to ad-vance with shouts and clashing of arms, but not toattack them. The Syracusans, on this, fled immedi-ately through the streets, though no one pursued them;for Dion retreated with his men into the territories ofthe Leontines.The very women laughed at the new officers for thiscowardly flight; and the latter, to recover their repu-tation, ordered the citizens to arms, pursued Dion,and came up with him as he was passing a river. Askirmish began between the cavalry; but when theyfound Dion no longer disposed to bear these indigni-ties with his usual paternal patience; when they ob-served him drawing up his men for battle, with all theeagerness of strong resentment, they once more turnedtheir backs, and with the loss of some few men, fled tothe city in a more disgraceful and more cowardly man-ner than before.The Leontines received Dion in a very honorablemanner, gave money to his soldiers, and made themfree of their city. They also sent messengers to Syra-cuse with requisitions that his men might have justicedone them, and receive their pay. The Syracusans,in return, sent other messengers, with impeachmentsagainst Dion: but when the matter was debated atLeontium, in full assembly of the allies, they evidentlyappeared to be in fault. They refused, nevertheless,to stand to the award of this assembly; for the recentrecovery of their liberties had made them insolent, andthe popular power was without control; their verycommanders being no more than servile dependents onthe multitude.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.About this time Dionysius sent a fleet tinder Nyp-sius, the Neapolitan, with provisions and pay for thegarrison in the citadel. The Syracusans overcame him,and took four of his ships; but they made an ill useof their success. Destitute of all discipline, they cele-brated the victory with the most riotous extravagance;and at a time when they thought themselves secure oftaking the citadel, they lost the city. Nypsius ob-serving their disorder, their night revels and debauches,in which their commanders, either from inclination, orthrough fear of offending them, were as deeply engagedas themselves, took advantage of this opportunity, brokethrough their walls, and exposed the city to the violenceand depredation of his soldiers.The Syracusans at once perceived their folly andtheir misfortune: but the latter, in their present con-fusion, was not easy to be redressed. The soldiersmade dreadful havoc in the city: they demolished thefortifications, put the men to the sword, and draggedthe women and children shrieking to the citadel. TheSyracusan officers being unable to separate the citizensfrom the enemy, or to draw them up in any order, gaveup all for lost. In this situation, while the Acradinaitself was in danger of being taken, they naturallyturned their thoughts on Dion; but none had thecourage to mention a man whom all had injured. Inthis emergency a voice was heard from the cavalry ofthe allies, crying, 'send for Dion and his Peloponne-sians from Leontium.' His name was no sooner men-tioned than the people shouted for joy. With tearsthey implored that he might once more be at theirhead: they remembered his intrepidity in the mosttrying dangers: they remembered the courage that heshowed himself, and the confidence with which he in-spired them when he led them against the enemy.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?120PLUTARCH.Archonides and Telesidea from the auxiliaries, and Hel-lanicus, with four more from the cavalry, were imme-diately despatched to Leontium, where, making thebest of their way, they arrived in the close of theevening. They instantly threw themselves at the feetof Dion, and related, with tears, the deplorable con-dition of the Syracusans. The Leontines and Pelopon-nesians soon gathered about them, conjecturing fromtheir haste, and the manner of their address, that theirbusiness had something extraordinary in it.Dion immediately summoned an assembly, and thepeople being soon collected, Archonides and Hellanicusbriefly related the distress of the Syracusans, intreatedthe foreign soldiers to forget the injuries they had donethem, and once more to assist that unfortunate people,who had already suffered more for their ingratitudethan even they whom they had injured would have in-flicted on them. When they had thus spoken, a pro-found silence ensued; on which Dion arose, and at-tempted to speak, but was prevented by his tears. Hissoldiers, who were greatly affected with their general'ssorrow, intreated him to moderate his grief, and pro-ceed. After he had recovered himself a little, he spoketo the following purpose: ' Peloponnesians and con-federates, I have called you together, that you mayconsult on your respective affairs. My measures aretaken: I cannot hesitate what to do when Syracuse isperishing. If I cannot save it, I will, at least, hastenthither, and fall beneath the ruins of my country: foryou, if you can yet persuade yourselves to assist themost unfortunate and inconsiderate of men, it may bein your power to save from destruction a city whichwas the work of your own hands. But if your pityfor the Syracusans be sacrificed to your resentment,may the gods reward your fidelity, your kindness to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.Dion! And remember, that as he would not desertyou, when you were injured, so neither could he aban-don his falling country!'He had hardly , ended when the soldiers signifiedtheir readiness for the service by loud acclamations,and called on him to march directly to the relief ofSyracuse. The messengers embraced them, and in-treated the gods to shower their blessings on Dion andthe Peloponnesians. When the noise subsided Diongave orders that the men should repair to their quarters,and, after the necessary refreshments, assemble in thesame place completely armed; for he intended to marchthat very night.The soldiers of Dionysius, after ravaging the cityduring the whole day, retired at night, with the loss ofa few men, into the citadel. This small respite oncemore encouraged the demagogues of the city, who, pre-suming that the enemy would not repeat their hostili-ties, dissuaded the people from admitting Dion and hisforeign soldiers. They advised them not to give up thehonor of saving the city to strangers, but to defend theirliberty themselves. On this the generals sent othermessengers to Dion to countermand his march; while,on the other hand, the cavalry, and many of the prin-cipal citizens, sent their requests that he would hastenit. Thus invited by one party, and rejected by another,he came forward but slowly; and, at night, the factionthat opposed him set a guard on the gates to preventhis entering.Nypsius now made a fresh sally from the citadel,with still greater numbers, and greater fury than be-fore. After totally demolishing the remaining part ofthe fortification, he fell to ravaging the city. Theslaughter was dreadful; men, women, and children,fell indiscriminately by the sword: for the object of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?128PLUTARCH.the enemy was not so much plunder as destruction.Dionysius despaired of regaining his lost empire, and,in his mortal hatred of the Syracusans, he determinedto hury it in the ruins of their city. It was resolvedtherefore that, before Dion's succors could arrive, theyshould destroy it the quickest way, by laying it inashes. Accordingly they set fire to those parts thatwere at hand by brands and torches, and to the re-moter parts by shooting flaming arrows. The citizens,in the utmost consternation, fled every where beforethem. Those who, to avoid the fire, had fled fromtheir houses, were put to the sword in the streets;and they who sought for refuge in their houses wereagain driven out by the flames: many were burnt todeath, and many perished beneath the ruins of thehouses.This terrible distress, by universal consent, openedthe gates for Dion. After being informed that theenemy had retreated into the citadel, he had made nogreat haste: but early in the morning some horsemencarried him the news of a fresh assault. These werefollowed by some, even of those who had recently op-posed his coming, but who now implored him to fly totheir relief. As the conflagration and destruction in-creased, Heraclides despatched his brother, and afterhim his uncle Theodotes, to intreat the assistance ofDion; for they were now no longer in a capacity of op-posing the enemy: he was wounded himself, and greatpart of the city was laid in ashes.When Dion received this news he was about sixtyfurlongs from the city. After he had acquainted hissoldiers with the dreadful exigency, and exhorted themto behave with resolution, they no longer marched, butran ; and in their way they were met by numbers, whointreated them, if possible, to go still faster. By the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.eager and vigorous speed of the soldiers, Dion quickly-arrived at the city; and, entering by the part calledHecatompedon, he ordered his light troops immediatelyto charge the enemy, that the Syracusans might takecourage at the sight of them. In the mean while hedrew up his heavy-armed men, with such of the citi-zens as had joined him, and divided them into severalsmall bodies, of greater depth than breadth, that hemight intimidate the enemy, by attacking them in seve-ral quarters at once. He advanced to the engagementat the head of his men, amidst a confused noise of shouts,plaudits, prayers, and vows, which the Syracusans of-fered up for their deliverer, their tutelary deity; forso they termed him now; and his foreign soldiers theycalled their brethren and fellow-citizens. At this time,perhaps, there was not one wretch so selfishly fond oflife, that he did not hold Dion's safety dearer than hisown, or that of all his fellow-citizens, while they sawhim advancing first in the front of danger, throughblood and fire, and over heaps of the slain.There was, indeed, something terrible in the appear-ance of the enemy, who, animated by rage and despair,had posted themselves in the ruins of the ramparts, sothat it was extremely dangerous and difficult to ap-proach them. But the apprehensions of fire discouragedDion's men the most, and distressed them in theirmarch. They were surrounded by flames that ragedon every side; and while they walked over burningruins, through clouds of ashes and smoke, they wereevery moment in danger of being burned beneath thefall of half consumed buildings. In all these diffi-culties they took infinite pains to keep close together,and maintain their ranks. When they came up to theenemy, a few only could engage at a time, on accountof the narrowness and inequality of the ground. They.^LUT. VoL. VII. I??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?130PLUTARCH.fought, however, with great bravery, and, encouragedby the acclamations of the citizens, at length theyrouted Nypsius, and most of his men escaped into thecitadel, which was near at hand. Such of them aswere dispersed and could not get in were pursued andput to the sword. The present deplorable state of thecity afforded neither time nor propriety for that joyand thpse congratulations which usually follow victory.All were busy in saving the remains of the conflagra-tions; and though they labored hard during the wholenight, it was with great difficulty the fire was ex-tinguished.Not one orator of the popular faction durst anylonger remain in the city. By their flight they at onceconfessed their guilt, and avoided punishment. Hera-clides, however, and Theodotes, surrendered them-selves to Dion. They acknowleged their error, andintreated that he would not imitate them in the crueltreatment they had shown him. They forgot not toadd how much it would be for his honor, who was un-equalled in other virtues, to restrain his resentments;and, by forgiving the ungrateful, to testify that supe-riority of spirit for which they had contended withhim. His friends, however, advised him by no meansto pardon these factious and invidious men, but togive them up to his soldiers, and to rid the common-wealth of the ambition of demagogues, no less destruc-tive than that of tyrants. Dion, on the other hand,endeavored to mitigate their resentments.--' Othergenerals,' said he, ' employ themselves chiefly in mili-tary studies; but, by being long conversant in theacademy, I have learned to subdue my passions, andto restrain the impulses of enmity and anger. To provethat I have really gained such a victory over myself,it is not sufficient merely to be kind to men of virtue,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.131but to be indulgent and reconcileable to the injurious.If I have excelled Heraclides in military and politicalabilities, I am resolved not to be inferior to him injustice and clemency; since to have the advantage inthose is the first degree of excellence. The honors ofconquest are never wholly our own; for though theconqueror may stand unrivalled, Fortune will claimher share in his success. Heraclides may be treacher-ous, invidious, and malicious; but must Dion thereforesully his glories by the indulgence of resentment? Thelaws, indeed, allow the revenge of an injury to bemore justifiable than the commission of it; but bothproceed originally from the infirmity of human na-ture. Besides, there is hardly any malignity so in-veterate, that it may not be overcome by kindness,and softened by repeated favors.' Agreeably to thesesentiments, Dion pardoned Heraclides and dismissedhim.His first object was to repair the wall which he hadformerly erected around the citadel; and, for this pur-pose, he ordered each of the citizens to furnish a pali-sade, and bring it to the works. When they had donethis he sent them to their repose, and employed hisown men the whole night in drawing a line of circum-vallation around the citadel, which both the enemyand the citizens were astonished to find completed inthe morning.After the dead were buried, and the prisoners, tothe amount of two thousand, ransomed, he summonedan assembly. Heraclides moved that Dion should bedeclared commander-in-chief, both at sea and land.This motion was approved by the nobility, and thecommons were desired to confirm it; but the sailorsand artificers opposed it in a tumultuous manner.They were unwilling that Heraclides should lose his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.command at sea; for though they had no good opinionof his principles, they knew that he would be more in-dulgent than Dion, and more ready to gratify their in-clinations. Dion therefore gave up his point, andagreed that Heraclides should continue admiral. Butwhen the equal distribution of lands was moved for,he opposed it, and repealed all the decrees which hadformerly passed on that measure, by which means heonce more incurred the displeasure of the people.Heraclides again made his advantage of this, andharangued the soldiers and sailors at Messana, ac-cusing Dion of a design to make himself absolute. Atthe same time he privately corresponded with Diony-sius, by means of Pharax, a Spartan. When the no-bility got intelligence of this, there was a sedition inthe army, and the city was greatly distressed by wantof provisions. Dion was novv at a loss what measuresto pursue; and all his friends condemned him forstrengthening the hands of so perverse and invidious awretch as Heraclides.Pharax was encamped at Neopolis, in the territoryof Agrigentum; and Dion drew out the Syracusans,but not with an intent to engage him, till he found aconvenient opportunity. This gave Heraclides and hisseamen an occasion of exclaiming that he delayedfighting only that he might the longer continue in com-mand. He was forced to action, therefore, contrary tohis inclinations, and was beaten. His loss indeed wassmall, and his defeat was owing more to a misunder-standing in his own army, than to the superior courageof the enemy: he therefore resolved to renew the en-gagement, and, after animating and encouraging hismen to redeem their lost credit, he drew them up inform of battle. In the evening, however, he receivedintelligence that Heraclides was sailing for Syracuse,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.with an intent to possess himself of the city, and toshut him out. On this he made a draught of thebravest and most active of the cavalry, and rode withsuch expedition, that he reached the city by nine inthe morning, after a march of seven hundred furlongs.Heraclides, though he made all the sail he could, wastoo late, and he therefore tacked about, and stood out tosea. While he was undetermined what course to steer,he met Gaesilus the Spartan, who informed him thathe was sent to command in chief in Sicily, as Gylippushad done before. Heraclides immediately acceptedhim, and boasted to his allies that he had found in thisSpartan an antidote to the power of Dion. At thesame time he sent a herald to Syracuse, ordering thecitizens to receive Gaesilus for their general. Dionanswered, that the Syracusans had already a sufficientnumber of generals; and that, if it were necessaryfor them to have a Spartan, he was himself a citizenof Sparta.Gaesilus having now no hopes of the command,waited on Dion, and, by his mediation, reconciled himto Heraclides. This reconciliation was confirmed bythe most solemn oaths, and Gaesilus himself was gua-rantee of the treaty, and undertook to punish Hera-clides, in case of any future breach of faith. TheSyracusans on this discharged their navy, as theyfound no advantages from it, equal to the expense ofkeeping it on foot, and to those inconveniences itbrought on them, by being a continual source of sedi-tions. At the same time they continued the siege, andinvested the city with another wall. As the besiegedwere cut off from farther supplies, when provisionsfailed, the soldiers began to mutiny, so that Apollo-crates found himself under a necessity of coming toterms with Dion, and offered to deliver up the citadel??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.to him, with all the arms and stores, on condition thathe might have five galleys, and be permitted to retirein safety with his mother and sisters. Dion grantedhis request, and with these he sailed to Dionysius.He was no sooner under sail than the whole city ofSyracuse assembled to behold the joyful sight. Theirhearts were so full of this interesting event, that theyeven expressed their anger against those who were ab-sent, and could not be witnesses with what glory thesun that day rose on Syracuse, delivered at last fromthe chains of slavery. As this flight of Dionysius wasone of the most memorable vicissitudes of fortune thatis recorded in history, and as no tyranny was evermore effectually established than his, how great musttheir joy and their self-complacency have been, afterthey had destroyed it by such inconsiderable means!When Apollocrates was gone, and Dion went to takepossession of the citadel, the women could not waittill he entered, but ran to meet him at the gate. Aris-tomache came first, leading Dion's son, and Arete fol-lowed her in tears, fearful and apprehensive of meet-ing her husband, after she had been so long in thepossession of another. Dion first embraced his sister,then his son : after which Aristomache presented Areteto him, with this address: 'Your banishment, Dion,made us all equally miserable. Your return, andyour success, have made us all happy, except her whomI had the misfortune to see, by cruel compulsion,given to another, while you were yet alive. We arenow intirely in your disposal; but how will you de-termine concerning this unhappy woman? And howmust she salute you? as her uncle, or as her husband?'Dion was affected by this tender intercession, and wept.He embraced Arete with great affection, put his soninto her hands, and desired her to retire to his own??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.135bouse, where he purposed to reside; for the city heimmediately delivered up to the Syracusans.All things had now succeeded to his wish: but heby no means sought to reap the first advantages of hisgood fortune. His first object was to gratify hisfriends, to reward his allies, and to give his fellow-citizens and foreign soldiers proper marks of his fa-vor, in which his munificence even exceeded his abili-ties. As to himself, he lived in a plain and frugalmanner, which, on this occasion in particular, wasuniversally admired: for while the fame of his actions,and the reputation of his valor was spread throughSicily and Greece, he seemed rather to live with Platoin the sparing simplicity of the academic life, thanamong soldiers, who look on every species of luxuryas a compensation for the toils and dangers of war.Though Plato himself wrote to him, that the eyes ofthe whole world were on him, he seems not to havecarried his attentions beyond one particular part of onecity, the academy. His judges in that society, heknew, would not so much regard the greatness of hisperformances, his courage, or his victories, as thattemper of mind with which he bore prosperity, andthat moderation with which he sustained his happierfortunes. He did not in the least relax the severityof his manners; he kept the same reserve to the peo-ple, though condescension was, at this time, politicallynecessary; and though Plato, as we have already ob-served, had expostulated with him on this account, andtold him that austerity was the companion of solitude.He had certainly a natural antipathy to complaisance;and he had moreover a design, by his own example, toreform the manners of the Syracusans, which were be-come vain, dissolute, and immodest. Heraclides oncemore began to oppose him. Dion sent for him to at-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?136PLUTARCH.tend at the council; and he made answer, that hewould not attend in any other capacity than as a privatecitizen at a public assembly. Soon after this he im-peached Dion of declining to demolish the citadel, andof preventing the people from opening the tomb ofDionysius, and dragging out the body. He accusedhim likewise of sending for counsellors and ministersto Corinth, in contempt of his fellow-citizens. And itis true that he had engaged some Corinthians to assisthim in settling his plan of government. His intentionwas to restrain the unlimited power of the popular ad-ministration, (which cannot properly be called a go-vernment, but, as Plato terms it, a warehouse of go-vernments,) and to establish the constitution on the La-cedaemonian and Cretan plan. This was a mixture ofthe regal and popular governments, or rather an aristo-cracy. Dion knew that the Corinthians were governedchiefly by the nobility, and that the influence of thepeople rather interfered. He foresaw that Heraclideswould be no inconsiderable impediment to his scheme.He knew him to be factious, turbulent, and inconstant;and he therefore gave him up to those who advised tokill him, though he had before saved him out of theirhands. Accordingly they broke into his house, andmurdered him. His death was, at first, resented by thecitizens; but when Dion gave him a magnificent fu-neral, attended the dead body with his soldiers, andpronounced an oration to the" people, their resentmentwent off. Indeed they were sensible that the citywould never be at peace whilst the competitions ofDion and Heraclides subsisted.Dion had a friend named Calippus, an Athenian,with whom he first became acquainted, not on accountof his literary merit, but, according to Plato, becausehe happened to be introduced by him to some religious??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.137mysteries. He had always attended him in the army,and was in great esteem. He was the first of hisfriends who marched along with him into Syracuse,with a garland on his head, and he had distinguishedhimself in every action. This man finding that Dion'schief friends had fallen in the war; that, since thedeath of Heraclides, the popular party was without aleader, and that he himself stood in great favor withthe army, formed an execrable design against the lifeof his benefactor. His object was certainly the su-preme command in Sicily, though some say he wasbribed to it with twenty talents: for this purpose hedrew several of the soldiers into a conspiracy againstDion, and his plot was conducted in a most artfulmanner. He constantly informed Dion of what heheard, or pretended to hear said against him in thearmy. By this means he obtained such confidence,that he was allowed to converse privately with whomhe thought proper, and to speak with the utmost free-dom against Dion, that he might discover his secretenemies. Thus, in a short time, he drew about himall the seditious and discontented citizens; and if anyone of different principles informed Dion that his in-tegrity had been tried, he gave himself no concernabout it, as that point had already been settled withCalippus.While this conspiracy was on foot Dion had a mon-strous and dreadful apparition. As he was meditatingone evening alone in the portico before his house, heheard a sudden noise, and, turning about, perceived(for it was not yet dark) a woman of gigantic size atthe end of the portico, in the form of one of the furies,as they are represented in the theatre, sweeping thefloor with a broom. In his terror and amazement hesent for some of his friends, and, informing them of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?138PLUTARCH.this prodigy, desired they would stay with him duringthe night. His mind was in the utmost disorder, andhe was apprehensive that, if they left him, the spectrewould appear again; but he saw it no more. Soonafter this his only son, who was now almost grown upto manhood, on some childish displeasure, or frivolousaffront, threw himself from the top of the house, andwas killed on the spot.While Dion was in this distress Calippus was ripen-ing the conspiracy; and, for this purpose, he propa-gated a report in Syracuse, that Dion, being now child-less, had determined to adopt Apollocrates, the son ofDionysius, who was nephew to his wife, and grandsonto bis sister. The plot however was now suspectedboth by Dion, his wife, and sister. Dion, who hadstained his honor, and tarnished his glories, by themurder of Heraclides, had, as we may suppose, hisanxieties on that account; and he would frequentlydeclare, that rather than live, not only in fear of hisenemies, but in suspicion of his friends, he would diea thousand deaths, and freely open his bosom to theassassin.When Calippus found the women inquisitive andsuspicious, he was afraid of the consequence, and as-serted, with tears, his own integrity, offering to givethem any pledge of his fidelity they might desire.They required that he would take the great oath; theform of which is as follows: the person who takes itgoes down into the temple of the Thesmophori, where,after the performance of some religious ceremonies,he puts on the purple robe of Proserpine, and, holdinga flaming torch in his hand, proceeds on the oath. Allthis Calippus did without hesitation; and, to showwith what contempt he held the goddess, he appointedthe execution of his conspiracy on the day of her fes-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN.139trad. Indeed, he could hardly think that even thiswould enhance his guilt, or render him more obnoxiousto the goddess, when he was the very person who hadbefore initiated Dion in her sacred mysteries.The conspiracy was now supported by numbers; andas Dion was surrounded by his friends, in the apart-ment where he usually entertained them, the conspira-tors invested the house, some securing the doors, andothers the windows. The assassins, who were Zacyn-thians, came in unarmed, in their ordinary dress.Those who remained without made fast the doors.The Zacynthians then fell on Dion, and endeavored tostrangle him; but not succeeding in this, they calledfor a sword. No one, however, durst open the door;for Dion had many friends about him: yet they had,in effect, nothing to fear from these; for each con-cluded that, by giving up Dion, he should consult hisown safety. When they had waited some time, Ly-con, a Syracusan, put a short sword through the win-dow into the hands of a Zacynthian, who fell on Dion,already stunned and senseless, and cut his throat likea victim at the altar. His sister, and his wife, whowas pregnant, they imprisoned. In this unhappy situ-ation she fell in labor, and was delivered of a son,whom they ventured to preserve; for Calippus wastoo much embroiled by his own affairs to attend tothem, and the keepers of the prison were prevailed onto connive at it.After Dion was cut off, and Calippus had the wholegovernment of Syracuse in his hands, he had the pre-sumption to write to the Athenians, whom, after thegods, he ought of all others to have dreaded, pollutedas he was with the murder of his benefactor. But ithas been observed, with great truth, of that state, thatits good men are the best, and its bad men the worst,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?140 PLUTARCH.in the world; as the soil of Attica produces the finesthoney, and the most fatal poisons. The success ofCalippus did not long reproach the indulgence of thegods. He soon received the punishment he deserved;for, in attempting to take Catana, he lost Syracuse; onwhich occasion he said that he had lost a city, and gota cheese-grater. Afterwards, at the siege of Messana,most of his men were cut off, and, amongst the rest,the murderers of Dion. As he was refused admissionby every city in Sicily, and universally hated anddespised, he passed into Italy, and made himself mas-ter of Rhegium; but being no longer able to maintainhis soldiers, he was slain by Leptines and Polyperchonwith the very same sword with which Dion had beenassassinated; for it was known by the size, (being short,like the Spartan swords,) and by the curious workman-ship. Thus Calippus received the punishment due tohis crimes.When Aristomache and Arete were released out ofprison, they were received by Icetes, a Syracusan, afriend of Dion's, who, for some time, entertained themwith hospitality and good faith. Afterwards, however,being prevailed on by the enemies of Dion, he put themon board a vessel, under pretence of sending them tothe Peloponnesus; but privately ordered the sailors tokill them in the passage, and throw the bodies over-board. Others say that they and the infant were thrownalive into the sea. This wretch, too, paid the forfeitof his villany; for he was put to death by Timoleon;and the Syracusans, to revenge Dion, slew his twodaughters ; of which I have made more particular men-tion in the life of Timoleon.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?M. BBMJTUJS.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?IMARCUS BRUTUS.The great ancestor of Marcus Brutus was that JuniusBrutus to whom the ancient Romans erected a statueof brass, and placed it in the capitol amongst theirkings. He was represented with a drawn sword in hishand, to signify the spirit and firmness with which hevanquished the Tarquins: but hard tempered, like thesteel of which that sword was composed, and in no de-gree humanised by education, the same obdurate seve-rity which impelled him against the tyrant shut up hisnatural affection from his children, when he found thosechildren conspiring for the support of tyranny. Onthe contrary, that Brutus, whose life we are nowwriting, had all the advantages that arise from thecultivation of philosophy. To his spirit, which wasnaturally sedate and mild, he gave vigor and activityby constant application. On the whole, he was hap-pily formed to virtue, both by nature and education.Even the partisans of Caesar ascribed to him everything that had the appearance of honor or generosityin the conspiracy; and all that was of a contrary com-plexion they laid to the charge of Cassius; who was,indeed, the friend and relation of Brutus, but by nomeans resembled him in the simplicity of his manners.It is universally allowed that his mother, Servilia, wasdescended from Servilius Ahala, who, when SpuriusMaelius seditiously aspired to the monarchy, went upto him in the forum, under a pretence of business, and,as Maelius inclined his head to hear what he would say,stabbed him with a dagger, which he had concealed forthe purpose. But the partisans of Caesar would notallow that be was descended from Junius Brutus,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?142PLUTARCH.whose family, they said, was extinct with his two sons.Marcus Brutus, according to them, was a plebeian, de-scended from one Brutus, a steward, of mean extrac-tion, and that the family had but lately risen to anydignity in the state. On the contrary, Posidonius, thephilosopher, agrees with those historians who say thatJunius Brutus had a third son, who was an infant whenhis brothers were put to death, and that Marcus Bru-tus was descended from him. He farther tells us thatthere were several illustrious persons of that family inhis time, with whom he was well acquainted, and whovery much resembled the statue of Junius Brutus.Cato the philosopher was brother to Servilia, themother of Brutus, who greatly admired and imitatedthe virtues of his uncle, and married his daughterPorcia.Brutus was acquainted with all the sects of the G reekphilosophers, and understood their doctrines; but thePlatonists stood highest in his esteem. He had nogreat opinion either of the new or of the middle aca-demy, but applied himself wholly to the studies of theancient. Autiochus of Ascalon was therefore his fa-vorite, and he entertained his brother Ariston in his ownhouse; a man who, though inferior to some of the phi-losophers in learning, was equal to the first of them inmodesty, prudence, and gentleness of manners. Era-pylus, who likewise lived with Brutus, as we find inhis own epistles, and in those of his friends, was anorator, and left a short but a well written narrative ofthe death of Caesar, intitled Brutus.Brutus spoke with great ability in Latin, both in thefield and at the bar. In Greek he affected the senten-tious and laconic way. There are several instances ofthis in his epistles. Thus, in the beginning of the war,he wrote to the Pergamenians: 'I hear you have given??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.143money to Dolabella. If you gave it willingly, yonmust own you injured me; if unwillingly, show it bygiving willingly to me.' Thus, on another occasion, tothe Samians: 'Your deliberations are tedious; youractions slow: what, think you, will be the conse-quence V Of the Pataraeans thus: 'The Xanthiansrejected my kindness, and desperately made their coun-try their grave. The Pataraeans confided in me, andretained their liberty. It is in your own choice toimitate the prudence of the Pataraans, or to suffer thefate of the Xanthians.' And such is the style of hismost remarkable letters.While he was yet very young he accompanied Catoto Cyprus in the expedition against Ptolemy. AfterPtolemy had killed himself, Cato, being detained bybusiness in the isle of Rhodes, sent Caninius to securethe king's treasure; but suspecting his fidelity, hewrote to Brutus to sail immediately to Cyprus fromPamphylia ; where, after a fit of sickness, he stayed forthe re-establishment of bis health. He obeyed the orderwith reluctance, both out of respect to Caninius, whowas superseded with disgrace, and because he thoughtthe employment illiberal, and by no means proper fora young man who was in pursuit of philosophy. Ne-vertheless he executed the commission with such dili-gence, that he had the approbation of Cato; and hav-ing turned the effects of Ptolemy into ready money, hebrought the greatest part of it to Rome.When Rome was divided into two factions, andPompey and Caesar were in arms against each other,it was generally believed that Brutus would join Cae-sar, because his father had been put to death by Pom-pey. However, he thought it his duty to sacrifice hisresentments to the interest of his country; and judg-ing Pompey's to be the better cause, he joined his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?144PLUTARCH.party, though before he would not even salute Pompeywhen he met him, esteeming it a crime to have anyconversation with the murderer of his father. He nowlooked on him as the head of the commonwealth; andtherefore, enlisting under his banner, he sailed for Sicilyin quality of lieutenant to Sestius, who was governorof the island. There however he found no opportunityto distinguish himself; and being informed that Pom-pey and Caesar were encamped near each other, andpreparing for that battle on which the whole empiredepended, he went voluntarily into Macedonia to havehis share in the danger. Pompey, it is said, was somuch surprised and pleased with his coming, that herose to embrace him in the presence of his guards, andtreated him with as much respect as if he had been hissuperior. During the time that he was in camp, thosehours that he did not spend with Pompey he employedin reading and study; and thus he passed the day be-fore the battle of Pharsalia. It was the middle ofsummer; the heats were intense, the marshy situationof the camp disagreeable, and his tent-bearers werelong in coming. Nevertheless, though extremely ha-rassed and fatigued, he did not anoint himself tillnoon; and then, taking a morsel of bread, while otherswere at rest, or musing on the event of the ensuingday, he employed himself till the evening in writingan epitome of Polybius.Caesar, it is said, had so high an esteem for him,that he ordered his officers by all means to save him,if he would surrender himself; and, if he refused, tolet him escape with his life. Some have placed thiskindness to the account of Servilia, the mother ofBrutus, with whom Caesar had connexions of a tenderuature in the early part of his life. Besides, as thisaffair was in full blow about the time when Brutus was??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.145born, Caesar had some reason to believe he might behis son. The intrigue was notorious: when the senatewas debating on the dangerous conspiracy of Catiline,Cato and Caesar, who took different sides of the ques-tion, happened to sit near each other. In the midst ofthe business a note was brought to Caesar from without,which he read silently to himself. Cato, hereon, loudlyaccused Caesar of receiving letters from the enemies ofthe commonwealth; and Caesar finding that it had oc-casioned a disturbance in the senate, delivered thenote to Cato as he had received it. Cato, when hefound it to be nothing but a frivolous letter from hisown sister Servilia, threw it back again to Caesar.'Take it, you sot/ said he, and went on with the publicbusiness.After the battle of Pharsalia, when Pompey had fledtowards the sea, and Caesar was storming the camp,Brutus escaped through one of the gates, and fled intoa watery marsh, where he hid himself amongst thereeds. From thence he ventured out in the night, audgot safe to Larissa. From Larissa he wrote to Caesar,who expressed the greatest pleasure in hearing of hissafety, sent for him, and entertained him amongst thefirst of his friends. When no one could give accountwhich way Pompey had fled, Caesar walked for sometime alone with Brutus, to consult his opinion; andfinding that it was for Egypt, he rejected the opinionsof the rest, and directed his march for that country.Pompey had, indeed, taken the route of Egypt, asBrutus conjectured; but he had already met his fate.Brutus had so much influence with Caesar, that hereconciled him to his friend Cassius; and when hespoke in behalf of the king of Africa, though therewere many impeachments against him, he obtained forPLUT. VoL. VII. K??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?146PLUTARCH.him a great part of his kingdom.1 When he first be-gan to speak on this occasion, Caesar said, 'I knownot what this young man intends; but whatever it is,he intends it strongly.' His mind was steady, and noteasily moved by intreaties. His principles were rea-son, and honor, and virtue; and the ends to whichthese directed him he prosecuted with so much vigor,that he seldom failed of success. No flattery couldinduce him to attend to unjust petitions; and thoughthat ductility of mind which may be wrought on by theimpudence of importunity, is by some called good-nature, he considered it as the greatest disgrace. Heused to say that he suspected those who could refuseno favors had not very honestly employed the flowerof their youth.Cassar, previously to his expedition into Africaagainst Cato and Scipio, appointed Brutus to the go-vernment of Gallio Cisalpina. And this was very for-tunate for that particular province: for while the inha-bitants of other provinces were oppressed and treatedlike slaves, by the violence and rapacity of their go-vernors, Brutus behaved with so much kindness to thepeople under his jurisdiction, that they were in somemeasure indemnified for their former sufferings. Yethe ascribed every thing to the goodness of Caesar;and it was no small gratification to the latter to find,on- his return through Italy, not only Brutus himself,but all the cities under his command, ready to attendhis progress, and industrious to do him honor.As there were several pretorships vacant, it was thegeneral opinion that the chief of them, which is thepretorship of the city, would be conferred either onBrutus or on Cassius. Some say that this competition1 Plutarch must here be mistaken. It was Deiotarus, andnot the king of Africa, that Brutus pleaded for.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.147heightened the variance that had already taken placebetween Brutus and Cassius; for there was a misun-derstanding between them, though Cassius was alliedto Brutus by marrying his sister Junia. Others saythat this competition was a political manoeuvre ofCaesar's, who had encouraged it by favoring both theirhopes in private. Be that as it may, Brutus had littlemore than the reputation of his virtue to set againstthe gallant actions performed by Cassius in the Par-thian war. Caesar weighed the merits of each; andafter consulting with his friends, 'Cassius,' he said,'has the better title to it, notwithstanding Brutusmust have the first pretorship.' Another pretorshipwas therefore given to Cassius; but he was not so muchobliged by this as offended by the loss of the first.Brutus had, or at least might have had, equal in-fluence with Caesar in every thing else: he mighthave stood the first in authority and interest, but hewas drawn off by Cassius' party. Not that he wasperfectly reconciled to Cassius, since the competitionfor the pretorial appointments; but he listened to hisfriends, who were perpetually advising him not to besoothed or cajoled by Caesar; but to reject the civili-ties of a tyrant, whose object was not to reward, but todisarm his virtue. On the other hand, Cassar had hissuspicions, and Brutus his accusers; yet the formerthought he had less to fear from his spirit, his au-thority, and his connexions, than he had to hope fromhis honesty. When he was told that Antony and Do-Labella had some dangerous conspiracy on foot, ' It isnot,' said he, ' the sleek and fat men that I fear, butthe pale and the lean;' meaning Brutus and Cassius.Afterwards, when he was advised to beware of Brutus,he laid his hand on his breast, and said, ' Do not youthink, then, that Brutus will wait till I have done withthis poor body V as if he thought Brutus the only pro-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?148PLUTARCH.per person to succeed him in his immense power. In?deed it is extremely probable that Brutus would havebeen the first man in Rome, could he have had patienceawhile to be the second, and have waited till time hadwasted the power of Caesar, and dimmed the lustre ofhis great actions. But Cassius, a man of violent pas-sions, and an enemy to Caesar, rather for personal thanpolitical hatred, still urged him against the dictator.It was universally said that Brutus hated the imperialpower, and that Cassius hated the emperor. Cassius,indeed, pretended that Caesar had injured him. Hecomplained that the lions which he had procured whenhe was nominated edile, and which he had sent to Me-gara, Caesar had taken and converted to his own use,having found them there when that city was takenby Calanus. Those lions, it is said, were very fatal tothe inhabitants; for as soon as their city was taken,they opened their dens, and unchained them in thestreets, that they might stop the irruption of theenemy: but instead of that they fell on the citizens,and tore them in such a manner, that their very ene-mies were struck with horror. Some say that this wasthe principal motive with Cassius for conspiring againstCaesar; but they are strangely mistaken. Cassius hada natural aversion to the whole race of tyrants, whichhe showed even when he was at school with Faustusthe son of Sylla. When Faustus was boasting amongstthe boys of the unlimited power of his father, Cassiusrose and struck him on the face. The friends andtutors of Faustus would have taken on themselvesto punish the insult; but Pompey prevented it, and,sending for the boys, examined them himself. Onwhich Cassius said, ' Come along, Faustus! repeat, ifyou dare, before Pompey, the expressions which pro-voked me, that I may punish you in the same man-ner.' Such was the disposition of Cassius.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.149But Brutus was animated to this undertaking by thepersuasion of his friends, by private intimations andanonymous letters. Under the statue of his ancestor,who destroyed the Tarquins, was placed a paper withthese words: 'O that we had a Brutus now! O thatBrutus were now alive!' His own tribunal on whichhe sat as pretor was continually filled with such in-scriptions as these: 'Brutus, thou sleepest! Thouart not a true Brutus!' The sycophants of Caesarwere the occasion of this; for, amongst other invidiousdistinctions which they paid him, they crowned hisstatues by night, that the people might salute himking, instead of dictator. However, it had a contraryeffect, as I have shown more at large in the life ofCaesar.When Cassius solicited his friends to engage in theconspiracy, they all consented, on condition that Bru-tus would take the lead. They concluded that it wasnot strength of hands, or resolution, that they wanted,but the countenance of a man of reputation, to presideat this sacrifice, and to justify the deed. They weresensible that, without him, they should neither proceedwith spirit, nor escape suspicion when they had effectedtheir purpose. The world, they knew, would conclude,that if the action had been honorable, Brutus wouldnot have refused to engage in it. Cassius having con-sidered these things, determined to pay Brutus thefirst visit after the quarrel that had been betweenthem; and as soon as the compliments of reconciliationwere over, he asked him, 'Whether he intended tobe in the senate on the calends of March; for it wasreported,' he said, 'that Caesar's friends designed tomove that he should be declared king.' Brutus an-swered, ' He should not be there;' and Cassius re-plied,--' But what if they should send for us V--' It??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?150 PLUTARCH.would then,' said Brutus, ' be my duty, not only tospeak against it, bat to sacrifice my life for the libertiesof Rome.' Cassius, encouraged by this, proceeded:--'But what Roman will bear to see you die? Do notyou know yourself, Brutus? Think you that thoseinscriptions you found on your tribunal were placedthere by weavers and victuallers, and not by the firstmen in Rome? From other pretors they look for pre-sents, and shows, and gladiators; but from you theyexpect the abolition of tyranny, as a debt which yourfamily has entailed on you. They are ready to sufferevery thing on your account, if you are really whatyou ought, and what they expect you to be.' Afterthis he embraced Brutus, and being perfectly recon-ciled, they retired to their respective friends.In Pompey's party there was one Quintus Ligarius,whom Caesar had pardoned, though he had borne armsagainst him. This man, less grateful for the pardonhe had received, than offended with the power whichmade him stand in need of it, hated Caesar, but wasthe intimate friend of Brutus. The latter one dayvisited him, and finding him not well, said, 'O Li-garius, what a time is this to be sick!' On which heraised himself on his elbow, and taking Brutus by thehand, answered, 'If Brutus has any design worthy ofhimself, Ligarius is well.' They now tried the incli-nations of all they could trust, and took into the con-spiracy, not only their familiar friends, but such asthey knew to be brave, and above the fear of death:for this reason, though they had the greatest regardfor Cicero, and the utmost confidence in his principlesas a republican, they concealed the conspiracy from,him, lest his natural timidity, and the weariness of age,should retard those measures which required the mostresolute dispatch.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.151Brutus likewise thought proper to leave his friendsStatilius and Favonius, the followers of Cato, out ofthe conspiracy. He had tried their sentiments, underthe color of a philosophical dispute; in which Favo-nius observed, that the worst absolute government waspreferable to a civil war:. and Statilius added, that itbecame no wise man to expose himself to fear anddanger on account of the faults and follies of others.But Labeo, who was present, contradicted both. AndBrutus, though he was then silent, as if the disputehad been difficult to determine, afterwards communi-cated the design to Labeo, who readily concurred init. It was then agreed to gain over the other Brutus,surnamed Albinus, who, though not distinguished byhis personal courage, was of consequence, on accountof the great number of gladiators he bred for the pub-lic shows, and the intire confidence that Caesar placedin him. To the solicitations of Cassius and Labeo hemade no answer; but when he came privately to Bru-tus, and found that he was at the head of the conspi-racy, he made no scruple of joining them. The nameof Brutus drew in many more of the most considerablepersons of the state ; and though they had entered intono oath of secrecy, they kept the design so close, thatnotwithstanding the gods themselves denounced theevent, by a variety of prodigies, no one would givecredit to the conspiracy.Brutus now felt his consequence lie heavy on him.The safety of some of the greatest men in Rome de-pended on his conduct, and he could not think of thedanger they were to encounter without anxiety. Inpublic, indeed, he suppressed his uneasiness: but athome, and especially by night, he was not the sameman. Sometimes he would start from his sleep; atothers, he was totally immersed in thought: from??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?152 PLUTARCH.which, and the like circumstances, it was obvious tohis wife that he was revolving in his mind some diffi-cult and dangerous enterprise. Porcia, as we beforeobserved, was the daughter of Cato. She was marriedto her cousin Brutus very young, though she was awidow, and had a son, named Bibulus, after his father.There is a small tract of his still extant, called ' Me-moirs of Brutus.' Porcia added to the affection of awife the prudence of a woman who was not unac-quainted with philosophy; and she resolved not to in-quire into her husband's secrets before she had madethe following trial of her own firmness. She orderedall her attendants out of her apartment, and, with asmall knife, gave herself a deep wound in the thigh.This occasioned a great effusion of blood, extreme pain,and a fever in consequence of that pain. Brutus wasextremely afflicted for her, and as he attended her, inthe height of her pain, she thus spoke to him: 'Bru-tus, when you married the daughter of Cato you didnot, I presume, consider her merely as a female com-panion, but as the partner of your fortunes. You, in-deed, have given me no reason to repent my marriage:but what proof, either of affection or fidelity, can youreceive from me, if I may neither share in your secretgriefs, nor in your secret councils? I am sensible thatsecrecy is not the characteristic virtue of my sex: butsurely our natural weakness may be strengthened by avirtuous education, and by honorable connexions; andPorcia can boast that she is the daughter of Cato, andthe wife of Brutus. Yet even in these distinctions Iplaced no absolute confidence till I tried, and foundthat I was proof against pain.' When she had saidthis she showed him her wound, and informed him ofher motives: on which Brutus was so struck with hermagnanimity that, with lifted hands, he intreated the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.153gods to favor his enterprise, and enable him to approvehimself worthy of Porcia. He then took every meansto cure her wound, and restore her health.A meeting of the senate being appointed, at whichCaesar was expected to attend, that was thought a pro-per time for the execution of their design; for thenthey could not only appear together without suspicion,but as some of the most considerable persons in thecommonwealth would be present, they flattered them-selves that, as soon as the deed was done, they wouldjoin in asserting the common liberty. The place toowhere the senate was to meet seemed providentiallyfavorable for their purpose. It was a portico adjoiningto the theatre, and in the midst of a saloon, furnished,with benches, stood a statue of Pompey, which hadbeen erected to him by the commonwealth when headorned that part of the city with those buildings.Here the senate was convened on the ides of March;and it seemed as if some god should bring Caesar tothis place to revenge on him the death of Pompey.When the day came, Brutus went out, and tookwith him a dagger; which last circumstance was knownonly to his wife. The rest met at the house of Cassius,and conducted his son, who was that day to put on thetoga virilis, to the forum: from whence they proceededto Pompey's portico, and waited for Caesar. Any onethat had been privy to the design of the conspiratorswould here have been astonished at their calm and con-sistent firmness. Many of them were pretors, and ob-liged by their office to hear and determine causes.These they heard with so much calmness, and decidedwith so much accuracy, that one could not have sup-posed there had been any thing else on their minds;and when a certain person appealed from the judgmentof Brutus to Caesar, Brutus, looking round on the as-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?164PLUTARCH.sembly, said, ' Caesar neither does, nor shall hinder mefrom acting agreeably to the laws.' Nevertheless theywere disturbed by many accidents. Though the daywas far spent, still Caesar did not come, being detainedby his wife and the soothsayers, on account of defectsin the sacrifices. In the mean time a person came upto Casca, one of the conspirators, and taking him bythe hand, 'You concealed the thing from me,' said he,'but Brutus has told me all.' Casca expressed hissurprise; on which the other said, laughing, 'Howcame you to be so rich on a sudden, as to stand for theedileship V so near was the great secret being blown bythe ambiguity of this man's discourse! At the sametime Popilius Laena, a senator, after saluting Brutusand Cassius in a very obliging manner, said, in awhisper, 'My best wishes are with you: but makeno delay; for it is now no secret.' After saying this,he immediately went away, and left them in great con-sternation; for they concluded that every thing wasdiscovered. Soon after this a messenger came runningfrom Brntus' house, and told him that his wife wasdying. Porcia had been under extreme anxiety, andin great agitations about the event. At every littlenoise or voice she heard she started up and ran to thedoor, like one of the frantic priestesses of Bacchus, in-quiring of every one that came from the forum whatBrutus was doing. She sent messenger after messengerto make the same inquiries; and being unable anylonger to support the agitations of her mind, she atlength fainted away. She had not time to retire to herchamber. As she sat in the middle of the house, herspirits failed, her color changed, and she lost her sensesand her speech. Her women shrieked, the neighborsran to their assistance, and a report was soon spreadthrough the city that Porcia was dead. However, by??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.155the care of those that were about her, she recoveredin a little time. Brutus was greatly distressed withthe news, and not without reason; but his privategrief gave way to the public concern; for it was now-reported that Caesar was coming on a litter. The illomen of his sacrifices had deterred him from enteringon business of importance, and be proposed to defer itunder a pretence of indisposition. As soon as he cameout of the litter Popilius Liena, who a little before hadwished Brutus success, went up, and spoke to him fora considerable time, Caesar all the while standing, andseeming very attentive. The conspirators not beingable to hear what he said, suspected, from what passedbetween him and Brutus, that he was now making adiscovery of their design. This disconcerted them ex-tremely, and looking on each other, they agreed, bythe silent language of the countenance, that they shouldnot stay to be taken, but despatch themselves. Withthis intent Cassius and some others were just about todraw their daggers from under their robes, when Bru-tus observing from the looks and gestures of Lienathat he was petitioning, and not accusing, encouragedCassius by the cheerfulness of his countenance. Thiswas the only way by which he could communicatehis sentiments, being surrounded by many who werestrangers to the conspiracy. Liena, after a little while,kissed Caesar's hand, and left him; and it plainly ap-peared, on the whole, that he had been speaking abouthis own affairs.The senate was already seated, and the conspiratorsgot close about Caesar's chair, under pretence of pre-ferring a suit to him. Cassius turned his face to Pom-pey's statue, and invoked it, as if it had been sensibleof his prayers. Trebonius kept Antony in conversationwithout the court. And now Caesar entered, and tha??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?156PLUTARCH.whole senate rose to salute him. The conspirator*crowded around him, and set Tullius Cimber, one oftheir number, to solicit the recall of his brother, whowas banished. They all united in the solicitation, tookhold of Caesar's hand, and kissed his head and hisbreast. He rejected their applications, and findingthat they would not desist, at length rose from his seatin anger. Tullius on this laid hold of his robe, andpulled it from his shoulders. Casca, who stood behind,gave him the first, though but a slight wound with hisdagger, near the shoulder. Caesar caught the handleof the dagger, and said in Latin, 'Villain! Casca!what dost thou mean V Casca, in Greek, called hisbrother to his assistance. Caesar was wounded by num-bers almost at the same instant, and looked round himfor some way to escape; but when he saw the daggerof Brutus pointed against him, he let go Casca's hand,and covering his head with his robe, resigned himselfto their swords. The conspirators pressed so eagerlyto stab him, that they wounded each other. Brutus, inattempting to have his share in the sacrifice, received awound in his hand, and all of them were covered withblood.Caesar thus slain, Brutus stepped forward into themiddle of the senate-house, and proposing to make aspeech, desired the senators to stay. They fled, how-ever, with the utmost precipitation, though no onepursued; for the conspirators had no design on anylife but Caesar's; and, that taken away, they invitedthe rest to liberty. Indeed, all but Brutus were ofopinion that Antony should fall with Caesar. Theyconsidered him as an insolent man, who in his princi-ples favored monarchy, and who had made himselfpopular in the army. Moreover, besides his naturaldisposition to despotism, he had at this time the consu-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.157lar power, and was the colleague of Caesar. Brutus,on the other hand, alleged the injustice of such a mea-sure, and suggested the possibility of Antony's changeof principle. He thought it far from being improbablethat, after the destruction of Caesar, a man so passion-ately fond of glory should be inspired by an emulationto join in restoring the commonwealth. Thus Antonywas saved; though, in the general consternation, hefled, in the disguise of a plebeian. Brutus and hisparty betook themselves to the capitol; and showingtheir bloody hands and naked swords, proclaimed li-berty to the people as they passed. At first all waslamentation, distraction, and tumult: but as no fartherviolence was committed, the senators and the peoplerecovered their apprehensions, and went in a body tothe conspirators in the capitol. Brutus made a popularspeech adapted to the occasion; and this being wellreceived, the conspirators were encouraged to comedown into the forum. The rest were undistinguished:but persons of the first quality attended Brutus, con-ducted him with great honor from the capitol, andplaced him in the rostrum. At the sight of Brutusthe populace, though disposed to tumult, were struckwith reverence; and when he began to speak, they at-tended with silence. It soon appeared, however, thatit was not the action, but the man, they respected; forwhen Cinna spoke, and accused Caesar, they loadedhim with the most opprobrious language; and becameso outrageous, that the conspirators thought properonce more to retire into the capitol. Brutus now ex-pected to be besieged, and therefore dismissed theprincipal people that attended him, because he thoughtit unreasonable that they who had no concern in theaction should be exposed to the danger that followedit. Next day the senate assembled in the temple of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?158PLUTARCH.Tellus, and Antony, Plancus, and Cicero, in their re-spective speeches, persuaded and prevailed on the peo-ple to forget what had passed. Accordingly, the con-spirators were not only pardoned, but it was decreedthat the consuls should take into consideration whathonors and dignities were proper to be conferred onthem. After this the senate broke up; and Antony,having sent his son as an hostage to the capitol, Brutusand his party came down, and mutual complimentspassed between them. Cassius was invited to sup withAntony, Brutus with Lepidus, and the rest were enter-tained by their respective friends.Early next morning the senate assembled again, andvoted thanks to Antony for preventing a civil war, aswell as to Brutus and his party for their services to thecommonwealth. The latter had also provinces distri-buted amongst them. Crete was allotted to Brutus,Africa to Cassius, Asia toTrebonius, Bithynia to Cim-ber, and the other Brutus had that part of Gaul whichlies on the Po.Caesar's will and his funeral came next in question.Antony proposed that the will should be read in pub-lic, and that the funeral should not be private, orwithout proper magnificence, lest such treatment shouldexasperate the people. Cassius strongly opposed this;but Brutus agreed to it; and here he fell into a seconderror. His preservation of so formidable an enemy asAntony was a mistaken thing; but his giving up themanagement of Caesar's funeral to him was an irre-parable fault. The publication of the will had an im-mediate tendency to inspire the people with a passion-ate regret for the death of Caesar; for he had left toeach Roman citizen seventy-five drachmas, besides thepublic use of his gardens beyond the Tiber, where nowthe temple of Fortune stands. When the body was??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS. 159brought into the forum, and Antony spoke the usualfuneral eulogium, as he perceived the people affectedby his speech, he endeavored still more to work ontheir passions, by unfolding the bloody garment of Cre-sar, showing thein in how many places it was pierced,and pointing out the number of his wounds. Thisthrew every thing into confusion. Some called aloudto kill the murderers; others, as was formerly done inthe case of that seditious demagogue Clodius, snatchedthe benches and tables from the neighboring shops,and erected a pile for the body of Ca?sar in the midst?of consecrated places and surrounding temples. Assoon as the pile was in flames, the people, crowdingfrom all parts, snatched the half-burnt brands, and ranround the city to fire the houses of the conspirators;but they were on their guard against such an assault,and prevented the effects.There was a poet named Cinna, who had no concernin the conspiracy, but was rather a friend of Caesar's.This man dreamt that Caesar invited him to supper;and that, when he declined the invitation, he took himby the hand, and constrained him to follow him into adark and deep place, which he entered with the utmosthorror. The agitation of his spirits threw him into afever, which lasted the remaining part of the night.In the morning, however, when Caesar was to be in-terred, he was ashamed of absenting himself from thesolemnity: he therefore mingled with the multitudethat had just been enraged by the speech of Antony;and being unfortunately mistaken for that Cinna whohad before inveighed against Caesar, he was torn topieces. This, more than any thing, except Antony'schange of conduct, alarmed Brutus and his party.They now thought it necessary to consult their safety,and retired to Antium. Here they sat down, with an??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?160 PLUTARCH.intent to return as soon as the popular fury shouldsubside; and for this, considering the inconstancy ofthe multitude, they concluded that they should nothave long to wait. The senate moreover was in theirinterest; and though they did not punish the mur-derers of Cinna, they caused strict inquiry to be madeafter those who attempted to burn the houses of theconspirators. Antony, too, became obnoxious to thepeople; for they suspected him of erecting anotherkind of monarchy. The return of Brutus was conse-quently wished for; and, as he was to exhibit showsand games in his capacity as pretor, it was expected.Brutus however had received intelligence that severalof Caesar's old soldiers, to whom he had distributedlands and colonies, had stolen, by small parties, intoRome, and that they lay in wait for him; he thereforedid not think proper to come himself; notwithstandingwhich, the shows that were exhibited on his accountwere extremely magnificent; for he had bought a con-siderable number of wild beasts, and ordered that theyshould all be reserved for that purpose. He wenthimself as far as Naples to collect a number of come-dians; and being informed of one Canutius, who wasmuch admired on the stage, he desired his friends touse all their interest to bring him to Rome. Canutiuswas a Grecian, and Brutus therefore thought that nocompulsion should be used. He wrote likewise to Ci-cero, and begged that he would by all means be pre-sent at the public shows.Such was the situation of his affairs when, on the ar-rival of Octavius at Rome, things took another turn.He was son to the sister of Caesar, who had adoptedand appointed him his heir. He was pursuing his stu-dies at Apollonia, and in expectation of meeting Caesarthere on his intended expedition against the Parthians,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.1G1at the time when Caesar was slain. On hearing of thisevent he immediately came to Rome, and, to ingratiatehimself with the people, assumed the name of Caesar.By punctually distributing amongst the citizens themoney that was left them by his uncle, he soon tookthe lead of Antony; and, by his liberality to the sol-diers, he brought over to his party the greatest numberof those who had served under Caesar. Cicero, like-wise, who hated Antony, joined his interest: and thiswas so much resented by Brutus, that, in his letters, hereproached him in the severest terms. 'He perceived,'he said, 'that Cicero was tame enough to bear a ty-rant, and was only afraid of the tyrant that hated him;that his compliments to Octavius were meant to pur-chase an easy slavery: but our ancestors,' said Brutus,'scorned to bear even a gentle master.' He added,that 'as to the measures of peace, or war, he was un-determined; but in one thing he was resolved, whichwas, never to be a slave!' He expressed his surprise'that Cicero should prefer an infamous accommodationeven to the dangers of civil war; and that the onlyfruits he expected from destroying the tyranny of An-tony should be the establishment of a new tyrant inOctavius.' Such was the spirit of his first letters.The city was now divided into two factions: somejoined Caesar, others remained with Antony, and thearmy was sold to the best bidder. Brutus, of course,despaired of any desirable event; and being resolvedto leave Italy, he went by land to Lucania, and cameto the maritime town of Elea. Porcia, being to returnfrom thence to Rome, endeavored, as well as possible,to conceal the sorrow that oppressed her; but, not-withstanding her magnanimity, a picture which shefound there betrayed her distress. The subject wasthe parting of Hector and Andromache. He was re-PLUT. VoL. VII. L??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?162PLUTARCH.presented delivering his son, Astyanax, into her arms,and the eyes of Andromache were fixed on him. Theresemblance that this picture bore to her own distressmade her burst into tears the moment she beheld it;and several times she visited the melancholy emblem,to gaze on it, and weep before it. On this occasionAcilies, one of Brutus' friends, repeated that passagein Homer where Andromache says,Yet while my Hector still survives, I seeMy father, mother, brethren, all in thee.To which Brutus replied, with a smile, 'But I mustnot answer Porcia as Hector did Andromache:Hasten to thy tasks at home,There guide the spindle and direct the loom.She has not personal strength, indeed, to sustain thetoils we undergo, but her spirit is not less active in thecause of her country.' This anecdote we have fromBibulus, the son of Porcia.From Elea, Brutus sailed for Athens, where he wasreceived with high applause, and invested with publichonors. There he took up his residence with a parti-cular friend, and attended the lectures of Theomnestusthe academic, and Cratippus the peripatetic, devotinghimself wholly to literary pursuits. Yet in this un-suspected state he was privately preparing for war.He despatched Herostratus into Macedonia to gain theprincipal officers in that province; and he secured byhis kindness all the young Romans who were thenstudents at Athens. Amongst these was the son ofCicero, on whom he bestowed the highest encomiums,and said, that he could never cease admiring the spiritof that young man, who bore such a mortal hatred totyrants.At length he began to act more publicly; and beinginformed that some of the Roman ships, laden with??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.163money, were returning from Asia, under the commandof a man of honor, a friend of his, he met him at Ca-rystus, a city of Euboea. There he had a conferencewith him, and requested that he would give up theships. By the bye, it happened to be Brutus' birth-day, on which occasion he gave a splendid entertain-ment; and while they were drinking ' Victory to Bru-tus,' and 'Liberty to Rome,' to encourage the cause,he called for a larger bowl. While he held it in hishand, without any visible relation to the subject theywere on, he pronounced this verse:My fall was doom'd by Phoebus and by Fate.Some historians say that 'Apollo' was the word hegave his soldiers in the last battle at Philippi; and, ofcourse, conclude that this exclamation was a presageof his defeat. Antistius, the commander of the ships,gave him five hundred thousand drachmas of the mo-ney he was carrying to Italy. The remains of Pom-pey's army that were scattered about Thessaly readilyjoined his standard; and, besides these, he took fivehundred horse, whom Cinna was conducting to Dola-bella in Asia. He then sailed to Demetrias, and seizeda large quantity of arms, which Julius Caesar had pro-vided for the Parthian war, and which were now to besent to Antony. Macedonia was delivered up to himby Hortensius the pretor; and all the neighboringprinces readily offered their assistance. When newswas received that Caius, the brother of Antony, hadmarched through Italy, to join the forces under Gabi-nius in Dyrrachium and Apollonia, Brutus determinedto seize them before he arrived, and made a forcedmarch with such troops as were at hand. The waywas rugged, and the snows were deep; but he movedwith such expedition, that his suttlers were left a lony??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?164PLUTARCH.way behind. When he had almost reached Dyrra-chium he was seized with the disorder called bulimia,or violent hunger, occasioned by cold and fatigue.This disorder affects both men and cattle, after fatiguesin the snow. Whether it is that, perspiration beingprevented by the extreme cold, the vital heat is con-fined, and more immediately consumes the aliment, orthat a keen and subtle vapor rising from the meltedsnow penetrates the body, and destroys the heat byexpelling it through the pores; for the sweatings seemto arise from the heat contending with the cold, whichbeing repelled by the latter, the vapory steam is dif-fused over the surface of the body. But of this I havetreated more largely in another place. Brutus grow-ing very faint, and no provisions being at hand, hisservants were forced to go to the gates of the enemy,and beg bread of the sentinels. When they were in-,formed of the distress of Brutus, they brought himmeat and drink in their own hands; and in return fortheir humanity, when he had taken the city, he showedkindness both to them and to the rest of the inha-bitants.When Caius arrived in Apollonia, he summoned thesoldiers that were quartered near the city to join him;but finding that they were all with Brutus, and sus-pecting that those in Apollonia favored the same party,he went to Buthrotus. Brutus however found meansto destroy three of his cohorts in their march. Caius,after this, attempted to seize some posts near Byllis,but was routed in a set battle by young Cicero, towhom Brutus had given the command of the army onthat occasion, and whose conduct he made use of fre-quently, and with success. Caius was soon after sur-prised in a marsh, from whence he had no means toescape; and Brutus finding him in his power, sur-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.165rounded him with his cavalry, and gave orders thatnone of his men should be killed; for he expected thatthey would quickly join him of their own accord. Ashe expected, it came to pass. They surrendered boththemselves and their general; so that Brutus had nowa very respectable army. He treated Caius for a longtime with all possible respect; nor did he divest himof any ensigns of dignity that he bore, though, it issaid, that he received letters from several persons atRome, and particularly from Cicero, advising him toput him to death. At length, however, when he foundthat he was secretly practising with his officers, andexciting seditions amongst the soldiers, he put him onboard a ship, and kept him close prisoner. The sol-diers that he had corrupted retired into Apollonia,from whence they sent to Brutus, that if he wouldcome to them there, they would return to their duty.Brutus answered, 'that this was not the custom of theRomans, but that those who had offended should comein person to their general, and solicit his forgiveness.'This they did, and were accordingly pardoned.He was now preparing to go into Asia, when he wasinformed of a change in affairs at Rome. Young Ca?sar,supported by the senate, had got the better of Antony,and driven him out of Italy; but, at the same time, hebegan to be no less formidable himself; for he solicitedthe consulship contrary to law, and kept in pay an un-necessary army. Consequently the senate, though thevat first supported, were now dissatisfied with his mea-sures: and as they began to cast their eyes on Brutus,and decreed or confirmed several provinces to him,Caesar was under some apprehensions. He thereforedespatched messengers to Antony, and desired that areconciliation might take place. After this he drew upbis army around the city, and carried the consulship,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?166PLUTARCH.though but a boy, in his twentieth year, as he tells usin his Commentaries. He was no sooner consul thanhe ordered a judicial process to issue against Brutusand his accomplices, for murdering the first magistratein Rome without trial, or condemnation. Lucius Cor-nificius was appointed to accuse Brutus, and MarcusAgrippa accused Cassius; neither of whom appearing,the judges were obliged to pass sentence against both.It Is said that when the crier, as usual, cited Brutusto appear the people could not suppress their sighs;and persons of the first distinction heard it in silentdejection. Publius Silicius was observed to burst intotears; and this was the cause why he was afterwardsproscribed. The triumviri, Caesar, Antony and Lepi-dus, being now reconciled, divided the provincesamongst them, and settled that list of murder, in whichtwo hundred citizens, and Cicero amongst the rest,were proscribed.When the report of these proceedings was broughtinto Macedonia, Brutus found himself under a neces-sity of sending orders to Hortensius to kill Caius, thebrother of Antony, in revenge of the death of Cicerohis friend, and Brutus Albinus his kinsman, who wasslain. This was the reason why Antony, when he hadtaken Hortensius at the battle of Philippi, slew him onhis brother's tomb. Brutus says that he was moreashamed of the cause of Cicero's death than grievedat the event; while he saw Rome enslaved more byher own fault, than by the fault of her tyrants, andcontinue a tame spectator of such scenes as ought notto have been heard of without horror.The army of Brutus was now considerable, and heordered its route into Asia, while a fleet was preparingin Bithynia and at Cyzicum. As he marched by land,he settled the affairs of the cities, and gave audience to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.the princes of those countries through which he passed.He sent orders to Cassius, who was in Syria, to giveup his intended journey into Egypt, and join him. Outhis occasion he tells him that their collecting forcesto destroy the tyrants was not to secure an empire tothemselves, but to deliver their fellow-citizens; thatthey should never forget this great object of their un-dertaking, hut, adhering to their first intentions, keepItaly within their eye, and hasten to rescue their coun-try from oppression.Cassius, accordingly, set out to join him, and Brutusat the same time making some progress to meet him,their interview was at Smyrna. Till this meeting, theyhad not seen each other since they parted at the Piraeusof Athens, when Cassius set out for Syria, and Brutusfor Macedonia. The forces they had respectively col-lected gave them great joy, and made them confidentof success. From Italy they had fled, like solitaryexiles, without money, without arms, without a ship,a soldier, or a town to fly to. Yet now, in so short atime, they found themselves supplied with shippingand money, with an army of horse and foot, and in acondition of contending for the empire of Rome.Cassius was no less respectful to Brutus, than Brutuswas to him; but the latter would generally wait onhim, as he was the older man, and of a feebler consti-tution. Cassius was esteemed an able soldier, but ofa fiery disposition, and ambitious to command ratherby fear than affection: though, at the same time, withhis familiar acquaintance he was easy in his manners,and fond of raillery to excess. Brutus, on account ofhis virtue, was respected by the people, beloved by hisfriends, admired by men of principle, and not hatedeven by bis enemies. He was mild in his temper, andhad a greatness of mind that was superior to anger,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.avarice, and the love of pleasure. He was firm andinflexible in his opinions, and zealous in every pursuit,where justice or honor were concerned. The peoplehad the highest opinion of his integrity and sincerityin every undertaking, and this naturally inspired themwith confidence and affection. Even Pompey the Greathad hardly ever so much credit with them: for whoever imagined, that if he had conquered Caesar, hewould have submitted to the laws, and would not haveretained his power under the title of consul or dictator,or some more specious and popular name? Cassius,on the contrary, a man of violent passions, and rapa-cious avarice, was suspected of exposing himself totoil and danger, rather from a thirst of power than anattachment to the liberties of his country. The formerdisturbers of the commonwealth, Cinna, and Marius,and Carbo, evidently set their country as a stake forthe winner, and hardly scrupled to own that theyfought for empire. But the very enemies of Brutusnever charge him with this. Even Antony has beenheard to say that Brutus was the only conspirator whohad the sense of honor and justice for his motive, andthat the rest were wholly actuated by malice or envy.It is clear too, from what Brutus himself says, that hefinally and principally relied on his own virtue. Thushe writes to Atticus immediately before an engage-ment 'That his affairs were in the most desirablesituation imaginable; for that either he should con-quer, and restore liberty to Rome, or die, and be freefrom slavery; that every thing else was reduced tocertainty; and that this only remained a question,whether they should live or die free men?' He adds,that 'Mark Antony was properly punished for his folly;who, when he might have ranked with the Bruti, theCassii, and Catos, chose rather to be the underling of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.' 169Octaviua; and that if he did not fall in the approach-ing battle, they would very soon be at variance witheach otherin which he seems to have been a trueprophet.? Whilst they were at Smyrna, Brutus desired Cassiusto let him have part of the vast treasure he had col-lected, because his own was chiefly expended in equip-ping a fleet, to gain superiority at sea. But the friendsof Cassius advised him against this; alleging that itwould be absurd to give Brutus that money which hehad saved with so much frugality, and acquired withso much envy, merely that Brutus might increase hispopularity by distributing it amongst the soldiers.Cassius, however, gave him a third of what he had,and then they parted for their respective commands.Cassius behaved with great severity on the taking ofRhodes: though when he first entered the city, andwas saluted with the title of king and master, he an-swered, 'That he was neither their king nor their mas-ter, but the destroyer of him who would have beenboth.' Brutus demanded supplies of men and moneyfrom the Lycians; but Naucrates, an orator, persuadedthe cities to rebel, and some of the inhabitants postedthemselves on the hills with an intent to oppose thepassage of Brutus. Brutus, at first, despatched a partyof horse, which surprised them at dinner, and killedsix hundred of them. But afterwards, when he hadtaken the adjacent towns and villages, he gave up theprisoners without ransom, and hoped to gain them tohis party by clemency. Their former sufferings, how-ever, made them reject his humanity; and those thatstill resisted being driven into the city of Xanthus,were there besieged. As a river ran close by thetown, several attempted to escape by swimming anddiving; but they were prevented by nets let down for??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?170PLUTARCH.that purpose, which had little bells at the top, to givenotice when any one was taken. The Xanthians after-wards made a sally in the night, and set fire to severalof the battering engines; but they were perceived anddriven back by the Romans: at the same time the vio-lence of the winds drove the flames on the city, so thatseveral houses near the battlements took fire. Brutusbeing apprehensive that the whole city would be de-stroyed, sent his own soldiers to assist the inhabitantsin quenching the fire. But the Lycians were seizedwith an incredible despair, a kind of frensy, which canno otherwise be described than by calling it a pas-sionate desire of death. Women and children, free-men and slaves, people of all ages and conditions,strove to repulse the soldiers as they came to theirassistance from the walls. With their own hands theycollected wood and reeds, and all manner of combus-tibles, to spread the fire over the city, and encouragedits progress by every means in their power. Thusassisted, the flames flew over the whole with dreadfulrapidity; whilst Brutus, extremely shocked at thiscalamity, rode round the walls, and stretching forthhis hands to the inhabitants, intreated tbem to sparethemselves and their city. Regardless of his intrea-ties, they sought by every means to put an end to theirlives. Men, women, and even children, with hideouscries, leaped into the flames. Some threw themselvesheadlong from the walls, and others fell on the swordsof their parents, opening their breasts, and begging tobe slain.When the city was in a great measure reduced toashes, a woman was found who had hanged herself,with her young child fastened to her neck, and thetorch in her hand, with which she had fired her house.This deplorable object so much affected Brutus, that??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.171he wept when he was told of it, and proclaimed a re-ward to any soldier who could save a Xanthian. It issaid that no more than a hundred and fifty were pre-served, and those against their will. Thus the Xan-thians, as if fate had appointed certain periods for theirdestruction, after a long course of years, sunk into thatdeplorable ruin, in.which the same rash despair had in-volved their ancestors in the Persian war: for they tooburned their city, and destroyed themselves.After this, when the Patareans likewise made resist-ance, Brutus was under great anxiety whether he shouldbesiege them; for he was afraid they would follow thedesperate measures of the Xanthians. However, havingsome of their women whom he had taken prisoners, hedismissed them without ransom; and those returningto their husbands and parents, who happened to be peo-ple of the first distinction, so much extolled the justiceand moderation of Brutus, that they prevailed on themto submit, and put their city in his hands. The adja-cent cities followed their example, and found that hishumanity exceeded their hopes. Cassius compelledevery Rhodian to give up all the gold and silver in hispossession, by which he amassed eight thousand talents;and yet he laid the public under a fine of five hundredtalents more ; but Brutus took only a hundred and fiftytalents of the Lycians, and, without doing them anyother injury, led his army into Ionia.Brutus, in the course of this expedition, did manyacts of justice, and was vigilant in the dispensation ofrewards and punishments. An instance of this I shallrelate, because both he himself, and every honest Ro-man, was particularly pleased with it. When Pompeythe Great, after his overthrow at Pharsalia, fled intoEgypt, and landed near Pelusium, the tutors and mi-nisters of young Ptolemy consulted what measures??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?172PLUTARCH.they should take on the occasion. But they were ofdifferent opinions. Some were for receiving him, othersfor excluding him out of Egypt. Theodotus, a Chianby birth, and a teacher of rhetoric by profession, whothen attended the king in that capacity, was, for wantof abler ministers, admitted to the council. This maninsisted that both were in the wrong--those who werefor receiving, and those who were for expelling Pom-pey. The best measure they could take, he said, wouldbe to put him to death; and concluded his speech withthe proverb that' dead men do not bite.' The councilentered into his opinion; and Pompey the Great, anexample of the incredible mutability of fortune, fell asacrifice to the arguments of a sophist, as that sophistlived afterwards to boast. Not long after, on Caesar'sarrival in Egypt, some of the murderers received theirproper reward, and were put to death; but Theodotusmade his escape. Yet, though for a while he gainedfrom fortune the poor privilege of a wandering anddespicable life, he fell at last into the hands of Brutus,as he was passing through Asia; and by paying theforfeit of his baseness, became more memorable fromhis death than from any thing in his life.About this time Brutus sent for Cassius to Sardis,and went with his friends to meet him. The wholearmy being drawn up, saluted both the leaders withthe title of imperator. But, as it usually happens ingreat affairs, where many friends and many officers areengaged, mutual complaints and suspicions arose be-tween Brutus and Cassius. To settle these more pro-perly, they retired into an apartment by themselves.Expostulations, debates, and accusations followed.And these were so violent, that they burst into tears.Their friends without were surprised at the loudnessand asperity of the conference; but though they were??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.173apprehensive of the consequence, they durst not inter-fere, because they had been expressly forbidden toenter. Favonius, however, an imitator of Cato, butrather an enthusiast than rational in his philosophy,attempted to enter. The servants in waiting endea-vored to prevent him; but it was not easy to stop theimpetuous Favonius. He was violent in his wholeconduct, and valued himself less on his dignity as asenator, than on a kind of cynical freedom in sayingevery thing he pleased; nor was this unentertaining tothose who could bear with his impertinence. However,he broke through the door, and entered the apartment,pronouncing, in a theatrical tone, what Nestor says inHomer,Young men, be ruled--I'm older than you both.Cassius laughed: but Brutus thrust him out, tellinghim that he pretended to be a cynic, but was in realitya dog. This, however, put an end to the dispute; andfor that time they parted. Cassius gave an entertain-ment in the evening, to which Brutus invited hisfriends. When they were seated, Favonius came infrom bathing. Brutus called aloud to him, telling himhe was not invited, and bade him go to the lower endof the table. Favonius, notwithstanding, thrust him-self in, and sat down in the middle. On that occasionthere was much learning and good-humor in the con-versation.The day following, one Lucius Pella, who had beenpretor, and employed in offices of trust, being im-peached by the Sardians of embezzling the publicmoney, was disgraced and condemned by Brutus.This was very mortifying to Cassius; for, a littlebefore, two of his own friends had been accused ofthe same crime; but he had absolved them in public,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?174PLUTARCH.and contenting himself with giving them a private re-proof, continued them in office. Of course he chargedBrutus with too rigid an exaction of the laws at a timewhen lenity was much more politic. Brutus, on theother hand, reminded him of the ides of March, thetime when they had killed Caesar; who was not, per-sonally speaking, the scourge of mankind, but onlyabetted and supported those that were with his power.He bade him consider, that if the neglect of justicewere in any case to be connived at, it should have beendone before, and that they had better have borne withthe oppressions of Caesar's friends, than suffered themalpractices of their own to pass with impunity: 'Forthen,' continued he, ' we could have been blamed onlyfor cowardice; but now, after all we have undergone,we shall lie under the imputation of injustice.' Suchtyere the principles of Brutus.When they were about to leave Asia, Brutus, it issaid, had an extraordinary apparition. Naturallywatchful, sparing in his diet, and assiduous in business,he allowed himself but little time for sleep. In the dayhe never slept, nor in the night, till all business wasover, and, the rest being retired, he had nobody to con-verse with. But at this time, involved as he was in theoperations of war, and solicitous for the event, he onlyslumbered a little after supper, and spent the rest ofthe night in ordering his most urgent affairs. Whenthese were despatched, he employed himself in readingtill the third watch, when the tribunes and centurionscame to him for orders. Thus, a little before be leftAsia, he was sitting alone in his tent, by a dim light,and at a late hour. The whole army lay in sleep andsilence, while the general, wrapt in meditation, thoughthe perceived something enter his tent: turning towardsthe door, he saw a horrible and monstrous spectre stand-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTU6.175ing silently by his side. 'What art thou V said heboldly. 'Art thou god or man? And what is thy busi-ness with me?' The spectre answered, 'I am thy evilgenius, Brutus! Thou wilt see me at Philippi.' Towhich he calmly replied, ' I'll meet thee there.' Whenthe apparition was gone, he called his servants, whotold him they had neither heard any noise, nor hadseen any vision. That night he did not go to rest, butwent early in the morning to Cassius, and told himwhat had happened. Cassius, who was of the schoolof Epicurus, and used frequently to dispute with Bru-tus on these subjects, answered him thus: ' It is theopinion of our sect, that not every thing we see is real;for matter is evasive, and sense deceitful. Besides,the impressions it receives are, by that quick and subtleinfluence of imagination, thrown into a variety of forms,many of which have no archetypes in nature: and thisthe imagination effects as easily as we may make animpression on wax. The mind of man, having in itselfthe plastic powers, and the component parts, can fashionand vary its objects at pleasure. This is clear from thesudden transition of dreams, in which the imaginationcan educe from the slightest principles such an amazingvariety of forms, and call into exercise all the passionsof the soul. The mind is perpetually in motion, andthat motion is imagination, or thought. But, when thebody, as in your case, is fatigued with labor, it natu-rally suspends, or perverts the regular functions of themind. On the whole, it is highly improbable thatthere should be any such beings as demons, or spirits;or, that if there were such, they should assume a humanshape or voice, or have any power to affect us. At thesame time I own I could wish there were such beings,that we might not rely on fleets and armies, but findthe concurrence of the gods in this our sacred and??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?17GPLUTARCH.glorious enterprise.' Such were the arguments hemade use of to satisfy Brutus.When the army began to march, two eagles perchedon the two first standards, and accompanied them asfar as Philippi, being constantly fed by the soldiers;but the day before the battle they flew away. Brutushad already reduced most of the nations in these parts;nevertheless he traversed the sea-coast over-againstThasus, that, if any hostile power remained, he mightbring it into subjection. Norbanus, who was encampedm the straits near Symbolum, they surrounded in sucha manner, that they obliged him to quit the place. In-deed, he narrowly escaped losing his whole army, whichhad certainly been the case, had not Antony come tohis relief with such amazing expedition, that Brutuscould not believe it to be possible. Caesar, who hadbeen kept behind by sickness, joined his army aboutten days after. Brutus was encamped over-againsthim; Cassius was opposite to Antony. The space be-tween the two armies the Romans call the plains ofPhilippi. Two armies of Romans, equal in numbersto these, had never before met to engage each other.Caesar's was something superior in numbers; but, inthe splendor of arms and equipage, was far exceededby that of Brutus; for most of their arms were of goldand silver, which their general had liberally bestowedon them. Brutus, in other things, had accustomed hisofficers to frugality; but the riches which his soldierscarried about with them, would at once, he thought,add to the spirit of the ambitious, and make the covet-ous valiant in the defence of those arms which weretheir principal wealth.Caesar made a lustration of his army within thecamp, and gave each private man a little corn, and fivedrachmas only for the sacrifice. But Brutus, to show??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.177his contempt of the poverty, or the avarice of Caesar,made a public lustration of his army in the field, andnot only distributed cattle to each cohort for the sacri-fice, but gave fifty drachmas on the occasion to eachprivate man. Of course he was more beloved by hissoldiers, and they were more ready to fight for him.It is reported that, during the lustration, an unluckyomen happened to Cassius. The garland he was towear at the sacrifice was presented to him the wrongside outwards. It is said too, that at a solemn pro-cession, some time before, the person who bore thegolden image of Victory before Cassius happened tostumble, and the image fell to the ground. Severalbirds of prey hovered daily about the camp, and swarmsof bees were seen within the trenches. On which thesoothsayers ordered the part where they appeared to beshut up: for Cassius, with all his Epicurean philoso-phy, began to be superstitious, and the soldiers wereextremely disheartened by these omens.For this reason Cassius was inclined to protract thewar, and unwilling to hazard the whole of the event ofa present engagement. What made for this measure toowas, that they were stronger in money and provisions,but inferior in numbers. Brutus, on the other hand, was,as usual, for an immediate decision; that he might eithergive liberty to his country, or rescue his fellow-citizensfrom the toils and expenses of war. He was encouragedlikewise by the success his cavalry met with in severalskirmishes; and some instances of desertion and mu-tiny in the camp brought over many of the friends ofCassius to his opinion. But there was one Atellius,who still opposed an immediate decision, and advisedto put it off till the next winter. When Brutus askedhim what advantages he expected from that, he answered,'If I gain nothing else, I shall at least live so much thePLUT. VoL. VII. M??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?178PLUTARCH.longer.' Both Cassius and the rest of the officers weredispleased with this answer; and it was determined togive battle the day following.Brutus that night expressed great confidence andcheerfulness; and having passed the time of supper inphilosophical conversation, he went to rest. Messalasays that Cassius supped in private with some of hismost intimate friends; and that, contrary to his usualmanner, he was pensive and silent. He adds, that aftersupper he took him by the hand, and pressing it close,as he commonly did, in token of his friendship, he saidin Greek,--' Bear witness, Messala, that I am reducedto the same necessity with Pompey the Great, of ha-zarding the liberty of my country on one battle. YetI have confidence in our good fortune, on which weought still to rely, though the measures we have re-solved on are indiscreet.' These, Messala tells us, ?were the last words that Cassius spoke before he badehim farewell; and that the next day, being his birth-day, he invited Cassius to sup with him.Next morning, as soon as it was light, the scarj/etrobe, which was the signal for battle, was hung out inthe tents of Brutus and Cassius; and they themselvesmet on the plain between the- two armies. On thisoccasion Cassius thus addressed himself to Brutus:--'May the gods, Brutus, make this day successful, thatwe may pass the rest of our days together in prosperity.But as the most important of human events are the mostuncertain; and as we may never see each other anymore, if we are unfortunate on this occasion, tell mewhat is your resolution concerning flight and death VBrutus answered, 'In the younger and less expe-rienced part of my life, I was led, on philosophicalprinciples, to condemn the conduct of Cato, in killinghimself. I thought it at once impious and unmanly??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.179to sink beneath the stroke of fortune, and to refuse thelot that had befallen us. In my present situation,however, I am of a different opinion. So that if hea-ven should now be unfavorable to our wishes, I willno longer solicit my hopes or my fortune, but die con-tented with it, such as it is. On the ides of March Idevoted my life to my country; and since that time Ihave lived in liberty and glory.' At these words Cas-sius smiled, and embracing Brutus, said, 'Let usmarch then against the enemy; for with these resolu-tions, though we should not conquer, we have no-thing to fear.' They then consulted with their friendsconcerning the order of battle. Brutus desired thathe might command the right wing, though the post wasthought more proper for Cassius on account of his ex-perience. Cassius, however, gave it up to him, andplaced Messala, with the best of his legions, in thesame wing. Brutus immediately drew out his cavalry,which were equipped with great magnificence; and thefoot followed close on them.Antony's soldiers were at this time employed inmaking a trench from the marsh where they were en-camped, to cut off Cassius' communication with thesea. Caesar lay still in his tent, confined by sickness.His soldiers were far from expecting that the enemywould come to a pitched battle. They supposed thatthey were only making excursions to harass thetrench-diggers with their light arms; and not per-ceiving that they were pouring in close on them, theywere astonished at the outcry they heard from thetrenches. Brutus, in the mean time, sent tickets tothe several officers with the word of battle, and rodethrough the ranks to encourage his men. There werefew who had patience to wait for the word. The greatestpart, before it could reach them, fell with loud shouts??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?180PLUTARCH.on the enemy. This precipitate onset threw the armyinto confusion, and separated the legions. Messala'slegion first got beyond the left wing of Caesar, andwas followed by those that were stationed near him.In their way they did nothing more than ttfrow some ofthe outmost ranks into disorder, and killed few of theenemy: their great object was to fall on Caesar's camp,and they made directly up to it. Caesar himself, as hetells ns in his Commentaries, had but just before beenconveyed out of his tent, in consequence of a visionof his friend Artorius, which commanded that he shouldbe carried out of the camp. This made it believedthat he was slain; for the soldiers had pierced hisempty litter in many places with darts. Those whowere taken in the camp were put to the sword, amongstwhom were two thousand Lacedaemonian auxiliaries.Those who attacked Caesar's legions in front easilyput them to the rout, and cut three legions in pieces.After this, borne along with the impetuosity of victory,they rushed into the camp at the same time with the fu-gitives, and Brutus was in the midst of them. The flankof Brutus' army was now left unguarded, by the separa-tion of the right wing, which was gone off too far inthe pursuit; and the enemy perceiving this, endeavoredto take advantage of it. They accordingly attacked itwith great fury, but could make no impression on themain body, which received them with firmness and un-shaken resolution. The left wing, however, whichwas under the command of Cassius, was soon put to therout; for the men were in great disorder, and knew no-thing of what had passed in the right wing. The enemypursued him into the camp, which they plundered anddestroyed, though neither of their generals were pre-sent. Antony, it is said, to avoid the fury of the firstonset, had retired into the adjoining marsh; and Caesar,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.181who had been carried sick out of the camp, was nowhere to be found. Nay, some of the soldiers wouldhave persuaded Brutus that they had killed Caesar, de-scribing his age and person, and showing him theirbloody swords.The main body of Brutus' army had now made pro-digious havoc of the enemy; and Brutus, in his de-partment, was no less absolutely conquered than Cas-sius was conquered. The want of knowing this wasthe ruin of their affairs. Brutus neglected to relieveCassius, because he knew not that he wanted relief.When Brutus had destroyed the camp of Caesar,and was returning from the pursuit, he was surprisedthat he could neither perceive the tent of Cassius abovethe rest, as usual, nor any of those that were about it;for they had been demolished by the enemy, on theirfirst entering the camp. Some, who were of quickersight than the rest, told him that they could perceivea motion of shining helmets and silver targets in thecamp of Cassius, and supposed, from their numbersand their armor, that they could not be those who wereleft to guard the camp; though, at the same time, therewas not so great an appearance of dead bodies as theremust have been after the defeat of so many legions.This gave Brutus the first suspicion of Cassius' mis-fortune; and, leaving a sufficient guard in the enemy'scamp, he called off the rest from the pursuit, and ledthem, in order, to the relief of Cassius.The case of that general was this:--he was cha-grined, at first, by the irregular conduct of Brutus'soldiers, who began the attack without waiting for thecommand; and, afterwards, by their attention to plun-der, whereby they neglected to surround and cut offthe enemy. Thus dissatisfied, he trifled with his com-mand, and, for want of vigilance, suffered himself to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?182PLUTARCH.be surrounded by the enemy's right wing; on whichhis cavalry quitted their post, and fled towards the sea.The foot likewise began to give way; and though helabored as much as possible to stop their flight, andsnatching an ensign from the hand of one of the fugi-tives, fixed it at his feet, yet he was hardly able tokeep his own pretorian band together: so that, atlength, he was obliged to retire, with a very smallnumber, to a hill that overlooked the plain. Yet herehe could discover nothing; for he was short-sighted,and it was with some difficulty that he could perceivehis own camp plundered. His companions, however,saw a large detachment of horse, which Brutus hadsent to their relief, making up to them. These Cassiusconcluded to be the enemy that were in pursuit of him;notwithstanding which, he despatched Titinius to re-connoitre them. When the cavalry of Brutus saw thisfaithful friend of Cassius approach, they shouted forjoy. His acquaintance leapt from their horses to em-brace him, and the rest rode round him with clash-ing of arms, and all the clamorous expressions of glad-ness. This circumstance had a fatal effect. Cassiustook it for granted that Titinius was seized by theenemy, and regretted that, through a weak desire oflife, he had suffered his friend to fall into their hands.When he had expressed himself to this effect, he re-tired into an empty tent, accompanied only by hisfreedman Pindarus, whom, ever since the defeat ofCrassus, he had retained for a particular purpose. Inthat defeat he escaped out of the hands of the Par-thians; but now, wrapping his robe about his face, helaid bare his neck, and commanded Pindarus to cut offhis head. This was done; for his head was foundsevered from his body; but whether Pindarus did itby his master's command, has been suspected; be-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.18:5cause he never afterwards appeared. It was soon dis-covered who the cavalry were, and Titinius, crownedwith garlands, came to the place where he left Cassius.When the lamentations of his friends informed him ofthe unhappy fate of his general, he severely reproachedhimself for the tardiness which had occasioned it, andfell on his sword.'Brutus, when he was assured of the defeat of Cassius,made all possible haste to his relief; but he knew no-thing of his death till he came up to his camp. Therehe lamented over his body, and called him ' the last ofRomans;' intimating, that Rome would never produceanother man of equal spirit. He ordered his funeralto be celebrated at Thasus, that it might not occasionany disorder in the camp. His dispersedand dejectedsoldiers he collected and encouraged; and as theyhad been stripped of every thing by the enemy, hepromised them two thousand drachmas a man. Thismunificence at once encouraged and surprised them:they attended him at his departure with great accla-mations, and complimented him as the only general ofthe four who had not been beaten. Brutus was con-fident of victory, and the event justified that con-fidence; for, with a few legions, he overcame all thatopposed him; and if most of his soldiers had notpassed the enemy, in pursuit of plunder, the battlemust have been decisive in his favor. He lost eightthousand men, including the servants, whom he callsBriges. Messala says he supposes the enemy lostmore thau twice that number: and, of course, theywere more discouraged than Brutus, till Demetrius,a servant of Cassius, went over to Antony in the even-ing, and carried him his master's robe and sword,which he had taken from the dead body. This soeffectually encouraged the enemy, that they were??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?184PLUTARCH.drawn up in form of battle by break of day. Bothcamps, in the occupation of Brutus, involved him indifficulties. His own, full of prisoners, required astrong guard. At the same time many of the soldiersof Cassius murmured at their change of master, andthe vanquished were naturally envious and jealous ofthe victors. He therefore thought proper to draw uphis army, but not to fight.All the slaves he had taken prisoners, being foundpractising with his soldiers, were put to the sword:but most of the freemen and citizens were dismissed;and he told them, at the same time, that they weremore truly prisoners in the hands of the enemy thanin his: with them, he said, they were slaves indeed;but with him, freemen and citizens of Rome. He wasobliged however to dismiss them privately; for theyhad implacable enemies amongst his own friends andofficers. Amongst the prisoners were Volumnius, amimic, and Saculio, a buffoon, of whom Brutus tookno notice till they were brought before him, and ac-cused of continuing, even in their captivity, their scur-rilous jests and abusive language. Yet, still taken upwith more important concerns, he paid no regard tothe accusation; but Messala Corvinus was of opinionthat they should be publicly whipped, and sent nakedto the enemy, as proper associates and convivial com-panions for such generals. Some were entertainedwith the idea, and laughed; but Publius Casca, thefirst that wounded Caesar, observed that it was indecentto celebrate the obsequies of Cassius with jesting andlaughter. 'As for you, Brutus,' said he, 'it will beseen what esteem you have for the memory of thatgeneral, when you have either punished or pardonedthose who ridicule and revile him.' Brutus resentedthis expostulation, and said, 'Why is this business??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.185thrown on me, Casca? Why do not you do what youthink proper V This answer was considered as an as-sent to their death; so the poor wretches were carriedoff and slain.He now gave the promised rewards to his soldiers;and after gently rebuking them for beginning the as-sault without waiting for the word of battle, he pro-mised, that if they acquitted themselves to his satis-faction in the next engagement, he would give them upthe cities of Lacedaemon and Thessalonica to plunder.This is the only circumstance in his life for which noapology can be made: for though Antony and Caesarafterwards acted with more unbounded cruelty in re-warding their soldiers; though they deprived most ofthe ancient inhabitants of Italy of their lands, and gavethem to those who had no title to them ; yet they actedconsistently with their first principle, which was theacquisition of empire and arbitrary power. But Bru-tus maintained such a reputation for virtue, that hewas neither allowed to conquer, nor even to save him-self, except on the strictest principles of honor andjustice; more particularly since the death of Cassius,to whom, if any act of violence were committed, it wasgenerally imputed. However, as sailors, when theirrudder is broken in a storm, substitute some otherpiece of wood in its place, and though they cannotsteer so well as before, do the best they can in theirnecessity, so Brutus, at the head of so vast an army,and such important affairs, unassisted by any officerthat was equal to the charge, was obliged to make useof such advisers as he had; and he generally followedthe counsel of those who proposed any thing that mightbring Cassius' soldiers to order: for these were ex-tremely untractable; insolent in the camp for want of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?186PLUTARCH.their general, though cowardly in the field, from theremembrance of their defeat.The affairs of Caesar and Antony were not in a muchbetter condition. Provisions were scarce, and themarshy situation of their camp made them dread thewinter. They already began to fear the inconveniencesof it; for the autumnal rains had fallen heavy after thebattle, and their tents were filled with mire and water;which, from the coldness of the weather, immediatelyfroze. In this situation they received intelligence oftheir loss at sea. Their fleet, which was coming fromItaly with a large supply of soldiers, was met by thatof Brutus, and so totally defeated, that the few whoescaped were reduced by famine to eat the sails andtackle of the ships. It was now determined, on Cae-sar's side, that they should come to battle before Bru-tus was made acquainted with his success. It appearsthat the fight, both by sea and land, was on the sameday; but, by some accident, rather than the fault oftheir officers, Brutus knew nothing of his victory tilltwenty days after. Had he been informed of it, hewould never, certainly, have hazarded a second battle;for he had provisions sufficient for a considerable lengthof time, and his army was so advantageously posted,that it was safe both from the injuries of the weatherand the incursions of the enemy. Besides, knowingthat he was wholly master at sea, and partly victoriousby land, he would have had every thing imaginable toencourage him, and could not have been urged to anydangerous measures by despair.But it seems that the republican form of governmentwas no longer to subsist in Rome; that it necessarilyrequired a monarchy; and that Providence, to removethe only man who could oppose its destined master,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.187kept the knowlege of that victory from him till it wastoo late. And yet, how near was he to receiving theintelligence! The very evening before the engage-ment a deserter, named Clodius, came over from theenemy to tell him that Caesar was informed of the lossof his fleet, and that this was the reason of his hasten-ing the battle. The deserter, however, was consideredeither as designing or ill informed: his intelligencewas disregarded, and he was not even admitted intothe presence of Brutus.That night, they say, the spectre appeared again toBrutus, and assumed its former figure, but vanishedwithout speaking. Yet Publius Volumnius, a philo-sophical man, who had borne arms with Brutus duringthe whole war, makes no mention of this prodigy;though he says that the first standard was coveredwith a swarm of bees; and that the arm of one of theofficers sweated oil of roses, which would not ceasethough they often wiped it off. He says too, that im-mediately before the battle two eagles fought in thespace between the two armies; and that there was anincredible silence and attention in the field, till that onthe side of Brutus was beaten and flew away. Thestory of the Ethiopian is well known, who, meeting thestandard-bearer opening the gate of the camp, was cutin pieces by the soldiers; for that they interpreted asan ill omen.When Brutus had drawn up his army in form ofbattle, he paused some time before he gave the word.While he was visiting the ranks, he had suspicions ofsome, and heard accusations of others. The cavalryhe found had no ardor for the attack, but seemed wait-ing to see what the foot would do. Besides, Camula-tus, a soldier in the highest estimation for valor, rodeclose by Brutus, and went over to the enemy in his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?188PLUTARCH.sight. This hurt him inexpressibly ; and, partly out ofanger, partly from fear of farther desertion and trea-chery, he led his forces against the enemy about threein the afternoon. Where he fought in person he wasstill successful. He charged the enemy's left wing,and the cavalry following the impression which thefoot had made, it was put to the rout. But when theother wing of Brutus was ordered to advance, the infe-riority of their numbers made them apprehensive thatthey should be surrounded by the enemy. For thisreason they extended their ranks in order to covermore ground; by which means the centre of the wingwas so much weakened, that it could not sustain theshock of the enemy, but fled at the first onset. Aftertheir dispersion, the enemy surrounded Brutus, whodid every thing that the bravest and most expert ge-neral could do in his situation, and whose conduct atleast intitled him to victory. But what seemed an ad-vantage in the first engagement proved a disadvantagein the second. In the former battle, that wing of theenemy which was conquered was totally cut off; butmost of the men in the conquered wing of Cassius weresaved. This, at the time, might appear an advantage,but it proved a prejudice. The remembrance of theirformer defeat filled them with terror and confusion,which they spread through the greatest part of thearmy.Marcus, the son of Cato, was slain fighting amidstthe bravest of the young nobility. He scorned alikeeither to fly or to yield ; but, avowing who he was, andassuming his father's name, still used his sword, till hefell on the heaps of the slaughtered enemy. Manyother brave men, who exposed themselves for the pre-servation of Brutus, fell at the same time.Lucilius, a man of great worth, and his intimate??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.189friend, observed some barbarian horse riding full speedagainst Brutus in particular, and was determined tostop them, though at the hazard of his own life. Hetherefore told them that he was Brutus; and they be-lieved him, because he pretended to be afraid of Cae-sar, and desired to be conveyed to Antony. Exultingin their capture, and thinking themselves peculiarlyfortunate, they carried him along with them by night;having previously sent an account to Antony of theirsuccess, who was infinitely pleased with it, and cameout to them. Many others, likewise, when they heardthat Brutus was brought alive, assembled to see him:and some pitied his misfortunes, while others accusedhim of an inglorious meanness, in suffering the love oflife to betray him into the hands of barbarians. Whenhe approached, and Antony was deliberating in whatmanner he should receive Brutus, Lucilius first ad-dressed him, and with great intrepidity said, ' Antony,be assured that Brutus neither is, nor will, be takenby an enemy. Forbid it Heaven, that Fortune shouldhave such a triumph over Virtue! Whether he shallbe found alive or dead, he will be found in a state be-coming Brutus. I imposed on your soldiers, and amprepared to suffer the worst you can inflict on me.'Thus spoke Lucilius, to the no small astonishment ofthose that were present; when Antony, addressinghimself to those that brought him, said, 'I perceive,fellow-soldiers, that you are angry at this impositionof Lucilius; but you have really got a better bootythan you intended. You sought an enemy; but youhave brought me a friend. I know not how I shouldhave treated Brutus, had you brought him alive; but Iam sure that it is better to have such a man as Luci-lius for a friend than for an enemy.' When he saidthis he embraced Lucilius, recommending him to the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?190PLUTARCH.care of one of his friends; and he ever after found himfaithful to his interest.Brutus, attended by a few of his officers and friends,having passed a brook that was overhung with cliffs,and shaded with trees, and being overtaken by night,stopped in a cavity under a large rock. There, cast-ing his eyes on the heavens, which were covered withstars, he repeated two verses; one of which, Volum-nius tells us, was this: .Forgive not, Jove, the cause of this distress!The other, he says, had escaped his memory. Onenumerating the several friends that had fallen beforehis eyes in the battle, he sighed deeply at the mentionof Flavius and Labeo; the latter of whom was hislieutenant, and the former master of the band of arti-ficers. In the mean while, one of his attendants beingthirsty, and observing Brutus in the same condition,took his helmet, and went to the brook for water. Atthe same time a noise was heard on the opposite bank,and Volumnius and Dardanus the armor-bearer wentto see what it was. In a short time they returned, andasked for the water: 'It is all drank up,' said Brutus,with a smile; 'but another helmet-full shall be fetched.'The man who had brought the first water was there-fore sent again; but he was wounded by the enemy,and made his escape with difficulty.As Brutus supposed that he had not lost many menin the battle, Statilius undertook to make his waythrough the enemy (for there was no other way) andsee in what condition their camp was. If things weresafe there, he was to hold up a torch for a signal, andreturn. He got safe to the camp; for the torch washeld up. But a long time elapsed, and he did notreturn. 'If Statilius were alive,' said Brutus, 'he??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?MARCUS BRUTUS.191would be here.' In his return he fell into the enemy'shands and was slain.The night was now far spent; when Brutus, leaninghis head towards his servant Clitus, whispered some-thing in his ear. Clitus made no answer, but burstinto tears. After that he took his armor-bearer Dar-danus aside, and said something to him in private. Atlast addressing himself to Volumuius in Greek, he in-treated him, in memory of their common studies andexercises, to put his hand to his sword, and help himto give the thrust. Volumnius, as well as severalothers, refused: and one of them observing that theymust necessarily fly; 'We must fly, indeed,' said Bru-tus, rising hastily, 'but not with our feet, but with ourhands.' He then took each of them by the hand, andspoke with great appearance of cheerfulness, to thefollowing purpose: 'It is an infinite satisfaction tome that all my friends have been faithful. If I amangry with Fortune, it is for the sake of my country.Myself I esteem more happy than the conquerors; notonly in respect of the past, but in my present situation.I shall leave behind me that reputation for virtue, whichthey, with all their wealth and power, will never acquire:for posterity will not scruple to believe and declare, thatthey were an abandoned 6et of men, who destroyed thevirtuous, for the sake of that empire to which they hadno right? After this he intreated them severally to pro-vide for their own safety, and withdrew with only twoor three of his most intimate friends. One of these wasStrato, with whom he first became acquainted when theystudied rhetoric. This friend he placed next to him-self, and laying hold of the hilt of his sword with bothhis hands, he fell on the point, and died. Some saythat Strato, at the earnest request of Brutus, turned??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?192PLUTARCH.aside his bead, and held the sword; on which he threwhimself with such violence that, entering at his breast,it passed quite through his body, and he immediatelyexpired.Messala, the friend of Brutus, after he was recon-ciled to Caesar, took occasion to recommend Strato tohis favor. 'This,' said he, with tears, ' is the man whodid the last kind office for my dear Brutus.' Caesar re-ceived him with kindness; and he was one of thosebrave Greeks who afterwards attended him at the bat-tle of Actium. Of Messala, it is said, that when Caesarobserved he bad been no less zealous in his service atActium than he had been against him at Philippi, heanswered, 'I have always taken the best and justestside.' When Antony found the body of Brutus, heordered it to be covered with the richest robe he had;and that being stolen, he put the thief to death. Theashes of Brutus he sent to his mother Servilia.With regard to Porcia, his wife, Nicolaus the philo-sopher, and Valerius Maximus, tell us, that being pre-vented from that death she wished for, by the constantvigilance of her friends, she snatched some burningcoals from the fire, and shut them close in her mouth,till she was suffocated. Notwithstanding, there is aletter from Brutus to his friends still extant, in whichhe laments the death of Porcia, and complains thattheir neglect of her must have made her prefer deathto the continuance of her illness: so that Nicolausappears to have been mistaken in the time, at least, ifthis epistle be authentic; for it describes Porcia'sdistemper, her conjugal affection, and the manner ofher death.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN AND BRUTUS CoMPARED. 193DION AND BRUTUS COMPARED.WHAt is principally to be admired in the lives of Dionand Brutus, is their rising to such importance from in-considerable beginnings. But here Dion has the ad-vantage; for, in the progress of glory, he had no co-adjutor: whereas Cassius went hand in hand with Bru-tus; and though, in the reputation of virtue and honor,he was by no means his equal, in military experience,resolution and activity, he was not inferior. Somehave imputed to him the origin of the whole enter-prise, and have asserted that Brutus would neverotherwise have engaged in it. But Dion, at the sametime that he made the whole military preparations him-self, engaged the friends and associates of his design.He did not, like Brutus, gain power and riches fromthe war; he employed that wealth on which he was tosubsist as an exile in a foreign country, in restoringthe liberties of his own. When Brutus and Cassiusfled from Rome, and found no asylum from the pursuitof their enemies, their only resource was war; andthey took up arms as much in their own defence as inthat of the common liberty. Dion, on the contrary,was happier in his banishment than the tyrant thatbanished him; and yet he voluntarily exposed himselfto danger for the freedom of Sicily. Besides, to deliverthe Romans from Caesar, and the Syracusans from Dio-nysius, were enterprises of a very different kind. Diony-sius was an avowed and established tyrant; and Sicily,with reason, groaned beneath his yoke. But with re-spect to Caesar, though, whilst his imperial power wasiu its infancy, he treated his opponents with severity;yet, as soon as that power was confirmed, the tyrannywas rather a nominal than real thing; for no tyrannicalPLUT. VoL. VII. N??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?194 ? PLUTARCH.action could be laid to his charge. Nay, such was thecondition of Rome, that it evidently required a master;and Caesar was no more than a tender and skilful phy-sician, appointed by Providence to heal the distempersof the state. Of course the people lamented his death,and were implacably enraged against his assassins.Dion, on the contrary, was reproached by the Syracu-sans for suffering Dionysius to escape, and not diggingup the former tyrant's grave.With regard to their military conduct, Dion, as ageneral, was without a fault: he not only made themost of his own instructions, but, where others failed,he happily repaired the error. But it was wrong inBrutus to hazard a second battle, where all was atstake. And when that battle was lost, he had neithersagacity enough to think of new resources, nor spirit,like Pompey, to contend with fortune, though he hadstill reason to rely on his troops, and was absolutemaster at sea.But what Brutus is chiefly blamed for, was his in-gratitude to Caesar. He owed his life to his favor, aswell as the lives of those prisoners for whom he inter-ceded. He was treated as his friend, and distinguishedwith particular marks of honor; and yet he imbruedhis hands in the blood of his benefactor. Dion standsclear of any charge like this. As a relation of Diony-sius, he assisted and was useful to him in the adminis-tration; in which case his services were equal to hishonors. When he was driven into exile, and de-prived of his wife and his fortune, he had every mo-tive that was just and honorable to take up armsagainst him.Yet if this circumstance is considered in anotherlight, Brutus will have the advantage. The greatestglory of both consists in their abhorrence of tyrants,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN AND BRUTUS CoMPARED. 195Iand their criminal measures. This, in Brutus, was notblended with any other motive. He had no quarrelwith Caesar; but exposed his life for the liberty of hiscountry. Had not Dion been injured, he had notfought. This is clear from Plato's epistles; where itappears that he was banished from the court of Dio-nysius, and in consequence of that banishment madewar on him. For the good of the community, Brutus,though an enemy to Pompey, became his friend; andthough a friend to Caesar, he became his enemy. Hisenmity and his friendship arose from the same princi-ple, which was justice. But Dion, whilst in favor, em-ployed his services for Dionysius; and it was not tillhe was disgraced that he armed against him. Of coursehis friends were not quite satisfied with his enterprise.They were apprehensive that when he had destroyedthe tyrant he might seize the government himself, andamuse the people with some softer title than that oftyranny. On the other hand, the very enemies of Bru-tus acknowlege that he was the only conspirator whohad no other view than that of restoring the ancientform of government.Besides, the enterprise against Dionysius cannot beplaced in competition with that against Caesar. Theformer had rendered himself contemptible by his low-manners, his drunkenness, and debauchery. But tomeditate the fall of Caesar, and not tremble at his dig-nity, his fortune, or his power, nor shrink at thatname, which shook the kings of India and Parthia ontheir thrones, and disturbed their slumbers; thisshowed a superiority of soul, on which fear couldhave no influence. Dion was no sooner seen in Sicilythan he was joined by thousands; bat the authority ofCa?sar was so formidable in Rome, that it supportedhis friends even after he was dead; and a simple boy??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?196 , PLUTARCH.rose to the first eminence of power by adopting hisname; which served as a charm against the envy andthe influence of Antony. Should it be objected thatDion had the sharpest conflicts in expelling the tyrant,but that Caesar fell naked and unguarded beneath thesword of Brutus, it will argue at least a consummatemanagement and prudence to be able to come at a manof his power naked and unguarded; particularly whenit is considered that the blow was not sudden, nor thework of one, or of a few men, but meditated, and com-municated to many associates, of whom not one de-ceived the leader; for either he had the power of dis-tinguishing honest men at the first view, or such as hechose he made honest by the confidence he reposed inthem. But Dion confided in men of bad principles;so that he must either have been injudicious in hischoice, or, if his people grew worse after their ap-pointments, unskilful in his management. Neither ofthese can be consistent with the talents and conduct ofa wise man; and Plato, accordingly, blames him in hisletters for making choice of such friends as, in the end,were his ruin.Dion found no friend to revenge his death; but Bru-tus received an honorable interment, even from hisenemy Antony: and Caesar allowed that public rejspect which was paid to his memory, as will appearfrom the following circumstance. A statue of brasshad been erected to him at Milan, in Gallia Cisalpina,which was a fine performance, and a striking likeness.Caesar, as he passed through the town, took notice ofit, and summoning the magistrates, in the presence ofhis attendants, be told them that they had broken theleague, by harboring one of his enemies. The magis-trates, as may well be supposed, denied it, and staredat each other, profoundly ignorant what enemy he??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?DIoN AND BRUTUS CoMPARED. 197could mean. He then turned towards the statue, and,knitting his hrows, said, 'Is not this my enemy thatstands here?' The poor Milanese were struck dumbwith astonishment; but Ca;sar told them, with a smile,that he was pleased to find them faithful to their friendsin adversity, and ordered that the statue should con-tinue where it was.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.THe first Artaxerxes, who of all the Persian kingswas most distinguished for his moderation and great-ness of mind, was surnamed Longiraanus, because hisright hand was longer than his left. He was the sonof Xerxes. The second Artaxerxes, surnamed Mne-mon, whose life we are going to write, was son to thedaughter of the first; for Darius, by his wife Pary-satis, had four sons; Artaxerxes the elder, Cyrus thesecond, and Ostanes and Oxathres, the two younger.Cyrus was called after the ancient king of that name,as he is said to have been after the sun; for the Per-sians call the sun Cyrus. Artaxerxes at first wasnamed Arsicas, though Dinon asserts that his originalname was Cartes. But though Ctesias has filled hisbooks with a number of incredible and extravagantfables, it is not probable that he should be ignorantof the name of a king at whose court he lived, inquality of physician to him, his wife, his mother, andhis children. <Cyrus from his infancy was of a violent and impe-tuous temper; but Artaxerxes had a native mildness,something gentle and moderate in his whole dispo-sition. The latter married a beautiful and virtuouslady, by order of his parents, and he kept her whenthey wanted him to put her away: for the king havingput her brother to death, designed that she shouldshare his fate. But Arsicas applied to his mother,with many tears and intreaties, and, with much diffi-culty, prevailed on her, not only to spare her life, butto excuse him from divorcing her. Yet his mother hadthe greater affection for Cyrus, and was desirous of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.raising him to the throne: therefore, when he wascalled from his residence on the coast in the sicknessof Darius, he returned full of hopes that the queen'sinterest had established him successor. Parysatis had,indeed, a specious pretence, which the ancient Xerxeshad made use of, at the suggestion of Demaratus, thatshe had brought Darius his son Arsicas when he wasin a private station, but Cyrus when he was a king.However, she could not prevail. Darius appointedhis eldest son his successor; on which occasion hisname was changed to Artaxerxes. Cyrus had the go-vernment of Lydia, and was to be commander-in-chiefon the coast.Soon after the death of Darius, the king, his suc-cessor, went to Pasargada;, in order to be consecrated,according to custom, by the priests of Persia. In thatcity there is the temple of a goddess, who has theaffairs of war under her patronage, and therefore maybe supposed to be Minerva. The prince to be con-secrated must enter that temple, put off his own robethere, and take that which was worn by the greatCyrus before he was king. He must eat a cake offigs, chew some turpentine, and drink a cup of acidu-lated milk. Whether there are any other ceremonies,is unknown, except to the persons concerned. AsArtaxerxes was on the point of going to be consecrated,Tissaphernes brought to him a priest, who had beenchief inspector of Cyrus' education in his infancy, andhad instructed him in the learning of the magi; andtherefore might be supposed to be as much concernedas any man in Persia at his pupil's not being ap-pointed king: for that reason his accusation againstCyrus could not but gain credit. He accused him of adesign to lie in wait for the king in the temple, and,after he had put off his garment, to fall on him and de-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?200PLUTARCH.stroy him. Some affirm that Cyrus was immediatelyseized on this information; others, that he got into thetemple, and concealed himself there, but was pointedout by the priest: in consequence of which he was tobe put to death ; but his mother, at that moment, tookhim in her arms, bound the tresses of her hair abouthim, held his neck to her own, and by her tears andintreaties prevailed to have him pardoned, and re-manded to the sea-coast. Nevertheless, he was farfrom being satisfied with his government. Instead ofthinking of his brother's favor with gratitude, he re-membered only the indignity of chains; and, in hisresentment, aspired more than ever after the sove-reignty.Some, indeed, say that he thought his allowance forhis table insufficient, and therefore revolted from hisking. But this is a foolish pretext: for if he had noother resource, his mother would have supplied himwith whatever he wanted out of her revenues. Be-sides, there needs no greater proof of his riches thanthe number of foreign troops that he entertained in hisservice, which were kept for him in various parts byhis friends and retainers: for, the better to concealhis preparations, he did not keep his forces in a body,but had his emissaries in different places, who enlistedforeigners on various pretences. Meanwhile his mo-ther, who lived at court, made it her business to re-move the king's suspicions: and Cyrus himself alwayswrote in a lenient style; sometimes begging a candidinterpretation, and sometimes recriminating on Tissa-phernes, as if his contention had been solely with thatgrandee. Add to this, that the king had a dilatoryturn of mind, which was natural to him, and whichmany took for moderation. At first, indeed, he seemedintirely to imitate the mildness of the first Artaxerxes,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.201whose name he bore, by behaving with great affabilityto all that addressed him, and distributing honors andrewards to persons of merit with a lavish hand. Hetook care that punishments should never be embit-tered with insult. If he received presents, he appearedas well pleased as those who offered them, or ratheras those who received favors from him; and in con-ferring favors, he always kept a countenance of benig-nity and pleasure. There was not any thing, howevertrifling, brought him by way of present, which he didnot receive kindly. Even when one Omisus broughthim a pomegranate of uncommon size, he said, ' Bythe light of Mithra, this man, if he were made go-vernor of a small city, would soon make it a greatone.' When he was once on a journey, and peoplepresented him with a variety of things by the way, alaboring man, having nothing else to give him, ran tothe river, and brought him some water in his hands.Artaxerxes was so much pleased, that he sent the mana gold cup, and a thousand darics. When Euclidas,the Lacedaemonian, said many insolent things to him,he contented himself with ordering the captain of hisguard to give him this answer, ' You may say whatyou please to the king; but the king would have youto know that he can not only say, but do.' One day,as he was hunting, Tiribazus showed him a rent in hisrobe: on which the king said, ' What shall I do withit?'--' Put on another, and give that to me,' said Tiri-bazus. 'It shall be so,' said the king; ' I give itthee; but I charge thee not to wear it.' Tiribazus,who, though not a bad man, was giddy and vain, dis-regarding the restriction, soon put on the robe, and atthe same time tricked himself out with some goldenornaments, fit only for queens. The court expressed- great indignation, because it was a thing contrary to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?202PLUTARCH.their laws and customs: but the king only laughed,and said to him, ' I allow thee to wear the trinkets as awoman, and the robe as a madman.'None had been admitted to the king of Persia'stable but his mother and his wife; the former of whichsat above him, and the latter below him: Artaxerxes,nevertheless, did that honor to Ostanes and Oxathres,two of his younger brothers. But what afforded thePersians the most pleasing spectacle was the queenStatira always riding in her chariot with the curtainsopen, and admitting the women of the country to ap-proach and salute her. These things made his admi-nistration popular. Yet there were some turbulent andfactious men, who represented that the affairs of Persiarequired a king of such a magnificent spirit, so able awarrior, and so generous a master as Cyrus was; andthat the dignity of so great an empire could not besupported without a prince of high thoughts and nobleambition. It was not therefore without a confidence insome of the Persians, as well as in the maritime pro-vinces, that Cyrus undertook the war.He wrote also to the Lacedaemonians for assistance;promising that to the foot he would give horses, and tothe horsemen chariots: that on those who had farmshe would bestow villages, and on those who had vil-lages, cities. As for their pay, he assured them itshould not be counted, but measured out to them. Atthe same time he spoke in very high terms of himself,telling them he had a greater and more princely heartthan his brother; that he was the better philosopher,being instructed in the doctrines of the magi; and thathe could drink and bear more wine than his brother.Artaxerxes, he said, was so timorous and effeminate aman, that he could not sit a horse in hunting, nor achariot in time of war. The Lacedaemonians therefore??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.203sent the scytale to Clearchus, with orders to serveCyrus in every thing he demanded.Cyrus began his march against the king with a nu-merous army of barbarians, and almost thirteen thou-sand Greek mercenaries. He found one pretence afteranother for having such an armament on foot; but hisreal designs did not remain long undiscovered; forTissaphernes went in person to inform the king ofthem.This news put the court in great disorder. Parysatiswas censured as the principal cause of this war, andher friends were suspected of a private intelligencewith Cyrus. Statira, in her distress about the war,gave Parysatis the most trouble. 'Where is now,'she cried, 'that faith which you pledged? Whereyour intercessions, by which you saved the man thatwas conspiring against his brother? Have they notbrought war and all its calamities on us V These ex-postulations fixed in the heart of Parysatis, who wasnaturally vindictive and barbarous in her resentmentand revenge, such a hatred of Statira, that she con-trived to take her off. Dinon writes that this cruelpurpose was put in execution during the war: butCtesias assures us it was after it. And it is not pro-bable that he, who was an eye-witness to the transac-tions of that court, could either be ignorant of the timewhen the assassination took place, or could have anyreason to misrepresent the date of it, though he oftendeviates into fictitious tales, and loves to give us in-vention instead of truth. We shall therefore leavethis story to the order of time in which he has placedit.While Cyrus was on his march, he had accountsbrought him that the king did not design to try thefortune of the field by giving battle immediately, but??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.to wait in Persia till his forces were assembled therefrom all parts of his kingdom: and though he haddrawn a trench across the plain ten fathoms wide, asmany deep, and four hundred furlongs in length, yethe suffered Cyrus to pass him, and to march almost toBabylon. Tiribazus, we are told, was the first whoventured to remonstrate to the king, that he ought notany longer to avoid an action, nor to abandon Media,Babylon, and even Susa, to the enemy, and hide him-self in Persia, since he had an army infinitely greaterthan theirs, and ten thousand satrapae and other offi-cers, all of them superior to those of Cyrus both incourage and conduct.On this he took a resolution to come to action assoon as possible. His sudden appearance with an armyof nine hundred thousand men, well prepared and ac-coutred, extremely surprised the rebels; who, throughthe confidence they had in themselves, and contemptof their enemy, were marching in great confusion, andeven without their arms: so that it was with great dif-ficulty that Cyrus reduced them to any order; and hecould not do it at last without much noise and tumult.As the king advanced in silence, and at a slow pace,the good discipline of his troops afforded an astonish-ing spectacle to the Greeks, who expected amongstsuch a multitude nothing but disorderly shouts andmotions, and every other instance of distraction andconfusion. He showed his judgment, too, in placingthe strongest of his armed chariots before that part ofhis phalanx which was opposite to the Greeks, that, bythe impetuosity of their motion, they might break theenemy's ranks before they came to close combat.Many historians have described this battle; but Xe-nophon has done it with such life and energy, that wedo not read an account of it--we see it, and feel all??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?AHTAXERXIiS.205the danger. It would be very absurd therefore to at-tempt any thing after him, except the mentioning somematerial circumstances which he has omitted.The place where the battle was fought is called Cu-naxa, and is five hundred furlongs from Babylon. Alittle before the action Clearchus advised Cyrus to posthimself behind the Macedonians, and not risk his per-son; on which he is reported to have said, 'What ad-vice is this, Clearchus 1 Would you have me, at thevery time I am aiming at a crown, to show myself un-worthy of one?' Cyrus, indeed, committed an errorin rushing into the midst of the greatest danger withoutcare or caution; but Clearchus was guilty of anotheras great, if not greater, in not consenting to place hisGreeks opposite to the king, and in getting the riveron his right, to prevent his being surrounded: for, ifsafety was his principal object, and he was by all meansto avoid loss, he ought to have stayed at home. Butto carry his arms ten thousand furlongs from the sea,without necessity or constraint, and solely with a viewto place Cyrus on the throne of Persia, and then notto be solicitous for a post where he might best defendthe prince whose pay he received, but for one in whichhe might act most at ease and in the greatest safety,was to behave like a man who, on the sight of presentdanger, abandons the whole enterprise, and forgets thepurpose of his expedition. For it appears from thecourse of the action, that if the Greeks had chargedthose that were posted about the king's person, theywould not have stood the shock; and after Artaxerxeshad been slain, or put to flight, the conqueror musthave gained the crown without farther interruption.Therefore the ruin of Cyrus' affairs, and his death, ismuch rather to be ascribed to the caution of Clearchusthan to his own rashness: for, if the king himself had??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?206PLUTARCH.been to choose a post for the Greeks, where they mightdo him the least prejudice, he could not have pitchedon a better than that which was most remote from him-self and the troops about him. At the distance he wasfrom Clearchus, he knew not of the defeat of that partof his army which was near the river, and Cyrus wascut off before he could avail himself of the advantagesgained by the Greeks. Cyrus, indeed, was sensiblewhat disposition would have been of most service tohim, and for that reason ordered Clearchus to chargein the centre; but Clearchus ruined all, notwithstand-ing his assurances of doing every thing for the best;for the Greeks beat the barbarians with ease, and pur-sued them a considerable way.In the mean time, Cyrus being mounted on Pasacas,a horse of great spirit, but at the same time headstrongand unruly, fell in, as Ctesias tells us, with Artager-ses, general of the Cadusians, who met him on thegallop, and called out to him in these terms: 'Mostunjust and most stupid of men, who disgracest thename of Cyrus, the most august of all names amongthe Persians: thou leadest these brave Greeks a vileway to plunder thy country, and to destroy thy brotherand thy king, who has many millions of servants thatare better men than thou. Try if he has not, and herethou shalt lose thy head before thou canst see the faceof the king.' So saying, he threw his javelin at himwith all his force; but his cuirass was of such excel-lent temper, that he was not wounded, though the vio-lence of the blow shook him in his seat. Then, asArtagerses was turning his horse, Cyrus aimed a strokeat him with his spear, and the point of it entered at hiscollar-bone, and pierced through his neck. That Ar-tagerses fell by the hand of Cyrus, almost all histo-rians agree. As to the death of Cyrus himself, since??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.Xenophon has given a very short account of it, hecansehe was not on the spot when it happened, perhaps itmay not be amiss to give the manner of it in detail, asDinon and Ctesias have represented it.Dinon tells us that Cyrus, after he had slain Arta-gerses, charged the vanguard of Artaxerxes with greatfury, wounded the king's horse, and dismounted him.Tiribazus immediately mounted him on another horse,and said, 'Sir, remember this day; for it deserves notto be forgotten.' At the second attack Cyrus spurredhis horse against the king, and gave him a wound: atthe third, Artaxerxes, in great indignation, said tothose that were by, 'It is better to die than to sufferall this.' At the same time he advanced against Cy-rus, who was rashly advancing to meet a shower ofdarts. The king wounded him with his javelin, andothers did the same. Thus fell Cyrus, as some say,by the blow which the king gave him; but accordingto others, it was a Carian soldier who despatched him,and who afterwards, for his exploit, had the honor ofcarrying a golden cock at the head of the army, on thepoint of his spear: for the Persians called the Carianscocks, on account of the crests with which they adornedtheir helmets.Ctesias' story is very long, but the purport of it isthis: when Cyrus had slain Artagerses, he pushed hishorse up towards the king, and the king advancedagainst him; both in silence. Ariacus, one of thefriends of Cyrus, first aimed a blow at the king, butdid not wound him. Then the king threw his javelinat Cyrus, but missed him; the weapon however didexecution on Tissaphernes, a man of approved valor,and a faithful servant to Cyrus. It was now Cyrus'turn to try his javelin: it pierced the king's cuirass,and going two fingers deep into his breast, brought??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?208 PLUTARCH.him from his horse. This caused such disorder in histroops that they fled: hut the king, recovering, re-tired with a few of his men, among whom was Ctesias,to an eminence not far off, and there reposed himself.In the mean time, Cyrus' horse, grown more furioushy the action, carried him deep amongst the enemy;and as night was coming on, they did not know him,and his own men sought for him in vain. Elated how-ever with victory, and naturally daring and impetuous,he kept on, crying out in the Persian language as hewent, ' Make way, ye slaves, make way!' They hum-bled themselves, and opened their ranks; but his tiarahappened to fall from his head; and a young Persian,named Mithridates, in passing, wounded him with hislance in the temple near his eye, without knowing whohe was. Such a quantity of blood issued from thewound, that he was seized with a giddiness, and fellsenseless from his horse. The horse, having lost hisrider, wandered about the field; the furniture too hadfallen off, and the servant of Mithridates, who hadgiven him the wound, took it up, all stained withblood.At last Cyrus, with much difficulty, began to reco-ver from his swoon; and a few slaves, who attendedhim, endeavored to mount him on another horse, andso to carry him out of danger: but as he was too weakto sit a horse, he thought it better to walk, and the slavessupported him as he went. His head was still heavy,and he tottered at every step; yet he imagined himselfvictorious, because be heard the fugitives calling Cyrusking, and imploring mercy.At that instant some Caunians of mean condition,who performed the most servile offices for the royalarmy, happened to mix with the company of Cyrus asfriends. They perceived, however, though not without??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.difficulty, that the clothing of his people was red,whereas that given by the king their master was white.One of these then ventured to give Cyrus a stroke withhis spear behind, without knowing him to be the prince.The weapon hit his ham, and cut the sinew; on whichhe fell, and in falling dashed his wounded templeagainst a stone, and died on the spot. Such is Ctesias'story of the death of Cyrus, which, like a blunt wea-pon, hacks and hews him a long time, and can hardlykill him at last.Soon after Cyrus expired an officer, who was calledthe King's Eye, passed that way. Artasyras (for thatwas his name) knowing the slaves, who were mourningover the corpse, addressed him who appeared to bemost faithful to his master, and said, ' Pariscas, whois that whom thou art lamenting so much ?'--' O Arta-syras!' answered the slave, ' see you not prince Cyrusdead V Artasyras was astonished at the event: how-ever, he desired the slave to compose himself, and takecare of the corpse; and then rode at full speed to Ar-taxerxes, who had given up all for lost, and was readyto faint, both with thirst and with the anguish of hiswound. In these circumstances the officer found him,and with a joyful accent hailed him in these words, ' Ihave seen Cyrus dead.' The king, at first, was impa-tient to see the dead body himself, and commandedArtasyras immediately to conduct him to it: but find-ing all the field full of terror and dismay, on a reportthat the Greeks, victorious in their quarter, were pur-suing the fugitives, and putting all to the sword, hethought proper to send out a greater number to recon-noitre the place which Artasyras had told him of.Accordingly thirty men went with flambeaux in theirhands. Still the king was almost dying of thirst, andthe slave Satibarzanes sought every place for water;PLUT. VoL. Vll. O??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.for the field afforded none, and they were at a greatdistance from the camp. After much search, he foundone of those poor Caunians had about two quarts ofbad water in a mean bottle, and he took it, and carriedit to the king. After the king had drunk it all up, theslave asked him, ' If be did not find it a disagreeablebeverage V On which he swore by all the gods, ' thathe bad never drunk the most delicious wine, nor thelightest and clearest water, with so much pleasure. Iwish only,' continued he, ' that I could find the manwho gave it thee, that I might make him a recompense.In the mean time I intreat the gods to make him hap-py and rich.' ,While he was speaking, the thirty men, whom he hadsent out, returned in great exultation, and confirmedthe news of his unexpected good fortune. Now likewisenumbers of his troops repaired to him again, and,dismissing his fears, he descended from the eminence,with many torches carried before him. When he cameto the dead body, according to the law of the Per-sians, the right hand and the head were cut off; andhaving ordered the head to be brought to him, he tookit by the hair, which was long and thick, and showedit to the fugitives, and to such as were still doubtful ofthe fortune of the day. They were astonished at thesight, and prostrated themselves before him. Seventythousand men soon assembled about him, and withthem he returned to his camp. Ctesias tells us he hadled four hundred thousand men that day into the field;but Dinon and Xenophon make that number muchgreater. As to the number of the killed, Ctesias says,an account only of nine thousand was brought to Arta-xerxes; whereas there appeared to Ctesias himself tobe no fewer than twenty thousand. That article there-fore must be left dubious: but nothing can be a more??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?pdlpa&le falsity than what Ctesias adds, that he wassent ambassador to the Greeks in conjunction withPhayllus, the Zacynthian, and some others; for Xe-nophon knew that Ctesias was at the Persian court:he mentions him in his works, and it is plain that hehad met with his books. Therefore, if he had beenjoined in commission to settle such important affairs,lie would not have passed him by unnoticed, but wouldhave mentioned him with Phayllus. Ctesias, indeed,was a man of unbounded vanity, as well as strong at-tachment to Clearchus; and for that reason alwaysleaves a corner in the story for himself, when he isdressing out the praises of Clearchus and the Lacedae-monians.After the battle, the king sent great and valuable pre-sents to the son of Artagerses, who was slain by Cy-rus. He rewarded also Ctesias and others in a dis-tinguished manner; and having found the Caunianwho gave him the bottle of water, he raised him fromindigence and obscurity to riches and honors. Therewas something of an analogy between his punishmentsand the crime. One Arbaces a Mede, in the battle de-serted to Cyrus, and, after that prince was killed,came back to his colors. As he perceived that the manhad done it rather out of cowardice than any treason-able design, all the penalty he laid on him was to car-ry about a woman on his shoulders a whole day in themarket-place. Another, besides deserting, had given itout that he had killed two of the enemy; and for hispunishment he only ordered his tongue to be piercedthrough with three needles.He supposed, and he was desirous of having it passon the world that Cyrus fell by his hand. This in-duced him to send valuable presents to Mithridates,who gave him the first wound, and to instruct the mes-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?212PLUTARCH.sengers to say, ' the king does you this honor, be-cause you found the furniture of Cyrus' horse, andbrought it to him.' And when the Carian, who gaveCyrus the stroke in his ham that caused his death,asked for his reward, he ordered those who gave ithim to say, 'the king bestows this on you, becauseyou were the second person that brought him goodtidings: for Artasyras was the first, and you the nextthat brought him an account of the death of Cyrus.'Mithridates went away in silence, though not withoutconcern. But the unhappy Carian could not conquerthe common disease of vanity. Elated with what hethought his good fortune, and aspiring to things abovehis walk in life, he would not receive his reward fortidings, but angrily insisted, and called the gods andmen to witness, that he, and no other man, killed Cy-rus; and that it was not just to rob him of the glory.The king was so much incensed at this, that he or-dered the man's head to be cut off: but his mother Pa-rysatis, being present, said, 'Let not this villanousCarian go off so: leave him to me, and he shall havethe reward which his audacious tongue deserves.'Accordingly the king gave him up to her, and she de-livered him to the executioners, with orders to torturehim for ten days, and then to tear out his eyes, andpour molten brass into his ears, till he expired.Mithridates also came to a miserable end soonafter, through his own folly. Being invited one even-ing to supper, where both the slaves of the king, andthose of his mother were present, he went in a robeembroidered with gold, which he had received fromthe king. During the entertainment, Parysatis' prin-cipal slave took occasion to say, ' What a beautifulgarment is this, Mithridates, which the king has givenyou! how handsome are those bracelets and that??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.213chain! how valuable your cimeter! He has cer-tainly made you not only a great, but a happy man.'Mithridates, who by this time was flushed with wine,made answer, 'What are these things, Sparamixes 1I deserve much greater marks of honor than these forthe services I rendered the king that day.' Then Spa-ramixes replied, with a smile, 'I speak not in theleast out of envy; but since, according to the Greekproverb, there is truth in wine, let me tell you mymind freely, and ask you what great matter it is tofind a horse's furniture fallen off, and bring it to theking.' This he said, not that he was ignorant of thereal state of the case; but because he wanted to layhim open, and saw that the wine had made him talka-tive, and taken him off his guard, he studied to piquehis vanity. Mithridates, no longer master of himself,said,' You may talk of what furniture and what triflesyou please; but I tell you plainly, it was by this handthat Cyrus was slain: for I did not, like Artagerses,throw my javelin in vain, but pierced his temples nearthe eye, and brought him to the ground; and of thatwound he died.' The rest of the company saw thedreadful fate that would befall Mithridates, and lookedwith dejected eyes on the ground; but he who gavethe entertainment said, ' Let us now attend to our eat-ing and drinking; and adoring the fortune of the king,let such matters alone as are too high for us.'Immediately after the company broke up the slavetold Parysatis what had been said, and she informedthe king, Artaxerxes, like a person detected, and onewho had lost a victory out of his hands, was enragedat this discovery: for he was desirous of making allthe barbarians and Greeks believe, that in the severalencounters he both gave and received blows; and thatthough he was wounded himself, he killed his adver-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.sary. He therefore condemned Mithridates to thepunishment of ' the hoat.' The manner of it is this.They take two hoats, which are made to fit each other,and extend the criminal in one of them in a supineposture. Then they turn the other on it, so that thepoor wretch's hody is covered, and only the head andhands are out at one end, and the feet at the other.They give him victuals daily, and if he refuses to eat,they compef him by pricking him in the eyes. After behas eaten, they make him drink a mixture of honey andmilk, which they pour into his mouth. They spreadthe same, too, over his face, and always turn him so asto have the sun full in his eyes; the consequence ofwhich is, that his face is covered with swarms of flies.As all the necessary evacuations of a man who eatsand drinks are within the boat, the filthiness and cor-ruption engender a quantity of worms, which consumehis flesh, and penetrate to his entrails. When theyfind that the man is dead, they take off the upper boat,and have the spectacle of a carcass whose flesh is eatenaway, and of numberless vermin dinging to and gnaw-ing the bowels. Mithridates with much difficulty founddeath, after he had been consumed in this manner forseventeen days.There remained now no other mark for the vengeaneeof Parysatis but Mesabates, one of the king's slaves,who cut off Cyrus' head and hand. As he took careto give her no handle against him, she laid this schemefor his destruction. She was a woman of keen partsin all respects, and in particular she played well atdice. The king often played with her before the war,and being reconciled to her after it, took the same dirversion with her. She was even the confidant of hispleasures, and scrupled not to assist him in any thingof gallantry.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?AETAXERXES.Statira indeed was the object of her hatred, and shelet her have a very small share of the king's company;for she was determined to have the principal interestwith bim herself. One day finding Artaxerxes wantedsomething to pass away the time, she challenged himto play for a thousand darks, and purposely managedher dice so ill, that she lost. She paid the money im-mediately, but pretended to be much chagrined, andcalled on him to play again for a slave. He consentedto the proposal, and they agreed each of tbem to ex-cept five of their most faithful slaves ; the winner wasto have his choice out of the rest. On these conditionsthey played. The queen, who had the affair at heart,exerted all her skill, and being favored besides by thedice, won the slave, and pitched on Mesabates, who wasnot of the number of the excepted. He was immedi-ately delivered to her, and before the king suspectedany thing of her intentions, she put him in the hands ofthe executioners, with orders to flay bim alive, to fixhis body on three stakes, and to stretch out his skin byitself. The king was highly incensed, and expressedbis resentment in strong terms: but she only said in alaughing ironical way, 'This is pleasant indeed, thatyou must be so angry about an old useless slave, whileI say not a word of my loss of a thousand darics!'The king, though much concerned at the imposition,held his peace. But Statira, who on other occasionsopenly censured the practice of the queen mother, com-plained now of her injustice and cruelty, in sacrificingto Cyrus the slaves, and other faithful servants of theking.After Tissaphernes bad deceived Clearchus and theother Grecian officers, and, contrary to the treaty andhis oaths, put them in chains, Ctesias tells us that Cle-archus made interest with him for the recovery of a??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?216PLUTARCH.comb. When he had obtained it, it seems, he was somuch pleased with the use of it, that he took his ringfrom his finger, and gave it Ctesias, that it might ap-pear as a token of his regard for him to his friends andrelations in Lacedaemon. The device was a dance ofthe Caryatides. He adds, that whenever provisionswere sent to Clearchus, his fellow-prisoners took mostof them for themselves, and left him a very small share:but that he corrected this abuse, by procuring a largerquantity to be sent to Clearchus, and separating theallowance of the others from his. All this, accordingto our author, was done with the consent, and by thefavor of Parysatis. As he sent every day a gammonof bacon among the provisions, Clearchus suggested tohim that he might easily conceal a small dagger in thefleshy part, and begged earnestly that he would do it,that his fate might not be left to the cruel dispositionof Artaxerxes; but, through fear of the king's dis-pleasure, he refused it. The king, however, at the re-quest of his mother, promised, on oath, not to put Cle-archus to death; but afterwards he was persuaded byStatira to destroy all the prisoners except Menon. Onthis account he tells us Parysatis plotted against Sta-tira, and resolved to take her off by poison. But it isa great absurdity in Ctesias to assign so disproportion-ate a cause. Would Parysatis, for the sake of Clear-chus, undertake so horrid and dangerous an enterprise,as that of poisoning the king's lawful wife, by whomhe had children and an heir to his crown? It is clearenough that he tells this fabulous tale to do honor tothe memory of Clearchus: for he adds, that the car-casses of the other officers were torn in pieces by dogsand birds; but that a storm of wind brought a greatheap of sand, and provided a tomb for Clearchus.Around this heap there sprang up a number of palm-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.trees, which soon grew into an admirable grove, andspread their protecting shade over the place ;, so thatthe king repented greatly of what he had done, be-lieving that he had destroyed a man who was a favoriteof the gods.It was therefore only from the hatred and jealousywhich Parysatis had entertained of Statira from thefirst, that she embarked in so cruel a design. She sawthat her own power with the king depended only onhis reverence for her as his mother; whereas that ofStatira was founded in love, and confirmed by thegreatest confidence in her fidelity. The point she hadto carry was great, and she resolved to make one despe-rate effort. She had a faithful and favorite attendant,named Gigis, who, as Dinon tells us, assisted in theaffair of the poison ; but, according to Ctesias, she wasonly conscious to it, and that against her will. Theformer calls the person who provided the poison Me-lantas; the latter, Belitaras.These two princesses had, in appearance, forgottheir old suspicions and animosities, and began to visitand eat at each other's table. But they did it with somuch distrust and caution, as to make it a rule to eatof the same dish, and even of the same slices. Thereis a small bird in Persia, which has no secretion, theintestines being only filled with fat; on which accountit is supposed to live on air and dew: the name of it isrhyntaces. Ctesias writes, that Parysatis divided oneof these birds with a small knife that was poisoned onone side, and taking the wholesomer part herself, gavethe other to Statira. Dinon, however, affirms that itwas not Parysatis, but Melantas, who cut the bird intwo, and presented the poisoned part to Statira. Bethat as it may, she died in dreadful agonies and con-vulsions; and was not only sensible herself of the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?218PLUTARCH.cause, but intimated her suspicions to the king, whoknew too well the savage and implacable temper of hismother: he therefore immediately made an inqusitioninto the affair. He took her officers and servants thatattended at her table, and put them to the torture.But she kept Gigis in her own apartment; and whenthe king demanded her, refused to give her up. Atlast Gigis begged of the queen-mother to let her go inthe night to her own house; and the king being in-formed of it, ordered some of his guards to intercepther. Accordingly she was seized, and condemned todie. The laws of Persia have provided this punish-ment for poisoners: their heads are placed on a broadstone, and then crushed with another, till nothing ofthe figure remains. In that manner was Gigis executed.As for Parysatis, the king did not reproach her withher crime, nor punish her any farther than by sendingher to Babylon, (which was the place she desired toretire to,) and declaring that he would never visit thatcity while she lived. Such was the state of his do-mestic affairs.He was no less solicitous to get the Greeks into hishands who had followed Cyrus into Asia, than he hadbeen to conquer Cyrus himself, and to keep the crown.But he could not succeed: for though they had lostCyrus their general, and their own officers, yet theyforced their way, as it were, out of the very palace ofArtaxerxes, and made it appear to all the world thatthe Persians and their king had nothing to value them-selves on but wealth, luxury, women, and that the restwas mere parade and ostentation. This gave freshspirits to the Greeks, and taught them to despise thebarbarians. The Lacedaemonians, in particular, thoughtit would be a great dishonor, if they did not now de-liver the Asiatic Greeks from servitude, and put an??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.219end to the insults of the Persians. Their first attemptwas under the direction of Thimbro, and the next underthat of Dercyllidas; but as those generals effectednothing of importance, the conduct of the war was givento Agesilaus. That prince immediately passed intoAsia with his fleet, and soon distinguished himself byhis vigorous operations; for he defeated Tissaphernesin a pitched battle, and brought over several cities.By these losses Artaxerxes understood what was hisbest method of making war. He therefore sent Her-mocrates, the Rhodian, into Greece, with a great quan-tity of gold, having instructed him to corrupt with itthe leading men amongst the states, and to stir upa Grecian war against Lacedaemon. -Hermocrates acquitted himself so well in his com-mission, that the most considerable cities leaguedagainst Sparta, and there were such commotions in Pe-loponnesus, that the magistrates were forced to recallAgesilaus from Asia. On leaving that country he isreported to have said to his friends, ' The king drivesme out of Asia with thirty thousand archers:' forthe Persian money bore the impression of an archer.Artaxerxes deprived the Lacedaemonians of the do*minion of the sea, by means of Conon, the Athenian,who acted in conjunction with Pharnabazus: for Co-non, after he had lost the sea-fight at JJgos Potamos,took up his abode in Cyprus; not merely to providefor his own safety, but to wait for a change of affairs,as mariners wait for the turn of the tide. As he sawthat his own plan wanted a respectable power to carryjt into execution, and that the Persian power requireda person of ability to conduct it, he wrote the king anaccount of the measures he had concerted. The mes-senger was ordered to get the letter delivered into hishands by Zeno the Cretan, who danced in the revels,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?220PLUTARCH.or by Polycritus the Mendaean, who was his physician;and in case of their absence, by Ctesias, another phy-sician. The letter, we are told, was given to Ctesias,and he added to it this paragraph: ' I desire you, sir,to send Ctesias to me, for he will be very serviceablein the business of the navy.' But Ctesias affirms thatthe king, without any kind of solicitation, put him onthis service.After Artaxerxes had gained, by Conon and Pharna-bazus, the battle of Cnidus, which stripped the Lace-daemonians of the empire of the sea, he drew almost allGreece into his interest; insomuch, that the celebratedpeace, called the Peace of Antalcidas, was intirely ofhis modelling. Antalcidas was a Spartan, the son ofLeon, and so strongly attached to the king, that heprevailed with the Lacedaemonians to give up to himall the Greek cities in Asia, and the islands whichare reckoned amongst its dependences, to be held ashis tributaries, in virtue of the peace; if we can callthat a peace by which Greece was dishonored and be-trayed; which was indeed so vile a bargain, that themost unsuccessful war could have terminated in no-thing more inglorious.Hence it was that Artaxerxes, though, according toDinon's account, he always detested the other Spar-tans as the most impudent of men, yet expressed agreat regard for Antalcidas, when he came to his court.One evening he took a chaplet of flowers from hishead, dipped it in the richest essences, and sent it fromhis table to Antalcidas. All the court was astonishedat such a mark of favor. But there seems to have beena propriety in making him so ridiculous a compliment;and he was a fit man to wear such a crown, who couldtake off Leonidas and Callicratides in a dance beforethe Persians. Somebody happening to say in the hear-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.221ing of Agesilaus, 'Alas for Greece! when the Lacedae-monians are turning Persians,' he corrected him, andsaid, 'No; the Medes are rather turning Lacedae-monians. But the wit of the expression did not re-move the disgrace of the thing. They lost their supe-riority in Greece by the ill-fought battle of Leuctra,as they had before lost their honor by the vile condi-tions of this peace.So long as Sparta kept the lead, the king admittedAntalcidas to the privileges of hospitality, and calledHim his friend. But when, on their defeat at Leuctra,the Spartans sent Agesilaus into Egypt, to get a sup-ply of money, and Antalcidas went on the same busi-ness to the Persian court, Artaxerxes treated him withso much neglect and contempt, that between the ridi-cule he suffered from his enemies, and his fear of theresentment of the ephori, he resolved, on his return, tostarve himself to death. Ismenias the Theban, andPelopidas, who had lately won the battle of Leuctra,went also to the court of Artaxerxes. Pelopidas sub-mitted to nothing unworthy of his country or cha-racter; but Ismenias being commanded to adore theking, purposely let his ring fall from his finger, andthen, by stooping to take it up, appeared in a postureof adoration. Timagoras, the Athenian, having giventhe king some secret intelligence in a letter which hesent by a secretary named Beluris, he was so muchpleased, that he made him a present of ten thousanddarics. The same Timagoras wanted a supply of cow'smilk, on account of a languishing disorder, and Arta-xerxes ordered eighty cows for his use, which wereto follow him wherever he went. He likewise senthim a bed with the necessary coverlets, and Persianservants to make it, because he thought the Greeks not??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PtUTARCH.skilled in that aft; and he ordered him to be carriedto the sea-side in a litter, on account of his indispo-sition. To this we may add the allowance for histable while he was at court, which was so magnificent,that Ostanes, the king's brother, one day said to him,'Timagoras, remember this table, for it is not sosumptuons for nothing.' This was rather reproachinghim with his treason, than calling for his acknow-legements. And, indeed, Timagoras, on his return,was capitally condemned by the Athenians for takingbribes.Artaxerxes, in some measure, atoned for the causesof sorrow he gave the Greeks, by doing one thing thatafforded them great pleasure: he put Tissaphernestheir most implacable enemy to death. This he didpartly at the instigation of Parysatis, who added othercharges to those alleged against him: for he did notlong retain his anger, but was reconciled to his mother,and sent for her to court; because he saw she hadunderstanding and spirit enough to assist in governingthe kingdom, and there now remained no farther causeof suspicions and uneasiness between them. From thistime she made it a rule to please the king in all hermeasures, and not to oppose any of his inclinations, bywhich she gained an absolute ascendant over him. Sheperceived that he had a strong passion for one of hisown daughters, named Atossa. He endeavored, indeed,to conceal it on his mother's account, and restrained itin public. Parysatis no sooner suspected the intrigue,than she caressed her grand-daughter more than ever;and was continually praising to Artaxerxes both herbeauty and her behavior, in which she assured himthere was something great and worthy of a crown. Atlast she persuaded him to make her his wife, without??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?AKTAXERXES.regarding the laws and opinions of the Greeks. 'God,'said she, 'has made you a law to the Persians, and arule of right and wrong.' Some historians, amongstwhom is Heraclides of Cumae, affirm, that Artaxerxesmarried not only Atossa, hut another of his daughters,named Amestris, of whom we shall speak by and by.His affection for Atossa was so strong, that though shebad a leprosy, which spread itself over her body, hewas not disgusted at it; but be was daily imploringJuno for her, and grasping the dust of her temple;for be paid his homage to no other goddess. At thesame time, by bis order, bis great officers sent so manyofferings to her shrine, that the whole space betweenthe palace and the temple, which was sixteen fur-longs, was filled with gold, silver, purple, and finehorses.He sent Pharnabazus and Iphicrates to make war onthe Egyptians; but the expedition miscarried throughthe difference which happened between the generals heemployed. After this he went in person against theCadusiaus, with three hundred thousand foot, and tenthousand horse. Their country is rough and uneven,and covered with perpetual fogs. As it produces nocorn or fruits by cultivation, the inhabitants, a fierceand warlike race of men, live on wild pears, apples,and other things of that kind. He therefore insensiblyfell into great danger and distress; for his troops couldfind no provisions there, nor could they be suppliedfrom any other place. They were forced to kill theirbeasts of burden, and eat them; and those became soscarce, that an ass's head was sold for sixty drachmas.The king's table itself was ill supplied; and there re-mained only a few horses, all the rest having been usedfor food.In this extremity Tiribazus, who often was in high??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?224PLUTARCH.favor on account of his valor, and often degraded forhis levity, and who at this very time was in the great-est disgrace, saved the king and his whole army bythe following stratagem. The Cadusians having twokings, each had his separate camp. On this Tiribazusformed his scheme; and, after he had communicated itto Artaxerxes, went himself to one of those princes,and sent his son to the other. Each imposed on theking he applied to, by pretending that the other wasgoing to send a private embassy to Artaxerxes, to ne-gotiate a separate alliance. 'But if you are wise,'said they, 'you will be beforehand with your rival,'and we will assist you in the whole affair. This argu-ment had its effect; and each, persuaded that the otherwas undermining him out of envy, sent his ambassa-dors; the one with Tiribazus, and the other with hisson. As some time passed before they returned, Arta-xerxes began to suspect; and there were those whosuggested that Tiribazus had some traitorous design.The king was extremely dejected, and, repenting ofthe confidence he had reposed in him, gave ear to allthe calumnies of his enemies. But at last Tiribazusarrived, as did also his son, with the Cadusian ambas-sadors, and peace was made with both parties; in con-sequence of which Tiribazus returned with the king ingreater esteem and authority than ever. During thisexpedition Artaxerxes showed that timidity and effe-minacy ought not to be ascribed, as they generally are,to the pomp and luxuries of life, but to a native mean-ness and a depraved judgment: for neither the gold,the purple, nor the jewels, which the king always wore,and which were worth no less than twelve thousandtalents, hindered him from bearing the same fatiguesand hardships with the meanest soldier in his army.He took his quiver on his back, and his buckler on his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.225arm, and quitting his horse, would often march fore-most up the most craggy and difficult places; inso-much, that others found their task much lighter, whenthey saw the strength and alacrity with which he pro-ceeded; for he marched above two hundred furlongs aday.At last he arrived at one of his own palaces, where,there were gardens and parks of great extent andbeauty, though the country around it was naked andbarren. As the weather was exceedingly cold, he per-mitted his men to cut wood out of his own parks, with-out sparing either pine or cypress: and when the sol-diers were loth to touch trees of such size and beauty,he took an axe in his own hand, and laid it to thefinest tree amongst them. After which they cut themdown without scruple, and, having made a number offires, passed the night with great satisfaction.He found, however, on his arrival at his capital, thathe had lost many brave men, and almost all his horses;and imagining that he was despised for his losses, andthe ill success of the expedition, he became suspiciousof his grandees. Many of them he put to death inanger, and more out of fear: for fear is the most san-guinary principle a tyrant can act from; courage, onthe contrary, is merciful, mild, and unsuspicious. Thusthe most timorous animals are the hardest to be tamed;but the more generous, having less suspicion, becausethey have less fear, fly not the caresses and society ofmen.Artaxerxes being now far advanced in years, ob-*served his sons making parties for the crown amongsthis friends and the rest of the nobility. The moreequitable part were for his leaving it to his eldest sonDarius, as he had received it from his father in thePLUT. VOL. VII. P??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.same right. But Lis younger son, Ochus, who was anactive man, and of a violent spirit, had also a consi-derable interest among the grandees. Besides, hehoped to gain his father through Atossa; for he paidhis court to her, and promised to make her the partnerof his throne on the death of Artaxerxes. Nay, it wassaid that he had already private familiarities with her.Artaxerxes, though he was ignorant of this circum-stance, resolved to cut off the hopes of Ochus at once;lest, following the daring steps of his uncle Cyrus, heshould involve the kingdom again in civil wars. Hetherefore declared Darius his successor, who was nowtwenty-five years old, and permitted him to wear thepoint of his turban erect, as a mark of royalty.As it is customary in Persia for the heir to ask a fa-vor of him that declared him such, which, if possible,is always granted, Darius asked for Aspasia, who hadbeen the favorite companion of Cyrus, and was now oneof the king's favorites. She was a native of Phoceain Ionia, and her parents, who were above the condi-tion of slaves, had given her a good education. Oneevening she was introduced to Cyrus at supper withthe other women. They approached him without scru-ple, and received his jokes and caresses with pleasure:but Aspasia stood by in silence ; and when Cyrus calledher, she refused to go. Perceiving that the chamber-lains were about to compel her, she said, 'Whoeverlays hands on me shall repent it.' On which the com-pany looked on her as an unpolished creature; butCyrus was pleased, and said, with a smile, to the per-son who brought the women, 'Do not you see, that ofall you have provided, this only has generous and vir-tuous sentiments?' From this moment he attachedhimself to her, loved her most of all his favorites,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.227and called her 'Aspasia the Wise.' When Cyrus fellin battle, she was taken amongst the plunder of hiscamp.Artaxerxes was much concerned at his son's request;for the barbarians are so extremely jealous of theirwomen, that capital punishment is inflicted, not onlyon the man who speaks to, or touches one of the king'sfavorites, but on him who approaches or passes theirchariots on the road. And though, in compliance withthe dictates of his passion, he had made Atossa hiswife contrary to law, he kept three hundred and sixtyfavorite women, all of the greatest beauty. However,when Darius demanded Aspasia, he declared her free,and said, 'She might go with him if she pleased;but he would do no violence to her inclinations.' Ac-cordingly Aspasia was sent for, and, contrary to theking's expectation, made choice of Darius. He gaveher up to him, indeed, because he was obliged to it bythe law; but he soon took her away, and made her apriestess of Diana of Ecbatana, whom they call Anitis,that she might pass the remainder of her life in chas-tity. This he thought no severe revenge on his son,but a pleasant way of chastising his presumption. ButDarius highly resented the affront; whether it was thatthe charms of Aspasia had made a deep impression onhim, or whether he thought himself insulted and ridi-culed by this proceeding.Tiribazus, seeing how much he was offended, endea-vored to exasperate him still more. This he did froma fellow feeling; for he had suffered an injury muchof the same kind. The king, having several daughters,promised to give Apama to Pharnabazus, Rhodoguneto Orontes, and Amestris to Tiribazus. He kept hisword with the two first, but deceived Tiribazus; for,instead of giving Amestris to him, he married her him-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?228I-PLUTARCH.self; promising, at the same time, that he should havehis youngest daughter Atossa. But he became ena-moured of her too, and married her, as we have al-ready mentioned. This treatment extremely incensedTiribazus, who had indeed nothing steady in his dispo-sition, but was wild and irregular. One while suc-cessful, and on a footing with the greatest men in thecourt, another while unacceptable to the king, andsinking into disgrace, he bore no change of fortunewith propriety. If he was in favor, his vanity wasinsupportable; if in disgrace, instead of being humbleand quiet, he had recourse to violence and ferocity.His conversing with the young prince was thereforeadding flame to fire. 'What avails it,' said he, 'tohave the point of your turban advanced, if you seeknot to advance your authority? Nothing can be moreabsurd than your thinking yourself secure of the suc-cession, while your brother is privately forwarding hisinterest by means of the women, and your father is sovery foolish and unsteady. He who could break oneof the most sacred laws of the Persians, for the sakeof an insignificant Grecian woman, is certainly not tobe depended on in more important engagements. Thecase is quite different between you and Ochus, as tothe event of the competition: if Ochus does not obtainthe crown, none will hinder him from livrng happily ina private station; but you, who have been declaredking, must either reign or die.' On this occasion wasverified that observation of Sophocles:Swift in its marchIs evil counsel.The road which leads us to what we desire is indeedsmooth, and of an easy descent; and the desires ofmost men are vicious, because they have never knownor tried the enjoyments of virtue. The lustre of such??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.229an imperial crown, and Darius' fear of his brother,furnished Tiribazus with other arguments; but thegoddess of beauty contributed her share towards per-suading him, by putting him in mind of the loss ofAspasia.He gave himself up therefore intirely to Tiribazus,and many others soon entered into the conspiracy.But before it could be carried into execution a slavegave the king information of it, and of all the measuresthat were taken; for he had got perfect intelligencethat they designed to enter his chamber in the night,and kill him in his bed.Artaxerxes thought it would be great imprudenceeither to slight the information, and lay himself opento such danger, or to credit it without farther proof.The method he took was this: he ordered the slave tojoin Darius and his adherents, and assist at all theircouncils; and in the mean time broke a door throughthe wall behind his bed, which he concealed with thetapestry. When the time came, which the slave in-formed him of, he placed himself on his bed, and re-mained there till he had a sight of the faces of theconspirators, and could perfectly distinguish each ofthem. But when he saw them draw their swords, andadvance towards him, he pulled back the tapestry, re-treated into the inner room, and, after he had boltedthe door, alarmed the palace. The assassins seeingthemselves discovered, and their designs disappointed,immediately took to flight, and desired Tiribazus todo the same, because he must certainly have been ob-served. While he lingered the guards came and laidhold of him; but he killed many of them, and it waswith difficulty that he was despatched at last by a ja-velin thrown at a distance.Darius was taken, together with his children, and??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.brought to answer for his crime before the judgeswhich the king appointed. The king did not thinkproper to assist at the trial in person, but directedothers to lay the charge against his son, and his nota-ries were to take down separately the opinion of eachjudge. As they all gave it unanimously for death, theofficers took Darius, and led him to an adjacent prison.But when the executioner came, with the instrumentin his hand which is used in beheading the capital con-victs, he was seized with horror at the sight of Darius,and drew back towards the door, as having neither abi-lity nor courage to lay violent hands on his king. Butthe judges who stood at the door, urging him to do hisoffice, with menaces of instant punishment if he didnot comply, he returned, and seizing Darius by thehair, threw him on the ground, and cut off his head.Some say the cause was tried in presence of the king,and that Darius, after he was convicted by indubitableproofs, fell on his face and begged for mercy, but Ar-taxerxes, rising in great anger, drew his cimeter, andpursued his stroke till he laid him dead at his feet.They add, that after this he returned to his palace;and having paid his devotions to the sun, said to thosewho assisted at the ceremony, ' My Persians, you maynow return in triumph, and tell your fellow-subjectsthat the great Oromazes1 has taken vengeance on thosewho formed the most impious and execrable designsagainst their sovereign.' Such was the end of the con-spiracy.Ochus now entertained very agreeable hopes, andwas encouraged besides by Atossa. But he had stillsome fear of his remaining legitimate brother, Ariaspes,and of his natural brother Arsames. Not that Ochus1 The Persians worshipped Oromazes as the author of good,and Arimauius as the author of evil.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARTAXERXES.231had so much to apprehend from Ariaspes, merely be-cause he was older, but the Persians were desirous ofhaving him succeed to the throne on account of hismildness, his sincerity, and his humane disposition.As for Arsames, he had the character of a wise prince,and was the particular favorite of his father. Thiswas no secret to Ochus. However, he planned thedestruction of both these brothers of his; and beingof an artful, as well as sanguinary turn, he employedhis cruelty against Arsames, and his art against Ari-aspes. To the latter he privately sent some of theking's slaves and friends with frequent accounts of se-vere and menacing expressions of his father's, as if hehad resolved to put him to a cruel and ignominiousdeath. As these persons came daily to tell him inconfidence, that some of these threats were on thepoint of being put in execution, and the others wouldnot be long delayed, he was so terrified, and fell intosuch a melancholy and desponding way, that he pre-pared a poisonous draught, and drank it, to deliverhimself from the burden of life.The king being informed of the manner of his death,sincerely lamented him, and had some suspicion of thecause, but could not examine into it thoroughly on ac-count of his great age.However, Arsames now became dearer to him thanever, and it was easy to see that the king placed anintire confidence in him, and communicated to him hismost secret thoughts. Ochus, therefore, would notdefer his enterprise longer, but employed Harpates,the son of Tiribazus, to kill Arsames. Artaxerxes,whom time had brought to the very verge of life, whenhe had this additional stroke in the fate of Arsames,could not make much more struggle; his sorrow andregret soon brought him to the grave. He lived nine-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?232PLUTARCH.ty-four years, and reigned sixty-two. He had thecharacter of a prince who governed with lenity, andloved his people. But perhaps the hehavior of hissuccessor might contribute not a little to his reputa-tion; for Ochus was the most cruel and sanguinary ofprinces.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?t\??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.THe philosopher Chrysippus, my dear Polycrates,seems to have thought the ancient proverb not quitejustifiable, and therefore he delivered it, not as it reallyis, but what he thought it should be--Who but a happy son will praise his sire 1Dionysidorus the Troezenian, however, corrects him,and gives it right,Who but unhappy sons will praise their sires IHe says, the proverb was made to silence those who,having no merit of their own, dress themselves up inthe virtues of their ancestors, and are lavish in theirpraises. And those in whom the virtues of their siresshine in congenial beauty, to make use of Pindar'sexpression ; who, like you, form their conduct afterthe brightest patterns in their families, may think it agreat happiness to remember the most excellent of theirancestors, and often to hear or speak of them: for theyassume not the honor of other men's virtues for wantof merit in their own, but uniting their great actionsto those of their progenitors, they praise them as theauthors of their descent, and the models of their lives:for which reason, when I have written the life of Ara-tus, your countryman, and one of your ancestors, Ishall send it to you, who reflect no dishonor on himeither in point of reputation or power. Not that 1doubt your having informed yourself of his actionsfrom the first with all possible care and exactness; butI do it, that your sons, Polycrates and Pythocles, mayform themselves on the great exemplars, in their ownfamily, sometimes hearing and sometimes reading what??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.it becomes them well to imitate: for it is the self-ad-mirer, not the admirer of virtue, that thinks himselfsuperior to others.After the harmony of the pure Doric,1 I mean thearistocracy, was broken in Sicyon, and seditions tookplace through the ambition of the demagogues, the citycontinued a long time in a distempered state. It onlychanged one tyrant for another, till Cleon was slain,and the administration committed to Timoclidas andClinias, persons of the greatest reputation and au-thority amongst the citizens. The commonwealthseemed to be in some degree re-established, when Ti-moclidas died. Abantidas, the son of Paseas, takingthat opportunity to set himself up tyrant, killed Cli-nias, and either banished or put to death his friendsand relations. He sought also for his son Aratus, whowas only seven years old, with a design to despatchhim. But, in the confusion that was in his house whenhis father was slain, the boy escaped among those thatfled, and wandered about the city, in fear, and destituteof help, till he happened to enter, unobserved, thehouse of a woman named Soso, who was sister toAbantidas, and had been married to Prophantus, thebrother of Clinias. As she was a person of generoussentiments, and persuaded, besides, that it was by thedirection of some deity that the child had taken re-fuge with her, she concealed him in one of her apart-ments till night, and then sent him privately to Argos.Aratus having thus escaped so imminent a danger,immediately conceived a violent and implacable hatredfor tyrants, which increased as he grew up. He waseducated by the friends of his family at Argos, in ?liberal manner; and as he was vigorous and robust, he1 There was a gravity, but at the same time great perfec-tion, in the Dorian music.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.235took to gymnastic exercises, and succeeded so well, asto gain the prize in the five several sorts.1 Indeed, inhis statues there is an athletic look; and amidst thestrong sense and majesty expressed in his countenance,we may discover something inconsistent with the vora-city and mattock of the wrestlers. Hence perhaps itwas that he cultivated his powers of eloquence less thanbecame a statesman. He might indeed be a betterspeaker than some suppose ; and there are those whojudge, from his Commentaries, that he certainly wasso, though they were hastily written, and attemptednothing beyond common language.Some time after the escape of Aratns, Dinias andAristotle the logician formed a design against Abanti-das, and they easily found an opportunity to kill him,when he attended, and sometimes joined in, their dis-putations in the public halls, which they had insensiblydrawn him into for that very purpose. Paseas, thefather of Abantidas, then seized the supreme power,but he was assassinated by Nicocles, who took hisplace, and was the next tyrant. We are told that therewas a perfect likeness between this Nicocles and Pe-riander, the son of Cypselus; as Orontes the Persianresembled Alcmaeon, the son of Amphiaraus, and a La-cedaemonian youth the great Hector. Myrtilas informsus that the young man was crowded to death by themultitudes who came to see him, when that resemblancewas known.Nicocles reigned four months, during which time hedid a thousand injuries 1o the people, and was nearlosing the city to the yEtolians, who formed a schemeto surprise it. Aratus was by this time approaching1 The five exercises of the pentathlon, as we have alreadyobserved, were running, leaping, throwing the dart, boxing,and wrestling.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?236PLUTARCH.to manhood, and great attention was paid him on ac-count of his high birth, and his spirit, in which therewas nothing little or unenterprising, and yet it wasunder the correction of a gravity and solidity of judg-ment much beyond his years. The exiles thereforeconsidered him as their principal resource; and Ni-cocles was not regardless of his motions, but by hisprivate agents observed the measures he was taking.Not that he expected he would embark in so bold anddangerous an enterprise as he did, but he suspectedhis applications to the princes who were the friendsof his father. Indeed, Aratus began in that channel;but when he found that Antigonus, notwithstandinghis promises, put him otf from time to time, and thathis hopes from Egypt and Ptolemy were too remote,he resolved to destroy the tyrant without any foreignassistance.The first persons to whom he communicated his in-tentions were Aristomachus and Ecdelus. Aristoma-chus was an exile from Sicyon, and Ecdelus an Arca-dian banished from Megalopolis. The latter was aphilosopher, who in speculation never lost sight ofpractice, for he had studied at Athens under Arcesilausthe academician.1 As these readily accepted his pro-posal, he applied to the other exiles; a few of whomjoined him, because they were ashamed to give up sopromising a hope; but the greatest part believed it wasonly Aratus' inexperience2 that made him think of sobold an attempt, and endeavored to prevent his pro-ceeding.While he was considering how to seize some post inthe territories of Sicyon, from whence he might prose-- 1 Arcesilaus was the disciple of Crantor, and had esta-blished the Middle Academy.2 He was not yet twenty years old.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.237cute hostilities against the tyrant, a man of Sicyonarrived at Argos, who had escaped out of prison. Hewas brother to Xenocles, one of the exiles; and beingintroduced by him to Aratns, he informed him that thepart of the wall which he had got over was almostlevel with the ground on the inside, as it joined on ahigh rocky part of the city, and that on the outside itwas not so high but that it might be scaled. On thisintelligence Aratus sent two of his servants, Sceuthasand Technon, along with Xenocles, to reconnoitre thewall; for he was resolved, if he could do it secretly,to hazard all on one great effort, rather than lengthenout the war, and publicly engage with a tyrant, whenhe had no resources but those of a private man.Xenocles and his companions, after they had takenthe height of the wall, reported at their return that itwas neither impracticable nor difficult, but that it wasdangerous to attempt it on account of some dogs keptby a gardener, which were little indeed, but at the sametime extremely fierce and furious. Aratus, however,immediately set about the work. It was easy to pro-vide arms without suspicion; for almost every bodywent armed, by reason of the frequent robberies andthe incursions of one people into the territories ofanother. And as to the scaling ladders, Euphranor,who was one of the exiles, and a carpenter by trade,made them publicly; his business screening him fromsuspicion. Each of his friends in Argos, who had nogreat number of men that he could command, furnishedhim with ten : he armed thirty of his own servants, andhired some few soldiers of Xenophilus, who was chiefcaptain of a band of robbers. To the latter it was givenout that the design of their march to Sicyon was tocarry off the king's stud; and several of them werescut before by different ways to the tower of Polygno-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?238PLUTARCH.tus, with orders to wait for him there. Caphesias waslikewise sent with four others in a travelling dress.These were to go in the evening to the gardener's, andpretending to be travellers, get a lodging there; afterwhich they were to confine both him and his dogs: forthat part of the wall was not accessible any other way.The ladders being made to take in pieces, were packedup in corn chests, and sent before in waggons preparedfor that purpose.In the mean time some of the tyrant's spies arrivedat Argos, and it was reported that they were sculkingabout to watch the motions of Aratus. Next morning,therefore, Aratus appeared early with his friends in themarket-place, and talked with them for some time. Hethen went to the gymnasium, and after he had anointedhimself, took with him some young men from thewrestling-ring who used to be of his parties of plea-sure, and returned home. In a little time his servantswere seen in the market-place, some carrying chapletsof flowers, some buying flambeaux, and some in dis-course with the women who used to sing and play atentertainments. These manoeuvres deceived the spies.They laughed, and said to each other, ' Certainly nothingcan be more dastardly than a tyrant, since Nicocles, whois master of so strong a city, and armed with so muchpower, lives in fear of a young man, who wastes thepittance he has to subsist on in exile, in drinking andrevelling even in the day-time.' After these false rea-sonings they retired.Aratus, immediately after he had made his meal, setout for the tower of Polygnotus, and when he had joinedthe soldiers there, proceeded to Nemea, where he dis-closed his real intentions to his whole company. Hav-ing exhorted them to behave like brave men, and pro-mised them great rewards, he gave propitious Apollo??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.239for the word, and then led them forwards towards Si-cyon, governing his march according to the motion ofthe moon, sometimes quickening, and sometimes slack-ening his pace, so as to have the benefit of her light bythe way, and to come to the garden by the wall justafter she was set. There Caphesias met him, and in-formed him that the dogs were let out before he arrived,but that he had secured the gardener. Most of thecompany were greatly dispirited at this account, anddesired Aratus to quit his enterprise; but he en-couraged them by promising to desist, if the dogsshould prove very troublesome. Then he orderedthose who carried the ladders to march before, underthe conduct of Ecdelus and Mnasitheus, and himselffollowed softly. The dogs now began to run aboutand bark violently at Ecdelus and his men; neverthe-less they approached the wall, and planted their lad-ders safe. But as the foremost of them were mounting,the officer who was to be relieved by the morning guardpassed by that way at the sound of bell, with manytorches and much noise. On this the men laid them-selves close to their ladders, and escaped the notice ofthis watch without much difficulty; but when the otherwhich was to relieve it came up, they were in the ut-most danger. However, that too passed by withoutobserving them; after which, Mnasitheus and Ecdelusmounted the wall first, and having secured the wayboth to the right and left, they sent Technon to Aratusto desire him to advance as fast as possible.It was no great distance from the garden to the wall,and to a tower in which was placed a great huntingdog to alarm the guard. But whether he was natu-rally drowsy, or had wearied himself the day before,he did not perceive their entrance. But the gardener'sdogs awaking him by barking below, he began to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?240PLUTARCH.growl; and when Aratus' men passed by the tower,he barked out, so that the whole place resounded withthe noise. Then the sentinel, who kept watch oppositeto the tower, called aloud to the huntsman, and askedhim ' whom the dog barked at so angrily, or whetherany thing new had happened V The huntsman answeredfrom the tower, 'that there was nothing extraordinary,and that the dog was only disturbed at the torches ofthe guards and the noise of the bell.' This encouragedAratus' soldiers more than any thing; for they ima-gined that the huntsman concealed the truth becausehe had a secret understanding with their leader, andthat there were many others in the town who wouldpromote the design. But when the rest of their com-panions came to scale the wall, the danger increased.It appeared to be a long affair, because the laddersshook and swung extremely if they did not mount themsoftly, and one by one; and the time pressed, for thecocks began to crow. The country people, too, whokept the market, were expected to arrive every mo-ment. Aratus, therefore, hastened up himself whenonly forty of his company were on the wall; and whena few more had joined him from below, he put himselfat the head of his men, and marched immediately tothe tyrant's palace, where the main-guard was kept,and where the mercenaries passed the night underarms. Coming suddenly on them, he took them pri-soners without killing one man; and then sent to hisfriends in the town to invite them to come and joinhim. They ran to him from all quarters; and daynow appearing, the theatre was filled with a crowd ofpeople who stood in suspense; for they had onlyheard a rumor, and had no certainty of what was doing,till a herald came and proclaimed it in these words,'Aratus the san of Clinias calls the citizens to liberty.'??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.241Then persuaded that the day they had long expectedwas come, they rushed in multitudes to the palace ofthe tyrant, and set fire to it. The flame was so strongthat it was seen as far as Corinth, and the Corinthianswondering what might he the cause, were on the pointof going to their assistance. Nicocles escaped out ofthe city by some subterranean conduits; and the sol-diers having helped the Sicyonians to extinguish thefire, plundered his palace. Nor did Aratus hinderthem from taking this booty; but the rest of the wealthwhich the several tyrants had amassed he bestowed onthe citizens.There was not so much as one man killed or woundedin this action, either of Aratus' party or of the enemy;fortune so conducting the enterprise, as not to sully itwith the blood of one citizen,. Aratus recalled eightypersons who had been banished by Nicocles, and ofthose that had been expelled by the former tyrants notless than five hundred. The latter had long been forcedto wander from place to place, some of them full fiftyyears; consequently most of them returned in a desti-tute condition. They were now, indeed, restored totheir ancient possessions; but their going into housesand lands which had found new masters laid Aratusunder great difficulties. Without, he saw Antigonusenvying the liberty which the city had recovered, and.laying schemes to enslave it again, and within he foundnothing but faction and disorder. He therefore judgedit best in this critical situation to join it to the Achaeanleague. As the people of Sicyon were Dorians, theyhad no objection to being called a part of the Achaeancommunity, or to their form of government. It mustbe acknowleged, indeed, that the Achaeans at that timewere no very great or powerful people. Their townswere generally small, their lands neither extensive norPLUT. VoL. VII. Q??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?242PLUTARCH.fertile; and they had no harbors on their coasts, thesea for the most part entering the land in rocky andimpracticable creeks. Yet none gave a better proofthan this people that the power of Greece is invinci-ble, while good order and harmony prevail amongsther members, and she has an able general to lead herarmies. In fact, these very Achaeans, though but in-considerable in comparison of the Greeks in their flo-rishing times, or, to speak more properly, not equallingin their whole community the strength of one respect-able city in the period we are on, yet by good counselsand unanimity, and by hearkening to any man of supe-rior virtue, instead of envying his merit, not only keptthemselves free amidst so many powerful states andtyrants, but saved great part of Greece, or rescued itfrom chains.As to his character, Aratus had something very po-pular in his behavior; he had a native greatness ofmind, and was more attentive to the public interestthan to his own. He was an implacable enemy to ty-rants; but with respect to others he made the good ofhis country the sole rule of his friendship or opposi-tion. So that he seems rather to have been a mildand moderate enemy, than a zealous friend; his re-gards or aversions to particular men varying as the oc-casions of the commonwealth dictated. In short, na-tions and great communities with one voice re-echoedthe declaration of the assemblies and theatres, thatAratus loved none but good men. With regard toopen wars and pitched battles, he was indeed diffidentand timorous; but in gaining a point by stratagem, insurprising cities and tyrants, there could not be anabler man.To this cause we must assign it, that after he hadexerted great courage, and succeeded in enterprises??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.243that were looked on as desperate; through too muchfear and caution he gave up others that were morepracticable, and not of less importance: for, as amongstanimals there are some that can see very clearly in thenight, and yet are next to blind in the day-time, thedryness of the eye, and the subtilty of its humora, notsuffering them to hear the light; so there is in man akind of courage and understanding, which is easilydisconcerted in open dangers and encounters, and yetresumes a happy boldness in secret enterprises. Thereason of this inequality in men, of parts otherwise ex-cellent, is their wanting the advantages of philosophy.Virtue is in them the product of nature, unassisted byscience, like the fruits of the forest, which come with-out the least cultivation. Of this there are many ex-amples to be found.After Aratus had engaged himself and his city inthe Achaean league, he served in the cavalry, and thegenerals highly esteemed him for his ready obedience:for though he had contributed so much to the commoncause by his name and by the forces of Sicyon, yet theAchaean commander, whether of Dima, or Tritta, orsome more inconsiderable town, found him always astractable as the meanest soldier.When the king of Egypt made him a present oftwenty-five talents, he received it, indeed, but laid outthe whole on his fellow-citizens; relieving the neces-sitous with part of it, and ransoming such as were pri-soners with the rest.But the exiles whom Aratus had recalled would notbe satisfied with any thing less than the restitution oftheir estates, and gave the present possessors so muchtrouble, that the city was in danger of being ruined bysedition. In this extremity he saw no resource exceptin the generosity of Ptolemy, and therefore determined??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?244PLUTARCH.to take a voyage to Egypt, and apply to him for asmuch money as would reconcile all parties. Accord-ingly he set sail for Methone above the promontory ofMalea, in hopes of taking the shortest passage: but acontrary wind sprang up, and the seas ran so high thatthe pilot, unable to bear up against them, changed hiscourse, and with much difficulty got into Adria, a townwhich was in the enemy's hands; for Antigonus had agarrison there. To avoid this imminent danger helanded, and, with only one friend, named Timanthes,making his way as far as possible from the sea, soughtfor shelter in a place well covered with wood, in whichhe and his companion spent a very disagreeable night.Soon after he had left the ship the governor of the fortcame and inquired for him; but he was deceived byAratus' servants, who were instructed to say he hadmade off in another vessel to Euboea. However, hedetained the ship and servants as lawful prize. Ara-tus spent some days in this distressful situation, whereone while he looked out to reconnoitre the coast, andanother while kept himself concealed; but at lastby good fortune a Roman ship happened to put in nearthe place of his retreat. The ship was bound for Sy-ria, and Aratus prevailed on the master to land him inCaria: but he had equal dangers to combat at sea inthis as in his former passages. And when he was inCaria he had a voyage to take to Egypt, which hefound a very long one. On his arrival however he wasimmediately admitted to an audience by the king, whohad long been inclined to serve him on account of thepaintings which he used to compliment him with fromGreece: for Aratus, who had a taste for these things, wasalways collecting for him the pieces of the best masters,particularly those of Pamphilus and Melanthus: forSicyon was famed for the cultivation of the arts, par-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS. 245ticularly the art of painting; and it was believed thatthere only the ancient elegance was preserved withoutthe least corruption. Hence it was that the greatApelles, at a time when he was much admired, wentto Sicyon, and gave the painters a talent, not so muchfor any improvement he expected, as for the reputa-tion of having been of their school. In consequenceof which, Aratus, when he restored Sicyon to liberty,and destroyed the portraits of the tyrants, hesitated along time on coming to that of Aristratus; for it wasthe united work of the disciples of Melanthus, whohad represented him standing in a chariot of victory,and the pencil of Apelles had contributed to the per-formance, as we are informed by Polemo the geo-grapher.The piece was so admirable that Aratus could notavoid feeling the art that was displayed in it; but hishatred of tyrants soon overruled that feeling, and heordered it to he defaced. Nealces the painter, whowas honored with his friendship, is said to have im-plored him with tears to spare that piece: and whenhe found him inflexible, said, ' Aratus, continue yourwar with tyrants, but not with every thing that belongsto them. Spare at least the chariot and the victory,and I shall soon make Aristratus vanish.' Aratus gavehis consent, and Nealces defaced the figure of Aristra-tus, but did not venture to put any thing in its placeexcept a palm-tree. We are told however that therewas still a dim appearance of the feet of Aristratus atthe bottom of the chariot.This taste for painting had already recommendedAratus to Ptolemy, and his conversation gained somuch farther on him, that he made him a present of ahundred and fifty talents for the city; forty of whichhe sent with him on his return to Peloponnesus, and??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?216PLUTARCH.he remitted the rest in the several portions and at thetimes that he had fixed. It was a glorious thing toapply so much money to the use of his fellow-citizens,at a time when it was common to see generals anddemagogues, for much smaller sums which they re-ceived of the kings, to oppress, enslave, and betray tothem the cities where they were born. But it was stillmore glorious, by this money to reconcile the poor tothe rich, to secure the commonwealth, and establishharmony amongst all ranks of people.His moderation in the exercise of the great powerhe was vested with was truly admirable: for, beingappointed sole arbitrator of the claims of the exiles, herefused to act alone, and joined fifteen of the citizensin the commission; with whose assistance, after muchlabor and attention, he established peace and friend-ship amongst the people. Besides the honors whichthe whole community conferred on him for these ser-vices, the exiles in particular erected his statue inbrass, and put on it this inscription:Far as the pillars which Alcides rear'd,Thy counsels and thy deeds in arms for GreeceThe tongue of Fame has told. But we, Aratus,We wanderers whom thou hast restored to Sicyon,Will sing thy justice; place thy pleasing form,As a benignant power, with gods that save:For thou hast given that dear equality,And all the laws which favoring Heaven might give.Aratus, after such important services, was placedabove envy amongst his people. But king Antigonus,uneasy at the progress he made, was determined eitherto gain him, or to make him obnoxious to Ptolemy.He therefore gave him extraordinary marks of his re-gard, though he wanted no such advances. Amongstothers, this was one. On occasion of a sacrifice which??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.he offered at Corinth, he sent portions of it to Aratus atSicyon; and at the feast which ensued, he said in fullassembly, 'I at first looked on this young Sicyonianonly as a man of a liberal and patriotic spirit, but now Ifind that he is also a good judge of the characters andaffairs of princes. At first he overlooked us for thesake of foreign hopes, and the admiration he had con-=ceived from stories of the wealth, the elephants, fleets,and the splendid court of Egypt; but since he has beenon the spot, and seen that all this pomp is merely atheatrical thing, he is come over intirely to us. I havereceived him to my bosom, and am determined to em-ploy him in all my affairs. I desire therefore you willall consider him as a friend.' The envious and male-volent took occasion from this speech to lay heavycharges against Aratus in their letters to Ptolemy ; in-somuch, that the king sent one of his agents to tax himwith his infidelity. Thus, like passionate lovers, thecandidates for the first favors of kings dispute themwith the utmost envy and malignity.After Aratus was first chosen general of the Achaeanleague, he ravaged Locris, which lies on the other sideof the gulf of Corinth, and committed the same spoilin the territories of Calydon. It was his intention toassist the Boeotians with ten thousand men; but hecame too late; they were already defeated hy the/Etolians in an action near Chaeronea, in which Abaso-critus their general and a thousand of their men wereslain.The year following Aratus, being elected generalagain, undertook that celebrated enterprise of recover-ing the citadel of Corinth; in which he consulted notonly the benefit of Sicyon and Achaia, but of Greece ingeneral; for such would be the expulsion of the Mace-donian garrison, which was nothing better than a ty-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?248 PLUTARCH.rant's yoke. As Chares, the Athenian general, on abattle which he won of the king of Persia's lieutenants,wrote to the people that he had gained a victory whichwas sister to that of Marathon; sq we may justly callthis exploit of Aratus sister to that of Pelopidas theTheban, and Thrasybulus the Athenian, when theykilled the tyrants. There is indeed this difference,that Aratus' enterprise was not against Greeks, butagainst a foreign power, which is a difference much tohis honor: for the isthmus of Corinth, which separatesthe two seas, joins our continent to that of Peloponne-sus; and when there is a good garrison in the citadelof Corinth, which stands on a high hill in the middle,at an equal distance from the two continents, it cuts offthe communication with those within the isthmus, sothat there can be no passage for troops, nor any kindof commerce, either by sea or land. In short, he thatis possessed of it is master of all Greece. The youngerPhilip of Macedon therefore was not jesting, but spokea serious truth, when he called the city of Corinth thefetters of Greece. Hence the place was always muchcontended for, particularly by kings and princes.Antigonus' passion, for it was not less than that oflove in its greatest madness; and it was the chief ob-ject of his cares to find a method of taking it by sur-prise, when the hopes of succeeding by open forcefailed. When Alexander, who was master of the cita-del, died of poison, that is said to have been given himthrough Antigonus' means, his wife NicKa, into whosehands it then fell, guarded it with great care. ButAntigonus, hoping to gain it by means of his son De-metrius, sent him to make her an offer of his hand. Itwas a flattering prospect to a woman somewhat ad-vanced in years to have such a young prince for herhusband. Accordingly Antigonus caught her by this??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.bait. However, she did not give up the citadel, butguarded it with the same attention as before. Antigo-nus, pretending to take no notice, celebrated the mar-riage with sacrifices and shows, and spent whole daysin feasting the people, as if his mind had been intirelytaken up with mirth and pleasure. One day, whenAmoebeus was to sing in the theatre, he conductedNicaea in person on her way to the entertainment in alitter set out with royal ornaments. She was elatedwith the honor, and had not the least thought of whatwas to ensue. But when they came to the point whichbore towards the citadel, he ordered the men that borethe litter to proceed to the theatre; and bidding fare-well to Amoebeus and the wedding, he walked up tothe fort much faster than could have been expectedfrom a man of his years. Finding the gate barred, beknocked with his staff, and commanded the guard toopen it. Surprised at the sight of him, they complied,and thus he became master of the place. He was notable to contain his joy on that occasion: he drank andrevelled in the open streets, and in the market-place,attended with female musicians, and crowned withflowers. When we see a man of his age, who had ex-perienced such changes of fortune, carouse and indulgehis transports, embracing and saluting every one hemeets, we must acknowlege that unexpected joy raisesgreater tumults in an unbalanced mind, and oversets itsooner, than either fear or sorrow.Antigonus having in this manner made himself mas-ter of the citadel, garrisoned it with men in whom heplaced the greatest confidence, and made the philoso-pher Persaeus governor. Whilst Alexander was living,Aratus had cast his eye on it, as an excellent acquisi-tion for his country; but, the Achaeatis admitting Alex-ander into the league, he did not prosecute his design.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.Afterwards, however, a new occasion presented itself.There were in Corinth four brothers, natives of Syria;one of which, named Diocles, served as a soldier inthe garrison. The other three, having stolen some ofthe king's money, retired to Sicyon, where they ap-plied to one jEgias, a banker, whom Aratus used toemploy. Part of this gold they immediately disposedof to him, and Erginus, one of the three, at severalvisits, privately changed the rest. Thus an acquaint-ance was formed between him and jEgias, who one daydrew him into discourse about the garrison. Erginustold him, that as he often went up to visit his brother,he had observed on the steepest side a small windingpath cut in the rock, and leading to a part of the wallmuch lower than the rest. On this jEgias said, withan air of raillery, 'Why will you, my good friend,purloin the king's treasures for so inconsiderable asum, when you might raise yourself to opulence byone hour's service? Do not you know, that if you aretaken, you will as certainly be put to death for thistrifling theft as if you had betrayed the citadel V Er-ginus laughed at the hint, and promised to sound hisbrother Diocles on the subject; for he could not, hesaid, place much confidence in the other two.A few days after this he returned, and had an inter-view with Aratus; at which it was agreed that heshould conduct him to a part of the wall that was notabove fifteen feet high, and that both he and his bro-ther Diocles should assist him in the rest of the enter-prise. Aratus, on his part, promised to give themsixty talents if he succeeded ; and in case they failed,and yet returned all safe to Sicyon, he engaged thateach of them should have a house and one talent. Asit was necessary that the sixty talents should be depo-sited in the hands of /Egias, for the satisfaction of Er-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.251ginus, and Aratus neither had such a sum nor chose toborrow it, because that might create some suspicion ofhis intentions, he took most of his plate and his wife'sjewels, and pledged them with jEgias for the money.Such was the greatness of his soul, such his passionfor high achievements, that knowing that Phocion andEpaminondas were accounted the justest and most ex-cellent of all the Greeks, for refusing great presents,and not sacrificing virtue to money, he ascended a stephigher. He privately gave money; he embarked hisestate in an enterprise, where he alone was to exposehimself for the many, who were not even apprised ofhis intentions in their favor. Who then can sufficientlyadmire his magnanimity? Who is there, even in ourdays, that is not fired with an ambition to imitate theman who purchased so much danger at so great an ex-pense, who pledged the most valuable of his goods forthe sake of being introduced by night amongst ene-mies, where he was to fight for his life, without anyother equivalent than the hope of performing a greataction?This undertaking, which was dangerous enough initself, became more so by a mistake which they com-mitted in the beginning. Technon, one of Aratus'servants, of whom we have already spoken, was sentbefore to Diocles, that they might reconnoitre the walltogether. He had never seen Diocles, but he thoughthe should easily know him by the marks which Ergi-nus had given, which were, curled hair, a swarthy com-plexion, and want of beard. He went therefore to theplace appointed, and sat down before the city at apoint called Ornis, to wait for Erginus and his brotherDiocles. In the mean time Dionysius, their eldestbrother, who knew nothing of the affair, happened tocome up. He greatly resembled Diocles; and Tech-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?252PLUTARCH.non, struck with his appearance, which answered thedescription, asked him if he had any connexion withErginus. He said he was his brother: on which Tech-non, thoroughly persuaded that he was speaking toDiocles, without asking his name, or waiting for anytoken, gave him his hand, mentioned to him the cir-cumstances of the appointment with Erginus, and askedhim many questions about it. Dionysius availed him-self very artfully of the mistake, agreed to every point,and returning towards the city, held him in discoursewithout giving him the least cause of suspicion. Theywere now near the town, and he was on the point ofseizing Technon, when by good fortune Erginus metthem, and perceiving how much his friend was imposedon, and the great danger he was in, beckoned to himto make his escape. Accordingly they both fled, andgot safe to Aratus. However, Aratus did not give uphis hopes, but immediately sent Erginus to Dionysius,to offer him money, and intreat him to be silent; inwhich he succeeded so well, that he brought Dionysiusalong with him to Aratus. When they had him intheir hands, they did not think it safe to part with him:they bound and set a guard on him in a small apart-ment, and then prepared for their principal design.When every thing was ready, Aratus ordered histroops to pass the night under arms; and taking withhim four hundred picked men, few of whom knew thebusiness they were going about, he led them to thegates of the city near the temple of Juno. It was thenabout the middle of the summer, the moon at the full,and the night without the least cloud. As their armsglittered with the reflection of the moon, they wereafraid that circumstance would discover them to thewatch. The foremost of them were now near the walls,when clouds arose from the sea, and covered the city??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS,263and its environs. The men sat down and took off theirshoes, that they might make the less noise, and mountthe ladders without danger of slipping. But Erginustook with him seven young men in the hahit of travel-lers, and getting unobserved to the gate, killed thekeeper and the guard that were with him. At the sametime the ladders were applied to the walls, and Aratus,with a hundred men, got over with the utmost expedi-tion. The rest he commanded to follow in the bestmanner they could, and having immediately drawn nphis ladders, he marched at the head of his party throughthe town towards the citadel, confident of success, be-cause he was not discovered.As they advanced they met four of the watch with alight, which gave Aratus a full and timely view ofthem, while he and his company could not be seen bythem, because the moon was still overclouded. Hetherefore retired under some ruined walls, and lay inambush for them. Three out of the four were killed;but the other, after he had received a cut on his head,ran off, crying that the enemy was in the city. Alittle after, the trumpets sounded, and the whole townwas in motion on the alarm. The streets were filledwith people running up and down; and so many lightswere brought out, both in the lower town and in thecitadel, that the whole was illuminated, and a confusednoise was heard from every quarter. Aratus went on,notwithstanding, and attempted the way up the rock.He proceeded in a slow and difficult manner at first,because he had lost the path which lay deep beneaththe craggy parts of the rock, and led to the wall by agreat variety of windings and turnings. But at thatmoment the moon, as it were by miracle, is said tohave dispersed the clouds, and thrown a light on themost obscure part of the path, which continued till he??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?254 PLUTARCH.reached the wall at the place he wanted. Then theclouds gathered afresh, and she hid her face again.In the mean time the three hundred men whom Ara-tus had left by the temple of Juno had entered the city,which they found all in an alarm, and full of lights. Asthey could not find the way Aratus had taken, nor tracehim in the least, they screened themselves under theshady side of a high rock, and waited there in greatperplexity and distress. By this time Aratus was en-gaged with the enemy on the ramparts of the citadel,and they could distinguish the cries of combatants; butas the noise was echoed by the neighboring mountains,it was uncertain from whence it first came. Whilst theywere in doubt what way to turn, Archelaus, who com-manded the king's forces, took a considerable corps,and began to ascend the hill with loud shouts, andtrumpets sounding, in order to attack Aratus' rear.He passed the party of the three hundred without per-ceiving them ; but he was no sooner gone by, than theyrose as from an ambuscade, fell on him, and killing thefirst they attacked, so terrified the rest, and even Arche-laus himself, that they turned their backs, and werepursued till they intirely dispersed.When the party was thus victorious, Erginus came tothem from their friends above, to inform them that Ara-tus was engaged with the enemy, who defended them-selves with great vigor; that the wall itself was dis-puted, and that their general wanted immediate assist-ance. They bade him lead them to the place thatmoment; and as they ascended, they discovered them-selves by their shouts. Thus their friends were en-couraged, and the reflection of the full moon on theirarms made their numbers appear greater to their ene-mies, on account of the length of the path. In theechoes of the night, too, the shouts seemed to come??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.from a much larger party. At last they joined Aratus,and with a united effort beat off the enemy, and tookpost on the wall. At break of day the citadel was theirown, and the first rays of the sun did honor to theirvictory. At the same time the rest of Aratus' forcesarrived from Sicyon: the Corinthians readily openedtheir gates to them, and assisted in taking the king'ssoldiers prisoners.When he thought his victory complete, he wentdown from the citadel to the theatre, an innumerablemultitude crowding to see him, and to hear the speechthat he would make to the Corinthians. After he haddisposed the Achaeans on each side of the avenues tothe theatre, he came from behind the scenes, and madehis appearance in his armor. But he was so muchchanged by labor and watching, that the joy and ele-vation which his success might have inspired wasweighed down by the extreme fatigue of his spirits.On his appearance the people immediately began toexpress their high sense of his services; on which hetook his spear in his right hand, and leaning his bodyand one knee a little against it, remained a long timein that posture silent, to receive their plaudits and ac-clamations, their praises of his virtue, and complimentson his good fortune.After their first transports were over, and he per-ceived that he could be heard, he summoned thestrength he had left, and made a speech in the name ofthe Aehaeans suitable to the great event, persuaded theCorinthians to join the league, and delivered to themthe keys of their city, which they had not been mastersof since the time of Philip. As to the generals ofAntigonus, he set Archelaus, who was his prisoner,free; but he put Theophrastus to death, because herefused to leave Corinth. Persa;us, on the taking of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?256PLUTARCH.the citadel, made his escape to Cenchreae. Some timeafter, when he was amusing himself with disputationsin philosophy, and some person advanced this posi-tion, ' None but the wise man is fit to be a general'--'It is true,' said he, ' and the gods know it, that thismaxim of Zeno's once pleased me more th,an all therest; but I have changed my opinion, since I wasbetter taught by the young Sicyonian.' This circum-stance concerning Persaeus we have from many his-torians.Aratus immediately seized the Heraeum, or templeof Juno, and the harbor of Lechaeum, in which he tooktwenty-five of the king's ships. He took also five hun-dred horses, and four hundred Syrians, whom he sold.The Achaeans put a garrison of four hundred men inthe citadel of Corinth, which was strengthened withfifty dogs, and as many men to keep them.The Romans were great admirers of Philopcemen,and called him ' the last of the Greeks;' not allowingthat there was any great man amongst that people afterhim. But, in my opinion, this exploit of Aratus is thelast which the Greeks have to boast of. Indeed, whe-ther we consider the boldness of the enterprise, or thegood fortune which attended it, it equals the greateston record. The same appears from its immediateconsequences; the Megarensians revolted from Anti-gonus, and joined Aratus; the Trcezenians and Epi-daurians, too, ranged themselves on the side of theAchaeans.In his first expedition beyond the bounds of Pelo-ponnesus, Aratus overran Attica, and passing into Sala-mis, ravaged that island; so that the Achaean forcesthought themselves escaped as it were, out of prison,and followed him wherever he pleased. On this occa-sion he set the Athenian prisoners free without ransom,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?? ARATUS.by which he sowed amongst them the first seeds of de-fection from the Macedonians. He brought Ptolemylikewise into the Achaean league, by procuring him thedirection of the war both by sea and land. Such washis influence over the Achsaans, that, as the laws didnot allow him to be general two years together, theyappointed him every other year; and in action, as wellas counsel, he had always in effect the chief command:for they saw it was not wealth, or glory, or the friend-ship of kings, or the advantage of his own country, orany thing else, that he preferred to the promotion ofthe Achaaan power. He thought that cities in theirsingle capacity were weak, and that they could notprovide for their defence without uniting and bindingthemselves together for the common good. As themembers of the body cannot be nourished, or live, butby their connexion with each other, and when sepa-rated pine and decay; so cities perish when they breakoff from the community to which they belonged; and,on the contrary, gather strength and power, by he-coming parts of some great body, and enjoying thefruits of the wisdom of the whole.Observing therefore that all the bravest people inhis neighborhood lived according to their own laws, itgave him pain to see the Argives in slavery, and hetook measures for destroying their tyrant Aristo-machus. Besides, he was ambitious for restoring Ar-gos to its liberty, as a reward for the education it hadafforded him, and to unite it to the Achaean league.Without much difficulty he found them hardy enoughto undertake the commission, at the head of whom wasiEschylus and Charimenes the diviner; but they hadno swords; for they were forbidden to keep arms, andthe tyrant had laid great penalties on such as shouldbe found to have any in their possession. To supplyPLUT. VoL. VII. , - , It??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PIUTARCH.this defect, Aratus provided several daggers for themat Corinth, and having sewed them up in the pack-saddles of horses that were to carry some ordinarywares, they were by that stratagem conveyed to Argos.In the mean time Charimenes taking in another of hisfriends as a partner, jEschylus and his associates wereso much provoked, that they cast him off, and deter-mined to do the business by themselves. But Chari-menes perceiving their intention, in resentment of theflight, informed the tyrant of their purpose, when theywere set out to put it in execution. On which theyfled with precipitation, and most of them escaped toCorinth.It was not long, however, before Aristomachus wasdespatched by one of his own servants; but before anymeasures could be taken to guard against tyranny,Aristippus took the reins, and proved a worse tyrantthan the former. Aratus, indeed, marched imme-diately to Argos with all the Acbaeans that were ableto bear arms, in order to support the citizens, whomhe doubted not to find ready to assert their liberty.But they had been long accustomed to the yoke, andwere willing to be slaves; insomuch, that not one ofthem joined him, and he returned with the inconve-nience of bringing a charge on the Achaeans, that theyhad committed acts of hostility in time of full peace:for they were summoned to answer for this injusticebefore the Mantineans.Aratus did not appear at the trial, and Aristippusbeing the prosecutor, got a fine of thirty minea laid onthe Achseans. As that tyrant both hated and fearedAratus, he meditated his death, and Antigonus enteredinto the scheme. They had their emissaries in almostevery quarter, watching their opportunity. But thesurest guard for a prince, or other chief, is the sincereaffection of his people: for when the commons and the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.nobility, instead of fearing their chief magistrate, fearfor him, he sees with many eyes, and hears with manyears. And here I cannot but leave a little the threadof my story, to describe that manner of life whichAristippus was under a necessity of leading, if hechose to keep in his hands that despotism, that stateof an arbitrary sovereign, which is commonly so muchenvied, and admired as the highest pitch of happiness.This tyrant, who had Antigonus for his ally, whokept so large a body-guard, and had not left one of hisenemies alive in the city, would not suffer his guardsto do duty in the palace, but only in the vestibule andporticos about it. When supper was over, he sentaway all the servants, barred the door of the hall him-self, and with his mistress crept through a trap-doorinto a small chamber above. On that door he placedhis bed, and slept there as a person in his anxiousstate of mind may be supposed to sleep. The ladderby which he went up his mistress' mother took away,and secured in another room till morning, when shebrought it again, and called up this wonderful prince,who crept like a reptile out of his hole. WhereasAratus, who acquired a lasting command, not by forceof arms, but by virtue, and in a way agreeable to thelaws; who made his appearance without fear in a plainvest and cloak, and always showed himself an enemyto tyrants, left an illustrious posterity among theGreeks, which flourishes at this day. But of thosewho have seized castles, who have maintained guards,who have fenced themselves with arms, and gates, andbarricadoes, how few can we reckon up that have not,like timorous hares, died a violent death! and not oneof them has left a family, or even a monument to pre-serve his memory with honor.Aratus made many attempts, both private and open,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.to pull down Aristippus, and rescue Argos but of hishands ; but he always miscarried. Once he applied hisscaling-ladders, and ascended the wall with a smallparty, in spite of the extreme danger that threatenedMm. He even succeeded so far as to kill the guardsthat came to oppose him: but when day appeared, andthe tyrant attacked him on all sides, the people of Ar-gos, as if he had not been fighting for their liberty,and they were only presiding at the Nemean games, satvery impartial spectators of the action, without makingthe least motion to assist. Aratus defended himselfwith great courage, and though he had his thigh runthrough with a spear, maintained his post all dayagainst such superior numbers. Would his strengthhave permitted him to continue the combat in the nighttoo, he must have carried his point; for the tyrantnow thought of nothing but making his escape, andhad already sent most of his treasure on board hisships. However, as no one gave Aratus intelligence ?of this circumstance, as his water failed, and his wounddisqualified him from any farther efforts, he called offhis men and retired.He now despaired of succeeding by way of surprise,and therefore openly entered the territories of Argoswith his army, and committed great devastations. Hefought a pitched battle with Aristippus near the riverChares, and on that occasion he was censured for de-serting the action, and letting the victory slip out ofhis hands: for one part of his army had clearly theadvantage, and was advancing fast in' the pursuit, when,-he, without being overpowered where he acted in per-son, merely out of fear and diffidence, retired in greatdisorder to his camp. His men, on their return from thepursuit, expressed their indignation at being preventedfrom erecting the trophy, after they had put the enemy??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?, ARATUS.261to flight, and killed many more men than they had lost.Aratus, wounded with these reproaches, determinedto risk a second battle for the trophy. Accordingly,after his men had rested one day, he drew them outthe next. But finding that the enemy's numbers wereincreased, and that their troops were in much higherspirits than before, he durst not venture on an action,but retreated, after having obtained a truce to carry off,the dead. However, by his engaging manners, and hisabilities in the administration, he obviated the conse-quences of this error, and added the city of Cleonae tothe Achaean league. In Cleonae he caused the Nemeangames to be celebrated; for. he thought that city hadthe best and most ancient claim to them. The peopleof Argos likewise exhibited them; and on this occa-sion the freedom and security which had been the pri-vilege of the champions, were first violated. TheAchaeans considered as enemies all that had repairedto the games at Argos, and having seized them as theypassed through their territories, sold them for slaves.So violent and implacable was their general's hatredof tyrants. . .Not long after, Aratus had intelligence that Aristip-pus had a design on Cleonae, but that he was afraid ofhim, because he then resided at Corinth, which wasvery near Cleonae. In this case he assembled his forcesby proclamation, and having ordered them to take pro-visions for several days, marched to Cenchreae. Bythis manoeuvre he hoped to bring Aristippus againstCleonae, as supposing him at a distance; and it hadits effect. The tyrant immediately set out from Ar-gos with his army. But it was no sooner dark, thanAratus returned from Cenchreae to Corinth, and hav-ing placed guards in all the roads, led on the Achaeans,who followed him in such good order, and with so??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.much celerity and pleasure, that they not only madetheir inarch, hut entered Cleonae that night, and putthemselves in order of battle; nor did Aristippus gainthe least knowlege of this morement.Next morning at break of day the gates were opened,the trumpet sounded, and Aratus advancing at fullspeed, and with all the alarm of war, fell on the enemy,and soon routed them. Then he went on the pursuit,particularly that way which he imagined Aristippusmight take; for the country had several outlets. Thepursuit was continued as far as Mycenw, and the tyrant,as Dinias tells us, was overtaken and killed by a Cre-tan named Tragiscus; and of his army there wereabove fifteen hundred slain. Aratus, though he badgained this important victory without the loss of oneman, could not make himself master of Argos, nor de-liver it from slavery; for Agias and young Aristo-machus entered it with the king of Macedon's troops,and held it in subjection.This action silenced in a great measure the calumnyof the enemy, and put a stop to the insolent scoffs ofthose, who, to flatter the tyrants, had not scrupled tosay, that whenever the Achaean general prepared forbattle, his bowels lost their retentive faculty; thatwhen the trumpet sounded, his eyes grew dim, andhis head giddy; and that when he had given the word,he used to ask his lieutenants, and other officers, whatfarther need there could be of him, since the die wascast, and whether he might not retire, and wait theevent of the day at some distance. These reports badprevailed so much, that the philosophers, in their in-quiries in the schools, whether the palpitation of theheart and change of color on the appearance of dan-ger, were arguments of cowardice, or only of somenatural defect, some coldness in the constitution? used??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATU8.always to quote Aratus as an excellent general, whoyet was always subject to these emotions on occasionsOf a battle.After he had destroyed Aristippus, he sought meansto depose Lysiades the Megalopolitan, who had as-sumed the supreme power in his native city. Thisman had something generous in his nature, and wasnot insensible to true honor. He had not, like mostother tyrants, committed this injustice out of a love oflicentious pleasure, or from a motive of avarice; butincited, when very young, by a passion for glory, andunadvisedly believing the false and vain accounts ofthe wondrous happiness of arbitrary power, he hadmade it his business to usurp it. However, he soonfelt it a heavy burden; and being at once desirous togain the happiness which Aratus enjoyed, and to de-liver himself from the fear of his intriguing spirit, heformed the noblest resolution that can be conceived,which was first to deliver himself from the hatred,the fears, and the guards that encompassed him, andthen to bestow the greatest blessing on his country.In consequence hereof he sent for Aratus, laid downthe authority he had assumed, and joined the cityto the Achaean league. The Achaeans, charmed withhis noble spirit, thought it not too great a complistent to elect him general. He was no sooner ap-pointed than he discovered an ambition to raise hisname above that of Aratus, and was by that meansled to several unnecessary attempts, particularly todeclare war against the Lacedaemonians. Aratus en-deavored to prevent it, but his opposition was thoughtto proceed from envy. Lysiades was chosen general asecond time, though Aratus exerted all his interest toget that appointment for another; for, as we have al-ready observed, he had the command himself onlyevery other year. Lysiades was fortunate enough to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?2C4PLUTARCH.gain that commission a third time, enjoying it alter-nately with Aratus. But at last, avowing himself hisenemy, and often accusing him to the Achaeans in full-council, that people cast him off: for he appeared withonly an assumed character to contend against real andsincere virtue. yEsop tells us, 'that the cuckoo oneday asked the little birds why they avoided her; andthey answered, it was because they feared she wouldat last prove a hawk.' In like manner it happened to-Lysiades. It was suspected that, as he had been oncea tyrant, his laying down his power was not quite avoluntary thing, and that he would be glad to take thefirst opportunity to resume it.Aratus acquired new glory in the war with the JEto-lians. The Achaeans pressed him to engage them onthe confines of Megara; and Agis, king of the Lace-daemonians, who attended with an army, joined hisinstances to theirs; but he would not consent. Theyreproached him with want of spirit, with cowardice;they, tried what the weapons of ridicule could do; buthe bore all their attacks with patience, and would notsacrifice the real good of the community to the fear ofseeming disgrace. On this principle he suffered thejEtolians to pass Mount Gerania, and to enter Pelo-ponnesus without the least resistance. But when hefound that in their march they had seized Pellene, hewas no longer the same man. Without the least de-lay, without waiting till all his forces were assembled,he advanced with those he had at hand against theenemy, who were much weakened by their late acqui-sition; for it had occasioned the utmost disorder and*misrule. They had no sooner entered the city thanthe private men dispersed themselves in the houses*and began to scramble and fight for the booty, whilethe generals and other officers seized the wives anddaughters of the inhabitants, and each put his helmet)??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS* 265on the head of his prize, as a mark to whom she be-longed, and to prevent her coming into the hands ofanother.While they were thus employed, news was broughtthat Aratus was at hand, and ready to fall on them.The consternation was such as might be expectedamongst men in extreme disorder. Before they wereall apprised of their danger, those that were about thegates and in the suburbs had skirmished a few mo-ments with the Achaeans, and were put to flight: andthe precipitation with which they fled greatly distressedthose who had assembled to support them. Duringthis confusion one of the captives, daughter to Epige-thes, a person of great eminence in Pellene, who wasremarkable for her beauty and majestic mien, wasseated in the temple of Diana, where the officer whoseprize she was had placed her, after having put his hel-met, which was adorned with three plumes of feathers,on her head. This lady, hearing the noise and tumult,ran out suddenly to see what was the cause. As shestood at the door of the temple, and looked down onthe combatants, with the helmet still on her head, sheappeared to the citizens a figure more than human, andthe enemy took her for a deity; which struck the latterwith such terror and astonishment, that they were nolonger able to use their arms.The Pelleneans tell us, that the statue of the goddessstands commonly untouched ; and that when the priest-ess moves it out of the temple, in order to carry it inprocession, none dare look it in the face; but, on thecontrary, they turn away their eyes with great care;for it is not only a terrible and dangerous sight tomankind, but its look renders the trees barren, andblasts the fruits where it passes. They add, that thepriestess carried it out on this occasion; and always??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.turning the face directly towards the jEtolians, filledthem with horror, and deprived them of their senses.But Aratus, in his Commentaries, makes no mention ofany such circumstance; he only says, that he put thejEtolians to flight, and entering the town with the fu-gitives, dislodged them by dint of sword, and killedSeven hundred. This action was one of the most cele-brated in history: Timanthes the painter gave a verylively and excellent representation of it.However, as many powerful states were combiningagainst the Achaeans, Aratus hastened to make peaceWith the ^Etolians, which he not only effected with theassistance of Pantaleon, one of the most powerful menamongst them, but likewise entered into an allianceoffensive and defensive. He had a strong desire torestore Athens to its liberty, and exposed himself tothe severest censures of the Achteans, by attemptingto surprise the Piraeus, while there was a truce sub-sisting between them and the Macedonians. Aratus,indeed, in his Commentaries, denies the fact, and laysthe blame on Erginus, with whom he took the citadelof Corinth. He says it was the peculiar scheme ofErginus to attempt that port; that, his ladder break-ing, he miscarried, and was pursued; and that, to savehimself, be often called on Aratus, as if present; bywhich artifice he deceived the enemy, and escaped.But this defence of his wants probability to support it.It is not likely that Erginus, a private man, a Syrian,would have formed a design of such consequence, with-out having Aratus at the bead of it, to supply him withtroops, and to point out the opportunity for the attack.Nay, Aratus proved the same against himself, by mak-ing not only two or three, but many more attempts onthe Piraeus. Like a person violently in love, his mis-carriages did not prevail on him to desist; for, as his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.hopes were disappointed only by the failure perhaps ofa single circumstance, and he was always within a lit-tle of succeeding, he still encouraged himself to go on.In one repulse, as he fled over the fields of Thirasium,he broke his leg; and the cure could not be effectedwithout several incisions; so that, for some time after,when he was called to action, he was carried into thefield in a litter.After the death of Antigonus, and Demetrius' acces-sion to the throne, Aratus was more intent than everon delivering Athens from the yoke, and conceived anutter contempt for the Macedonians. He was howeverdefeated in a battle near Phylacia, by Bitbys, the newking's general; and a strong report being spread onone side that he was taken prisoner, and on anotherthat he was dead, Diogenes, who commanded in thePiraeus, wrote a letter to Corinth, insisting ' that theAchaeans should evacuate the place, since Aratus wasno more.' Aratus happened to be at Corinth when theletter arrived; and the messengers finding that theirbusiness occasioned much laughter and satirical dis-course, retired in great confusion. The king of Mace-don himself, too, sent a ship, with orders 'that Aratusshould be brought to him in chains.'The Athenians, exceeding themselves in flattery tothe Macedonians, wore chaplets of flowers on the firstreport of Aratus' death. Incensed at this treatment, heimmediately marched out against them; and proceededas far as the Academy: but they implored him to sparethem, and he returned without doing them the leastinjury. This made the Athenians sensible of his vir-tue; and, as on the death of Demetrius they were de-termined to make an attempt for liberty, they calledhim in to their assistance. Though he was not generalof the Achasana that year, and was so much indisposed??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?268PLUTARCH.besides, by long sickness, as to be forced to keep hidbed, yet he caused himself to be carried in a litter, torender them his best services. Accordingly he pre-vailed on Diogenes, who commanded the garrison, togive up the Piraeus, Munychia, Salamis, and Sunium,to the Athenians, for the consideration of a hundredand fifty talents, twenty of which Aratus himself fur-nished. On this the jEginetae and Hermionians joinedthe Achaeans, and great part of Arcadia paid contribu-tions to the league. The Macedonians now found em-ployment enough for their arms nearer home; and theAchaeans, numbering the iEtolians amongst their allies,found a great addition to their power.Aratus still proceeded on his old principles, and inhis uneasiness to see tyranny established in a city sonear him as that of Argos, sent his agents to Aristoma-Chus, to represent ' how advantageous a thing it wouldbe for him to restore that city to liberty, and join it tothe Achaean league; how noble to follow the exampleof Lysiades, and command so great a people with repu-tation and honor, as the general of their choice, ratherthan one city as a tyrant, exposed to perpetual dangerand hatred.' Aristomachus listened to their suggestions,and desired Aratus to send him fifty talents to pay offhis troops. The money was granted agreeably to hisrequest; but Lysiades, whose commission as general wasnot expired, and who was ambitious to have this nego-tiation pass with the Achaeans for his work, took anopportunity, while the money was providing, to accuseAratus to Aristomachus, as a person that had an im-placable aversion to tyrants, and to advise him ratherto put the business into his hands. Aristomachus be-lieved these suggestions, and Lysiades had the honorof introducing him to the league. But on this occasionespecially: the Achaean council showed their affection??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?. ARATUS.and fidelity to Aratus: for, on his speaking againstAristomachus, they rejected him with marks of resent-ment. Afterwards, when Aratus was prevailed on tomanage the affair, they readily accepted the proposal,and passed a decree, by which the Argives and Phlia-sians were admitted into the league. The year follow*ing, too, Aristomachus was appointed general.Aristomachus finding himself esteemed by the Achae-ans, was desirous of carrying his arms into Laconia,for which purpose he sent for Aratus from Athens.Aratus made answer, that he utterly disapproved theexpedition, not choosing that the Achaeans should en-gage with Cleomenes, whose spirit and power keptgrowing in proportion to the dangers he had to en-counter. Aristomachus, however, was bent on theenterprise, and Aratus yielding to his solicitations, re-turned to assist him in the war. Cleomenes offeredhim battle at Palantium; but Aratus prevented himfrom accepting the challenge. Hereon, Lysiades ac-cused Aratus to the Achaeans, and the year followingdeclared himself his competitor for the command; butAratus had the majority of votes, and was for thetwelfth time declared general.This year he was defeated by Cleomenes at MountLycaeum; and, in his flight, being forced to wanderabout in the night, he was supposed to be killed. Thiswas the second time that a report of his death spreadover Greece. He saved himself, however; and havingcollected the scattered remains of his forces, was notsatisfied with retiring unmolested: on the contrary, beavailed himself in the best manner of his opportunity;and when none expected, or even thought of such amanoeuvre, fell suddenly on the Mantineaus, who wereallies to Cleomenes, took their city, secured it with agarrison, and declared all the strangers he found there??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.free of the city. In short, he acquired that for theAchaeans whea beaten, which they could not easilyhave gained when victorious.The Lacedaemonians again entering the territories ofMegalopolis, he marched to relieve that city. Cleo-menes endeavored to bring him to an engagement; buthe declined it, though the Megalopolitans pressed himmuch to leave the matter to the decision of the sword:for, besides that he was never very fit for disputes inthe open field, he was now inferior in numbers; and ata time of life when his spirits began to fail and hisambition was subdued, he would have had to do witha young man of the most adventurous courage. Hethought, too, that, if Cleomenes, by his boldness, soughtto acquire glory, it became him, by his caution, to keepthat which he had. - >>One day the light infantry skirmished with the Spar-tans, and having driven them to their camp, entered itwith them, and began to plunder. Aratus even thenwould not lead on the main body, but kept his men onthe other side of a defile that lay between, and wouldnot suffer them to pass. Lysiades, incensed at thisorder, and reproaching him with cowardice, called onthe cavalry to support the party which was in pursuitof the enemy, and not to betray the victory, nor to de-sert a man who was going to hazard all for his country.Many of the best men in the army followed him to thecharge, which was so vigorous, that he put the rightwing of the Lacedaemonians to flight. But, in theardor of his courage, and his ambition for honor, hewent inconsiderately on the pursuit, till he fell into anintricate way, obstructed with trees, and intersectedwith large ditches. Cleomenes attacked him in thisground, and slew him, after he had maintained themost glorious of all combats, the combat for his peo-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.271pie, almost at their own doors. The rest of the ca-valry fled, and turning back on the main body, putthe infantry in disorder, so that the rout becamegeneral.This loss was principally ascribed to Aratus, for hewas thought to have abandoned Lysiades to his fate.The Achseans therefore retired in great anger, andobliged him to follow them to jEgium. There it wasdecreed in full council, that he should be supplied withno more money, nor have any mercenaries maintained;and that if he would go to war, he must find resourcesfor it himself. Thus ignominiously treated, he wasinclined to give up the seal, and resign his commandimmediately; but, on more mature consideration, bethought it better to bear the affront with patience.Soon after this, he led the Achaeans to Orchomenus,where he gave battle to Megistonus, father-in-law toCleomenes, killed three hundred of his men, and tookhim prisoner. '?It had been customary with him to take the com-mand every other year; but when his turn came, andhe was called on to resume it, he absolutely refused,and Timoxenus was appointed general. The reasoncommonly given for his rejecting that commission, washis resentment against the people for the late dishonorthey had done him; but the real cause was the badposture of the Achaean affairs. Cleomenes no longeradvanced by insensible steps: he had no measures nowto keep with the magistrates at home, nor any thing tofear from their opposition; for he had put the ephorito death, distributed the lands in equal portions, andadmitted many strangers citizens of Sparta. After hehad made himself absolute master by these means athome, he marched into Achaia, and insisted on beingappointed general of the league. Aratus, therefore, ia??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?272-PLUTARCH.highly blamed, when affairs were in such a tempestuousstate, for giving up the helm to another pilot, when heOught rather to have taken it by force to save the com-munity from sinking. Or, if he thought the Achaeanpower beyond the possibility of being retrieved, heshould have yielded to Cleomenes, and not havebrought Peloponnesus into a state of barbarism againwith Macedonian garrisons, nor filled the citadel ofCorinth with Illyrian and Gaulish arms: for this wasmaking those men to whom he had shown himself supe-rior, both in his military and political capacity, andwhom he vilified so much in his Commentaries, mastersof his cities, under the softer, but false name of allies.It may be said, perhaps, that Cleomenes wanted justice,and was tyrannically inclined: let us grant it for a mo-ment; yet he was a descendant of the Heraclidae, andhis country was Sparta, the meanest citizen of whichshould have been preferred as general of the league tothe first of the Macedonians, at least by those who setatiy value on the dignity of Greece. Besides, Cleome-nes asked for the command among the Achaeans, onlyto make their cities happy in his services, in returnfor the honor of the title: whereas Antigonus, thoughdeclared commander-in-chief both by sea and land,would not accept the commission till he was paid withthe citadel of Corinth ; in which he perfectly resembledjEsop's hunter; for he would not ride the Achaeans,though they offered their backs, and though by em-bassies and decrees they courted him to do it, till hehad first bridled them by his garrison, and by the hos-tages which they were obliged to deliver to him.It is true, Aratus labors to justify himself by the ne-cessity of affairs. But Polybius assures us that, longbefore that necessity existed, he had been afraid of thedaring spirit of Cleomenes, and had not only treated??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?. ARATUS.273with Antigonus in private, but drawn in the Megalo-politans to propose it to the general assembly of theAchaeans, that Antigonus should be invited to their as-sistance: for, whenever Cleomenes renewed his depre-dations, the Megalopolitans were the first that sufferedby them. Phylarchus gives the same account; but weshould not have afforded him much credit, if he hadnot been supported by the testimony of Polybius: forsuch is his fondness for Cleomenes, that he cannotspeak of him but in an enthusiastic manner; and, asif he was pleading a cause, rather than writing a his-tory, he perpetually disparages the one, and vindicatesthe other.The Achaeans having lost Mantinea, which Cleome-nes now took a second time, and being moreover de-feated in a great battle at Hecatomboeum, were struckwith such terror, that they immediately invited Cleo-menes to Argos, with a promise of making him general.But Aratus no sooner perceived that he was on hismarch, and had brought his army as far as Lerma,than his fears prevailed, and he sent ambassadors todesire him to come to the Achaeans as friends andallies, with three hundred men only. They were toadd, that if he had any distrust of the Achaeans, theywould give him hostages. Cleomenes told them, theydid but insult and mock him with such a message, andreturning immediately, wrote a letter to the Achaeancouncil, full of complaints and invectives against Ara-tus. Aratus wrote another against Cleomenes in thesame style; and they proceeded to such gross abuse,as not to spare even the characters of their wives andfamilies.On this, Cleomenes sent a herald to declare waragainst the Achaeans; and in the mean time the city ofSicyon was near being betrayed to him. DisappointedPLUT. VoL. VII. 8??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:38 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?874PLUTARCH.of his expectation there, be turned against Pellene,dislodged the Achaean garrison, and secured the townfor himself. A little after this he took Pheneum andPenteleum; and it was not long before the people ofArgos adopted his interest, and the Phliasians receivedhis garrison. So that scarce any thing remained firmto the Achaaans of the dominions they had acquired;Aratus saw nothing but confusion about him ; all Pelo-ponnesus was in a tottering condition; and tbe citiesevery where exoited by innovators to revolt. Indeed,none were quiet or satisfied with their present circum-stances. Even amongst the Sicyonians and Corinthiansmany were found to have a correspondence with Cleo-menes, having been long disaffected to the administra-tion and the public utility, because they wanted to getthe power into their own hands. Aratus was investedwith full authority to punish the delinquents. Thecorrupt members of Sicyon he cut off; but, by seekingfor such in Corinth, in order to put them to death, heexasperated the people, already sick of the same dis-temper, and weary of the Achaean government. Onthis occasion they assembled in the temple of Apollo,and sent for Aratus, being determined either to killhim, or take him prisoner, before they proceeded to anopen revolt. He came leading his horse, as if he hadnot the least mistrust or suspicion. When they sawhim at the gate, a number of them rose up, and loadedhim with reproaches. But he, with a composed counte-nance and mild address, bade them sit down again, andnot by standing in the way, and making such a dis-orderly noise, prevent other citizens who were at thedoor from entering. At the same time that he saidthis, he drew back step by step, as if he was seekingsomebody to take his horse. Thus he got out of thecrowd, and continued to talk, without the least appear-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS. 275ance of confusion, to such of the Corinthians as he met,and desired them to go to the temple, till he insensiblyapproached the citadel. He then mounted his horse,and without stopping any longer at the fort, than togive his orders to Cleopater the governor to keep astrict guard on it, he rode off to Sicyon, followed byno more than thirty soldiers, for the rest had left himand dispersed.The Corinthians, soon apprised of his flight, went inpursuit of him; but failing in their design, they sentfor Cleomenes, and put the city into his hands. Hedid not however think this advantage equal to his lossin their suffering Aratus to escape. As soon as the in-habitants of that district on the coast called Acte hadsurrendered their towns, he shut up the citadel witha wall of circumvallation, and a pallisadoed intrench-ment.In the mean time many of the Achaeans repaired toAratus at Sicyon, and a general assembly was held, inwhich he was chosen commander-in-chief, with anunlimited commission. He now first took a guard,and it was composed of his fellow-citizens. He hadconducted the Achaean administration three-and-thirtyyears; he had been the first man in Greece, both inpower and reputation; but he now found himself aban-doned, indigent, persecuted without any thing but oneplank to trust to in the storm that had shipwrecked hiscountry: for the jEtolians refused him the assistancewhich he requested, and the city of Athens, thoughwell inclined to serve him, was prevented by Euclidesand Micion.Aratus had a house and valuable effects at Corinth.Cleomenes would not touch any thing that belonged tohim, but sent for his friends and agents, and chargedthem to take the utmost care of his affairs, as remem-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?276PLUTARCH.bering that they must give an account to Aratus. ToAratus himself he privately sent Tripylis, and after-wards his father-in-law Megistonus, with great offers,and among the rest a pension of twelve talents, whichwas double the yearly allowance he had from Ptolemy:for this, he desired to be appointed general of theAchaeans, and to be joined with him in the care of thecitadel of Corinth. Aratus answered, 'That he did notnow govern affairs, but they governed him.' As thereappeared an insincerity in this answer, Cleomenesentered the territories of Sicyon, and committed greatdevastations. He likewise blocked up the city forthree months together; all which time Aratus was de-bating with himself whether he should surrender thecitadel to Antigonus; for he would not send him suc-cors on any other condition.Before he could take his resolution the Achaeansmet in council at jEgium, and called him to attend it.As the town was invested by Cleomenes, it was danger-ous to pass. The citizens intreated him not to go, anddeclared they would not suffer him to expose himselfto an enemy who was watching for his prey. The ma-trons and their children, too, hung on him, and weptfor him as for a common parent and protector. Heconsoled them, however, as well as he could, and rodedown to the sea, taking with him ten of his friends,and his son, who was now approaching to manhood.Finding some vessels at anchor, he went on board, andarrived safe at jEgium. There he held an assembly,in which it was decreed that Antigonus should becalled in, and the citadel surrendered to him. Aratussent his own son amongst the other hostages; whichthe Corinthians so much resented, that they plunderedhis goods, and made a present of his house to Cleo-menes.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.277As Antigonus was now approaching with his army,which consisted of twenty thousand foot, all Mace-donians, and of fourteen hundred horse, Aratus wentwith the Achaean magistrates by sea, and without beingdiscovered by the enemy, met him at Pegae; thoughhe placed no great confidence in Antigonus, and dis-trusted the Macedonians: for he knew that his great-ness had been owing to the mischiefs he had donethem, and that he had first risen to the direction ofaffairs in consequence of his hatred to old Antigonus.But seeing an indispensable necessity before him, suchan occasion as those who seemed to command areforced to obey, he faced the danger. When Antigonuswas told that Aratus was come in person, he gave therest a common welcome, but received him in the mosthonorable manner; and finding him on trial to be aman of probity and prudence, took him into his mostintimate friendship: for Aratus was not only service-able to the king in great affairs, but in the hours ofleisure his most agreeable companion. Antigonus,therefore, though young, perceiving in him such atemper, and such other qualities as fitted him for aprince's friendship, preferred him not only to the restof the Achaeans, but even to the Macedonians thatwere about him, and continued to employ him in everyaffair of consequence. Thus the thing which the godsannounced by the entrails of one of the victims wasaccomplished: for it is said, that when Aratus wassacrificing not long before, there appeared in the livertwo gall-bladders inclosed in the same caul; on which,the diviner declared, that two enemies, who appearedthe most irreconcileable, would soon be united in thestrictest friendship. Aratus then took little notice ofthe saying, for he never put much faith in victims, norindeed in predictions from any thing else, but used to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?278PIUTARCH.depend on his reason. Seme time after, however,when the war went on successfully, Antigonus made anentertainment at Corinth, at which, though there wasa numerous company, he placed Aratus next abovehim. They had not sat long before Antigonus calledfor a cloak. At the same time he asked Aratus,'Whether he did not think it very cold,' and he an-swered, 'It was extremely cold.' The king then de-sired him to sit nearer, and the servants who broughtthe cloak put it over the shoulders of both. This put-ting Aratus in mind of the victim, he informed theking both of the sign and the prediction: but this hap-pened long after the time that we are on.While they were at Pegae they took oaths of mu-tual fidelity, and then marched against the enemy.There were several actions under the walls of Corinth,in which Cleomenes had fortified himself strongly,and the Corinthians defended the place with greatvigor.In the mean time Aristotle, a citizen of Argos, andfriend of Aratus, sent an agent to him privately, withan offer of bringing that city to declare for him, ifhe would go thither in person with some troops. Ara-tus having acquainted Antigonus with this scheme,embarked fifteen hundred men, and sailed immediatelywith them from the Isthmus to Epidaurus. But thepeople of Argos, without waiting for his arrival, hadattacked the troops of Cleomenes, and shut them upin the citadel. Cleomenes having notice of this, andfearing that the enemy, if they were in possession ofArgos, might cut off his retreat to Lacedaemon, lefthis post before the citadel of Corinth the same night,and marched to the succor of his men. He reachedit before Aratus, and gained some advantage over theenemy; but Aratus arriving soon after, and the king??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.279appearing with bis army, Cleomenes retired to Man-tinea.On this, all the cities joined the Achaeans again.Antigonus made himself master of the citadel of Co-rinth; and the Argives having appointed Aratus theirgeneral, he persuaded them to give Antigonus theestates of the late tyrants and all the traitors. Thatpeople put Aristomachus to the torture at Cencbreaa,and afterwards drowned him in the sea. Aratus wasmuch censured on this occasion, for permitting a manto suffer unjustly, who was not a bad character, withwhom he formerly had connexions, and who, at bispersuasion, had abdicated the supreme power, andbrought Argos to unite itself to the Achaean league.There were other charges against Aratus, namely,that, at his instigation, the Achaeans had given the cityof Corinth to Antigonus, as if it had been no morethan an ordinary village; that they had suffered himto pillage Orchomenus, and place in it a Macedoniangarrison; that they had made a decree that their com-munity should not send a letter or an embassy to anyother king, without the consent of Antigonus; thatthey were forced to maintain and pay the Macedo-nians; and that they had sacrifices, libations, andgames, in honor of Antigonus; the fellow-citizens ofAratus setting the example, and receiving Antigonusinto their oity, on which occasion Aratus entertainedhim in his house: for all these things they blamedAratus, not considering that when he had once put thereins in the hands of that prince, he was necessarilycarried along with the tide of regal power; no longermaster of any thing but his tongue, and it was dan-gerous to use that with freedom: for he was visiblyconcerned at many circumstances of the king's con-duct, particularly with respect to the statues. Antigo-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.nus erected anew those of the tyrants which Aratughad pulled down, and demolished those he had set upin memory of the brave men that surprised the citadelof Corinth. That of Aratus only was spared, not-withstanding his intercession for the rest. In the affairof Mantinea, too, the behavior of the Achaeans was notso suitable to the Grecian humanity: for having con-quered it by means of Antigonus, they put the prin-cipal of the inhabitants to the sword; some of the restthey sold, or sent in fetters to Macedonia; and theymade slaves of the women and children. Of the moneythus raised, they divided a third part amongst them-selves, and gave the rest to the Macedonians. Butthis had its excuse in the law of reprisals: for, how-ever shocking it may appear for men to sacrifice totheir anger those of their own nation and kindred, yetin necessity, as Simonides says, it seems rather a pro-per alleviation, than a hardship, to give relief to amind inflamed and aching with resentment. But as towhat Aratus did afterwards with respect to Mantinea,it is impossible to justify him on a plea either of pro-priety or necessity: for Antigonus having made a pre-sent of that city to the Argives, they resolved to re-people it, and appointed Aratus to see it done; invirtue of which commission, as well as that of general,be decreed that it should no more be called Mantinea,but Antigonea, which name it still bears. Thus, byhis means Mantinea, the amiable Mantinea, as Homercalls it, was no more; and in the place of it we have acity which took its name from the man who ruined itsinhabitants.Some time after this, Cleomenes being overthrownin a great battle near Sellasia, quitted Sparta, andsailed to Egypt. As for Antigonus, after the kindestand most honorable behavior to Aratus, he returned to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.281Macedonia. In his sickness there, which happenedsoon after his arrival, he sent Philip, then very young,but already declared his successor, into Peloponnesus;having first instructed him above all things to give at-tention to Aratus, and through him to treat with thecities, and make himself known to the Achaeans. Ara-tus received him with great honor, and managed himso well, that he returned to Macedonia full of senti-ments of respect for his friend, and in the most favor-able disposition for the interests of Greece.After the death of Antigonus the .iEtolians despisedthe inactivity of the Achaeans: for, accustomed to theprotection of foreign arms, and sheltering themselvesunder the Macedonian power, they sunk into a state ofidleness and disorder. This gave the jEtolians roomto attempt a footing in Peloponnesus. By the waythey made some booty in the country about Patrae andDyme, and then proceeded to Messene, and laid wasteits territories. Aratus was incensed at this insolence,but he perceived that Timoxenus, who was then gene-ral, took slow and dilatory measures, because his yearwas almost expired. Therefore, as be was to succeedto the command, he anticipated his commission by fivedays, for the sake of assisting the Messenians. Heassembled the Achaeans; but they had now neither ex-ercise nor courage to enable them to maintain the com-bat, and consequently he was beaten in a battle whichhe fought at Caphyae. Being accused of having ven-tured too much on this occasion, he became afterwardsso cold, and so far abandoned his hopes for the public,as to neglect the opportunities which the _55toliansgave him, and suffered them to roam about Pelopon-nesus, in a bacchanalian manner, committing all theexcesses that insolence could suggest.The Achaeans were now obliged to stretch out their??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH,hands again towards Macedonia, and brought Philipto interfere in the affairs of Greece. They knew theregard he had for Aratus, and the confidence he placedin him, and hoped on that account to find him tract-able and easy in all their affairs. But the king nowfirst began to listen to Apelles, Megalacus, and othercourtiers, who endeavored to darken the character ofAratus, and prevailed on him to support the contraryparty, by which means Eperatus was elected generalof the Aclueans. Eperatus, however, soon fell intothe greatest contempt amongst them; and, as Aratuswould not give any attention to their concerns, nothingwent well. Philip, finding that he had committed acapital error, turned again to Aratus, and gave himselfup intirely to his direction. As his affairs now pros-pered, and bis power and reputation grew under theculture of Aratus, he depended intirely on him for thefarther increase of both. Indeed it was evident to allthe world that Aratus had excellent talents, not onlyfor guiding a commonwealth, but a kingdom too; forthere appeared a tincture of his principles and mannersin all the conduct of this young prince. Thus the mo-deration with which he treated the Spartans after theyhad offended him, his engaging behavior to the Cre-tans, by which he gained the whole island in a fewdays, and the glorious success of his expedition againstthe >?tolians, gained Philip the honor of knowing howto follow good counsel, and Aratus that of being ableto give it.On this account the courtiers envied him still more;?nd as they found that their private engines of ca-lumny availed nothing, they began to try open battery,reviling and insulting him at table with the utmosteffrontery and lowest abuse. Nay, once they threwstones at him, as he was retiring from supper to his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.tent. Philip, incensed at such outrage, fined themtwenty talents; and, on their proceeding to disturband embroil his affairs, pnt them to death.But afterwards he was carried so high, by the flowof prosperity, as to discover many disorderly passions.The native badness of his disposition broke throughthe veil be had put over it, and by degrees bis realcharacter appeared. In the first place, he greatly in-jured young Aratus by corrupting bis wife; and th*intercourse was a long time secret, because he livedunder his roof, where he had been received under thesanction of hospitality. In the next place, he disco-vered a strong aversion to commonwealths, and to th*cities that were under that form of government. It waseasy to be seen, too, that he wanted to shake off Ara-tus. The first suspicion of his intentions arose fromhis behavior with respect to the Messenians. Therewere two factions amongst them which had raised asedition in the city. Aratus went to reconcile them;but Philip getting to the place a day before him, addedstings to their mutual resentments. On the one hand,he called the magistrates privately, and asked tbemwhether they had not laws to restrain the rabble; and,on the other, he asked the demagogues whether theyhad not hands to defend them against tyrants. Themagistrates, thus encouraged, attacked the chiefs ofthe people; and they, in their turn, came with supe-rior numbers, and killed the magistrates, with neartwo hundred more of their party.After Philip had engaged in these detestable prac-tices, which exasperated the Messenians still moreagainst each other, Aratus, when he arrived, made nosecret of his resentment, nor did he restrain his son inthe severe and disparaging things he said to Philip.The young man had once a particular attachment to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?284PLUTARCH.Philip, which in those days they distinguished by thename of love; but, on this occasion, he scrupled notto tell him, 'that after such a base action, instead ofappearing agreeable, he was the most deformed of hu-mankind.'Philip made no answer, though anger evidently wasworking in his bosom, and he often muttered to him-self while the other was speaking. However, he pre-tended to bear it with great calmness; and, affectingto appear the man of subdued temper and refined man-ners, gave the elder Aratus his hand, and took himfrom the theatre to the castle of Ithome, under pre-tence of sacrificing to Jupiter and visiting the place.This fort, which is as strong as the citadel of Corinth,were it garrisoned, would greatly annoy the neighbor-ing country, and be almost impregnable. After Philiphad offered his sacrifice there, and the diviner came toshow him the entrails of the ox, he took them in bothhands, and showed them to Aratus and Demetrius ofPhariae; sometimes turning them to one, and some-times to the other, and asking them 'what they saw inthe entrails of the victim ; whether they warned him tokeep this citadel, or to restore it to the Messenians?'Demetrius smiled and said, 'If you have the soul of adiviner, you will restore it; but, if that of a king, youwill hold the bull by both his horns.' By which hehinted that he must have Peloponnesus intirely in sub-jection, if he added Ithome to the citadel of Corinth.Aratus was a long time silent, but on Philip's pressinghim to declare his opinion, he said, 'There are manymountains of great strength in Crete, many castles inBceotia and Phocis in lofty situations, and many im-pregnable places in Acarnania, both on the coast andwithin land. You have seized none of these, and yetthey all pay you a voluntary obedience. Robbers,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.indeed, take to rocks and precipices for security; butfor a king, there is no such fortress as honor and hu-manity. These are the things that have opened to youthe Cretan sea; these have unbarred the gates of Pe-loponnesus. In short, by these it is that, at so earlya period in life, you are become general of the one,and sovereign of the other.' Whilst he was yet speak-ing, Philip returned the entrails to the diviner, andtaking Aratus by the hand, drew him along, and said,'Come on then, let us go as we came ;' intimating thathe had overruled him, and deprived him of such anacquisition as the city would have been.From this time Aratus began to withdraw from court,and by degrees to give up all correspondence with Phi-lip. He refused also to accompany him in his expedi-tion into Epirus, though applied to for that purpose;choosing to stay at home, lest he should share in thedisrepute of his actions. But, after Philip had losthis fleet with great disgrace in the Roman war, andnothing succeeded to his wish, he returned to Pelo-ponnesus, and tried once more what art could do toimpose on the Messenians. When he found that hisdesigns were discovered, he had recourse to open hos-tilities, and ravaged their country. Aratus then, sawall his meanness, and broke with him intirely. Bythis time, too, he perceived that he had dishonored hisson's bed; but though the injury lay heavy on him,he concealed it from his son, because be could onlyinform him that he was abused, without being ableto help him to the means of revenge. There seemedto be a great and unnatural change in Philip, who,of a mild and sober young prince, became a crueltyrant; but, in fact, it was not a change of disposition,it was only discovering, in a time of full security, the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?286 PLUTARCH.vices which his fears had long concealed. That hieregard for Aratus had originally a great mixture offear and Teverence, appeared even in the method hetook to destroy him: for though he was very desirousof effecting that cruel purpose, hecause he neitherlooked on himself as an absolute prince, or a king, oreven a freeman, while Aratus lived, yet he would notattempt any thing against him in the way of open force;but desired Phaurion, one of his friends and generals,to take him off in a private manner, in his absence: atthe same time he recommended poison. That officeraccordingly, having formed an acquaintance with him,gave him a dose, not of a sharp or violent kind, butsuch a one as causes lingering heats and a slight cough,and gradually brings the body to decay. Aratus wasnot ignorant of the cause of his disorder, but knowing-that it availed nothing to discover it to the world, hebore it quietly and in silence, as if it had been an ordi-nary distemper. Indeed, when one of his friends came-to visit him in his chamber, and expressed his surpriseait seeing him spit blood, he said, 'Such, Cepbalon,are the fruits of royal friendship.'Thus died Aratus at jEgium, after he had been se-venteen times general of the Achaeans. That people-were desirous of having him buried there, and wouldhave thought it an honor to give him a magnificent fu-neral, and a monument worthy of his life and charac-ter. Bui the Sicyonians considered it as a misfortuneto have him interred any where but amongst them, andtherefore persuaded the Achaeans to leave the disposalof the body intirely to them. As there was an ancientlaw that had been observed with religious care, againstburying any person within their walls, and they wereafraid to transgress it on this occasion, they sent to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?ARATUS.inquire of the priestess of Apollo at Delphi; and shereturned this answer:Seek yon what funeral honors you shall payTo your departed prince, the small rewardFor liberty restored, and glory won 1Bid Sicyon, fearless, rear the sacred tomb.For the vile tongue that dares with impious breathOffend Aratus, blasts the face of nature,Pours horror on the earth, and seas, and skies.This oraole gave great joy to all the Achaeans, particu-larly the people of Sicyon. They changed the day ofmourning into a festival; and, adorning themselveswith garlands and white robes, brought the corpse withsongs and dances from JEgium to Sicyon. There theyselected the most conspicuous ground, and interredhim as the founder and deliverer of their city. Theplace is still called Aratium; and there they offer twoyearly sacrifices; the one on the fifth of the monthDiBsius, (the Athenians call it Authesterion,1) which wasthe day he delivered the city from the yoke of tyrants,and on which account they call the festival Soteria;the other on his birthday. The first sacrifice was of-fered by the priest of Jupiter the Preserver, and thesecond by the son of Aratus, who, on that occasion,wore a girdle, not intirely white, but half purple. Themusic was sung to the harp by the choir that belongedto the theatre. The procession was led up by the mas-ter of the gymnasium, at the head of the boys andyoung men; the senate followed, crowned with flow-ers, and such of the other citizens as chose to attend.Some small marks of the ceremonies observed on thosedays still remain, but the greatest part is worn out bytime and other circumstances.1 February.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?288PLUTARCH.'Such was the life and character that history hasgiven us of the elder Aratus. And as to the younger,Philip, who was naturally wicked, and delighted toadd insolence to cruelty, gave him potions, not of thedeadly kind, but such as deprived him of his reason;insomuch, that he took up inclinations that were shock-ing and monstrous, and delighted in things that notonly dishonored but destroyed him. Death, there-fore, which took him in the flower of his age, was con-sidered, not as a misfortune, but a deliverance. Thevengeance however of Jupiter, the patron of hospitalityand friendship, visited Philip for his breach of both,and pursued him through life: for he was beaten bythe Romans, and forced to yield himself to their dis-cretion. In consequence of which, he was stripped ofall the provinces he had conquered, gave up all hisships except five, obliged himself to pay a thousandtalents, and deliver his son as a hostage. He evenheld Macedonia and its dependences only at the mercyof the conquerors. Amidst all these misfortunes, hewas possessed only of one blessing, a son of superiorvirtue, and him he put to death, in his envy and jea-lousy of the honors the Romans paid him. He left hiscrown to his other son Perseus, who was believed notto be his, but a supposititious child, born of a semp-stress named Gnathaenium. It was over him thatPau-lus yEmilius triumphed, and in him ended the royalrace of Antigonus; whereas the posterity of Aratusremained to our days, and still continues in Sicyonand Pellene.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.IpHicrates, the Athenian general, thought that a sol-dier of fortune should have an attachment both to mo-ney and pleasure, that his passions might put him onfighting with more boldness for a supply. But mostothers are of opinion that the main body of an army,like the healtiiy natural body, should have no motionof its own, but be intirely guided by the head. HencePaulus jEmilius, when he found his army in Macedo-nia, talkative, busy, and ready to direct their general,is said to have given orders 'that each;'should keep hishand fit for action, and his sword sharp, and leave therest to him.' And Plato perceiving that the best gene-ral cannot undertake any thing with success, unlesshis troops are sober, and perfectly united to supporthim, concluded, that to know how to obey required asgenerous a disposition, and as rational an education,as to know how to command; for these advantageswould correct the violence and impetuosity of the sol-dier with the mildness and humanity of the philoso-pher. Amongst other fatal examples, what happenedamongst the Romans after the death of Nero, is suffi-cient to show that nothing is more dreadful than anundisciplined army actuated only by the impulse oftheir own ferocity. Demades, seeing the wild and vio-lent motions of the Macedonian army after the deathof Alexander, compared it to the Cyclops,1 after hiseye was put out. But the Roman empire more re-sembled the extravagant passions and ravings of theTitans, which the poets tell us of, when it was torn inPLUT.1 Polyphemus.VoL. VII.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?290PLUTARCH.pieces by rebellion, and turned its arms against itself;not so much through the ambition of the emperors, asthe avarice and licentiousness of the soldiers, whodrove out one emperor by another.Dionysius the Sicilian, speaking of Alexander ofPhera, who reigned in Thessaly only ten months, andthen was slain, called him, in derision of the suddenchange, a theatrical tyrant: but the palace of the Ca?-sars received four emperors in a less space of time, oneentering, and another making his exit, as if they hadonly been acting a part on a stage. The Romans, in-deed, had one consolation amidst their misfortunes,that they needed no other revenge on the authors ofthem, than to see them destroy each other; and withthe greatest justice of all fell the first, who corruptedthe army, and taught them to expect so much on thechange of an emperor; thus dishonoring a glorious ac-tion by mercenary considerations, and turning the revoltfrom Nero into treason: for Nymphidius Sabinus,who, as we observed before,1 was joined in commissionwith Tigellinus, as captain of the pretorian cohorts,after Nero's affairs were in a desperate state, and itwas plain that he intended to retire into Egypt, per-suaded the army, as if Nero had already abdicated, todeclare Galba emperor, promising every soldier of thepretorian cohorts seven thousand five hundred drach-mas, and the troops that were quartered in the pro-vinces twelve hundred and fifty drachmas a man: asum which it was impossible to collect without doinginfinitely more mischief to the empire than Nero haddone in his whole reign. .'This proved the immediate ruin of Nero, and soonafter destroyed Galba himself. They deserted Nerd1 In the life of Nero, which is lost.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALEA.in hopes of receiving the money, and despatched Galbabecause they did not receive it. Afterwards theysought for another who might pay them that sum; butthey ruined themselves by their rebellions and trea-sons, without gaining what they had been made to ex-pect. To give a complete and exact account of theaffairs of those times belongs to the professed histo-rian. It is however in my province to lay before thereader the most remarkable circumstances in the livesof the Caesars.It is an acknowleged truth that Sulpitius Galba wasthe richest private man that ever rose to the imperialdignity: but though his extraction was of the noblest,from the family of the Servii, yet he thought it agreater honor to be related to Quintus Catulus Capito-linus, who was the first man in his time for virtue andreputation, though he voluntarily left to others thepre-eminence in power. He was also related to Liviathe wife of Augustus, and it was by her interest thathe was raised from the office he had in the palace to thedignity of consul. It is said that he acquitted himselfof his commission in Germany with honor; and thathe gained more reputation than most commanders,during his proconsulate in Africa: but his simple par-simonious way of living passed for avarice in an empe-ror; and the pride he took in economy and strict tem-perance was out of character.He was sent governor into Spain by Nero, beforethat emperor had learned to fear such of the citizensas had great authority in Rome. Besides, the mildnessof his temper and his advanced time of life, promiseda cautious and prudent conduct. The emperor's re-ceivers, a most abandoned set of men, harassed theprovinces in the most cruel manner. Galba could notassist them against their persecutors, but his concern??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?292PLUTARCH.for their misfortunes, which appeared not less than ifhe had heen a sufferer himself, afforded them someconsolation, even while they were condemned and soldfor slaves. Many songs were made on Nero, and sungevery where; and as Galba did not endeavor to sup-press them, or join the receivers of the revenues in theirresentment, that was a circumstance which endearedhim still more to the natives: for by this time he hadcontracted a friendship with them, having long beentheir governor. He had borne that commission eightyears, when Junius Vindex, who commanded in Gaul,revolted against Nero. It is said that before this re-bellion broke out Galba had intimations of it in let-ters from Vindex; but he neither countenanced nordiscovered it, as the governors of other provinces did,who sent the letters they had received to Nero, and bythat means ruined the project, as far as was in theirpower. Yet those same governors afterwards joiningin the conspiracy against their prince, showed that theycould betray not only Vindex, but themselves.But after Vindex had openly commenced hostilities,he wrote to Galba, desiring him 'to accept the impe-rial dignity, and give a head to the strong Gallic body,which so much wanted one; which had no less than ahundred thousand men in arms, and was able to raise amuch greater number.'Galba then called a council of his friends. Some ofthem advised him to wait and see what motions theremight be in Rome, or inclinations for a change: but Ti-tus Viuius, captain of one of the pretorian cohorts,said, 'What room is there, Galba, for deliberation?To inquire whether we shall continue faithful to Nero,is to have revolted already. There is no medium.We must either accept the friendship of Vindex, as ifNero were our declared enemy, or accuse and fight Vin-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.293dex, because he desires that the Romans should haveGalba for their emperor, rather than Nero for theirtyrant.' On this, Galba, by an edict, fixed a day forenfranchising all who should present themselves. Thereport of this soon drew together a multitude of peoplewho were desirous of a change, and he had no soonermounted the tribunal, than with one voice they de-clared him emperor. He did not immediately acceptthe title, but accused Nero of great crimes, and la-mented the fate of many Romans of great distinction,whom he had barbarously slain: after which he de-clared ' that he would serve his country with his bestabilities, not as Caesar or emperor, but as lieutenant tothe senate and people of Rome.'That it was a just and rational scheme which Vindexadopted in calling Galba to the empire, there needs nobetter proof than Nero himself: for though he pre-tended to look on the commotions in Gaul as nothing,yet when he received the news of Galba's revolt,which he happened to do just after he had bathed, andhad sat down to supper, in his madness he overturnedthe table. However, when the senate had declaredGalba to be an enemy to his country, he affected todespise the danger, and, attempting to be merry on it,said to his friends, ' I have long wanted a pretence toraise money, and this will furnish me with an excel-lent one. The Gauls, when I have conquered them,will be a fine booty, and, in the mean time, I will seizethe estate of Galba, since he is a declared enemy, anddispose of it as I think fit.' Accordingly he gave di-rections that Galba's estate should be sold; whichGalba no sooner heard of, than he exposed to sale allthat belonged to Nero in Spain, and more readilyfound purchasers.The revolt from Nero soon became general; and the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.governors of provinces declared for Galba: only Clo-dius Macer in Africa, and Virginius Rufus in Ger-many, stood out and acted for themselves, but on dif-ferent motives. Clodius being conscious to himself ofmuch rapine, and many murders, to which his avariceand cruelty had prompted him, was in a fluctuatingstate, and could not take his resolution either to as-sume or reject the imperial title. And Virginius, whocommanded some of the best legions in the empire, andhad been often pressed by them to take the title of em-peror, declared, ' that he would neither take it him-self, nor suffer it to be given to any other, but the per-son whom the senate should name.'Galba was not a little alarmed at this at first: butafter the forces of Virginius and Vindex had over-powered them, like charioteers no longer able to guidethe reins, and forced them to fight, Vindex lost twentythousand Gauls in the battle, and then despatchedhimself. A report was then current that the victori-ous army, in consequence of so great an advantage,would insist that Virginius should accept the imperialdignity, and that if he refused it, they would turnagain to Nero. This put Galba in p. great consterna-tion, and he wrote letters to Virginius exhorting himto act in concert with him, for preserving the empireand liberty of the Romans. After which he retiredwith his friends to Colonia, a city in Spain, and therespent some time, rr.ther in repenting of what he haddone, and wishing for the life of ease and leisure, towhich he had so long been accustomed, than takingany of the necessary steps for his promotion.It was now the beginning of summer, when one even-ing, a little before night, one of Galba's freedmen, anative of Sicily, arrived in seven days from Rome,BeiDg told that Galba had retired to rest, he ran up to??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.295his chamber, and having opened it, in spite of the re-sistance of the chamberlains, informed him, 'That asJJero did not appear, though he was living at that time,the army first, and then the people and senate of Rome,had declared Galba emperor; and, not long after, newswas brought that Nero was dead.' He added, that hewas not satisfied with the report, but went and saw thedead body of the tyrant, before he would set out.Galba was greatly elevated by this intelligence; andhe encouraged the multitudes that soon attended at thedoor by communicating it to them, though the expedi-tion with which it was brought appeared incredible.But, two days after, Titus Vinius, with many others,arrived from the camp, and brought an account of allthe proceedings of the senate. Vinius was promotedto an honorable employment; while the freedman hadhis name changed from Icelus to Marcianus, was ho-nored with the privilege of wearing the gold ring, andhad more attention paid him than any of the otherfreedmen.Meantime, at Rome, Nymphidius Sabinus got theadministration into his hands, not by slow and insensi-ble steps, but with the greatest celerity. He knewthat Galba, on account of his great age, being now se-venty-three, was scarce able to make the journey toRome, though carried in a litter. Besides, the forcesthere had long been inclined to serve him, and nowthey depended on him only, considering him as theirbenefactor on account of the large gratuity he had pro-mised, and Galba as their debtor. He therefore im-mediately commanded his colleague Tigellinus to giveup his sword. He made great entertainments, at whichhe received persons of consular dignity, and such ashad commanded armies and provinces; yet he gave,the invitation in the name of Galba. He likewise in-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?290PLUTARCH.structed many of the soldiers to suggest it to the pre-torian cohorts, that they should send a message toGalba, demanding that Nymphidius should be alwaystheir captain, and without a colleague. The readinessthe senate expressed to add to his honor and authority,in calling him their benefactor, in going daily to paytheir respects at his gate, and desiring that he wouldtake on him to propose and confirm every decree,brought him to a much higher pitch of insolence; in-somuch, that, in a little time, he became not only ob-noxious, but formidable to the very persons that paidtheir court to him. When the consuls had chargedthe public messengers with the decrees to be carriedto the emperor, and had sealed the instruments withtheir seal, in order that the magistrates of the townsthrough which they were to pass, seeing their autho-rity, might furnish them with carriages at every dif-ferent stage for the great expedition, he resented it,that they had not made use of his seal, and employedhis men to carry the dispatches. It is said that heeven had it under consideration whether he should notpunish the consuls; but on their apologising and beg-ging pardon for the affront, he was appeased. To in-gratiate himself with the people, he did not hinderthem from despatching by torture such of Nero'screatures as fell into their hands. A gladiator, namedSpicillus, was put under the statues of Nero, anddragged about with them in the forum till he died:Aponius, one of the informers, was extended on theground, and waggons, loaded with stones, driven overhim: they tore many others in pieces, and some whowere intirely innocent. So that Mauriscus, who hadnot only the character of one of the best men in Rome,but really deserved it, said one day to the senate, 'hewas afraid they should soon regret the loss of Nero.'??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.Nymphidius, thus advancing in his hopes, was not atall displeased at being called the son of Caius Caesar,who reigned after Tiberius. It seems that prince, inhis youth, was acquainted with his mother, who wasdaughter of Callistus, one of Caesar's freedmen, bya sempstress, and who was not wanting in personalcharms. But it is evident that the acquaintance Caiushad with her was after the birth of Nymphidius; andit was believed that he was the. son of Martianus thegladiator, whom Nymphidia fell in love with on ac-count of his reputation in his way; besides, his re-semblance to the gladiator gave a sanction to thatopinion. Be that as it may, he acknowleged himselfthe son of Nymphidia, and yet insisted that he-wasthe only person who deposed Nero. Not content withthe honors and emoluments he enjoyed on that ac-count, ********** *he aspired to the imperial seat, and had his enginesprivately at work in Rome, in which he employed hisfriends, with some intriguing women, and some men ofconsular rank. He sent also Gellianus, one of his friends,into Spain, to act as a spy on Galba.After the death of Nero, all things went for Galbaaccording to his wish; only the uncertainty what partVirginius Rufus would act, gave him some uneasiness.Virginius commanded a powerful army, which hadalready conquered Vindex; and he held in subjectiona very considerable part of the Roman empire; for hewas master not only of Germany, but Gaul, which wasin great agitation, and ripe for a revolt. Galba,therefore, was apprehensive that he would listen tothose who offered him the imperial purple. Indeed,there was not an officer of greater name or reputationthan Virginius, nor one who had more weight in the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?298PLUTARCH.affairs of those times; for he had delivered the empireboth from tyranny and from a Gallic war. He abodehowever by his first resolution, and reserved the ap-pointment of emperor for the senate. After Nero'sdeath was certainly known, the troops again pressedhard on Virginius, and one of the tribunes drew hissword in the pavilion, and bade him receive eithersovereign power or the steel; but the menace had noeffect. At last, after Fabius Valens, who commandedone legion, had taken the oath of fidelity to Galba, andletters arrived from Rome with an account of the se-nate's decree, he persuaded his army, though withgreat difficulty, to acknowlege Galba. The new em-peror having sent Flaccus Hordeouius as his suc-cessor, he received him in that quality, and deliveredup his forces to him. He then went to meet Galba,who was on his journey to Rome, and attended himthither, without finding any marks either of his favoror resentment. The reason of this was, that Galba,on the one hand, considered him in too respectable alight to offer him any injury; and, on the other hand,the emperor's friends, particularly Titus Vinius, werejealous of the progress he might make in his favor.But that officer was not aware, that while he was pre-venting his promotion, he was co-operating with hisgood genius, in withdrawing him from the wars andcalamities in which other generals were engaged, andbringing him to a life of tranquillity full of days andpeace.The ambassadors which the senate sent to Galbamet him at Narbon, a city of Gaul. There they madetheir compliments, and advised him to show himself assoon as possible to the people of Rome, who were verydesirous to see him. He gave them a kind reception,and entertained them in an agreeable manner. But??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.though Nymphidius had sent him rich vessels, andother furniture suitable to a great prince, which hehad taken out of Nero's palace, he made use of noneof it; every thing was served up in dishes of hisown. This was a circumstance that did him honor, forit showed him a man of superior sentiments, and in-tirely above vanity. Titus Vinius, however, soonendeavored to convince him that these superior senti-ments, this modesty and simplicity of manners, be-trayed an ambition for popular applause, which realgreatness of mind disdains; by which argument heprevailed with him to use Nero's riches, and show allthe imperial magnificence at his entertainments. Thusthe old man made it appear that in time he would beintirely governed by Vinius.No man had a greater passion for money than Vi-nius; nor was any man more an admirer of women.While he was yet very young, and making his firstcampaign under Calvisius Sabinus, he brought thewife of his general one night into the camp in a sol-dier's habit, and remained with her in that part of itwhich the Romans call the Principia: for this, CainsCaesar put him in prison; but. he was released on thedeath of that prince. Afterwards, happening to supwith Claudius Caesar, he stole a silver cup. The em-peror being informed of it, invited him the followingevening, but ordered the attendants to serve him withnothing but earthen vessels. This moderation of theemperor seemed to show that the theft was deservingonly of ridicule, and not serious resentment: but whathe did afterwards, when he had Galba and his revenuesat command, served partly as the cause, and partlyas the pretence, for many events of the most tragicalkind.Nymphidius, on the return of Gelliauus, whom he??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?300PLUTARCH.had sent as a spy on Galba, was informed that Corne-lius Laco was appointed to the command of the guardsand of the palace, and that all the power would be inthe hands of Vinius. This distressed him exceedingly,as he had no opportunity to attend the emperor, orspeak to him in private; for his intentions were sus-pected, and all were on their guard. In this perplexity,he assembled the officers of the pretorian cohorts, andtold them, that ' Galba was indeed an old man of mildand moderate sentiments; but that, instead of usinghis own judgment, he was intirely directed by Viniusand Laco, who made a bad use of their power. It isour business therefore,' continued he, ' before theyinsensibly establish themselves, and become sole mas-ters, as Tigellinus was, to send ambassadors to theemperor in the name of all the troops, and representto him, that if he removes those two counsellors fromhis person, he will find a much more agreeable recep-tion amongst the Romans.' Nymphidius perceivingthat his officers did not approve the proposal, butthought it absurd and preposterous to dictate the choiceof friends to an emperor of his age, as they might havedone to a boy who now first tasted power, he adoptedanother scheme. In hopes of intimidating Galba, hepretended sometimes in his letters that there werediscontents, and dangers of an insurrection in Rome;sometimes, that Clodius Macer had laid an embargo inAfrica on the corn-ships. One while he said the Ger-man legions were in motion, and another while thatthere was the same rebellious disposition amongst thosein Syria and Judea. But as Galba did not give muchattention or credit to his advices, he resolved to usurpthe imperial title himself before he arrived; thoughClodius Celsus, the Antiochian, a sensible man, andone of his best friends, did all in his power to dis-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.301suade him; and told him plainly, he did not believethere was one family in Rome that would give him thetitle of Caesar. Many others however made a jest ofGalba; and Mithridates of Pontus, in particular, mak-ing merry with his bald head and wrinkled face, said,'The Romans think him something extraordinarywhile he is at a distance, but as soon as he arrives, theywill consider it a disgrace to the times to have evercalled him Caesar.'It was resolved therefore that Nymphidius should beconducted to the camp at midnight, and proclaimedemperor. But Antonius Honoratus, the first tribune,assembled in the evening the troops under his com-mand, and blamed both himself and'them for changingso often in so short a time, not in pursuance of the dic-tates of reason, or for making a better choice, but be-cause some demon pushed them on from one treason toanother. 'The crimes of Nero, indeed,' said he, 'mayjustify our first measures: but has Galba murderedhis own mother, or his wife? or has he made youashamed of your emperor by appearing as a fiddler oran actor on a stage? Yet not even these things broughtus to abandon Nero; but Nymphidius first persuadedus that he had abandoned us, and had fled into Egypt.Shall we then sacrifice Galba after Nero; and whenwe have destroyed the relation of Livia, as well as theson of Agrippina, set the son of Nymphidia on theimperial throne? Or rather, after having taken ven-geance on a detestable tyrant in Nero, shall we notshow ourselves good and faithful guards to Galba?'On this speech of the tribune, all his men accededto the proposal. They applied also to their fellow-soldiers, and prevailed on most of them to return totheir allegiance. At the same time a loud shout washeard in the camp; and Nymphidius either believing??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?303PLUTARCH.(which is the account that some give us) that the troopswere calling him in order to proclaim him emperor, orelse hastening to appease the insurrection, and fix suchas he found wavering, went with lights to the camp;having in his hand a speech composed for him by Cin-gonins Varro, which he had committed to memory, inorder to pronounce it to the army. But seeing thegates shut, and a number of men in arms on the wall,his confidence abated. However, advancing nearer, heasked them, ' What they intended to do, and by whosecommand they were under arms V They answered,one and all, 'that they acknowleged no other em-peror but Galba.' Then pretending to enter into theiropinion, he applauded their fidelity, and ordered thosethat accompanied him to follow his example. Theguard opening the gate, and suffering him to enter witha few of his people, a javelin was thrown at him, whichSeptimius, who went before, received on his shield.But others, drawing their swords, he fled, and waspursued into a soldier's hut, where they despatchedhim. His body was dragged to the middle of thecamp, where they inclosed it with pales, and exposedit to public view the next day.Nymphidius being thus taken off, Galba was nosooner informed of it, than he ordered such of his ac-complices as had not already despatched themselves,to be put to death. Amongst these was Cingonius, whocomposed the oration, and Mithridates of Pontus. Inthis the emperor did not proceed according to thelaws and customs of the Romans ; .nor was it indeed apopular measure to inflict capital punishment On per-sons of eminence, without any form of trial, thoughthey might deserve death: for the Romans, deceived,as it usually happens, by the first reports, now ex-pected another kind of government. But what afflicted??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.them most, was the order he sent for the execution ofPetronius Turpilianus, a man of consular dignity,merely because he had been faithful to Nero. Therewas some pretence for taking off Macer in Africa, bymeans of Trebonianus, and Fonteius in Germany byValens, because they were in arms, and had forces thathe might be afraid of. But there was no reason whyTurpilianus, a defenceless old man, should not have ahearing, at least under a prince who should have pre-served in his actions the moderation he so much af-fected. Such complaints there were against Galba onthis subject.When he was about five-and-twenty furlongs fromthe city, he found the way stopped by a disorderlyparcel of seamen, who gathered about him on all sides.These were persons whom Nero had formed into alegion, that they might act as soldiers. They nowmet him on the road to have their establishment con-firmed, and crowded the emperor so much, that hecould neither be seen nor heard by those who came towait on him; for they insisted, in a clamorous manner,on having legionary colors and quarters assigned them.Galba put them off to another time; but they consi-dered that as a denial; and some of them even drewtheir swords: on which he ordered the cavalry to fallon them. They made no resistance, but fled with theutmost precipitation, and many of them were killed intheir flight. It was considered as an inauspicious cir-cumstance for Galba to enter the city amidst so muchblood and slaughter. And those who despised himbefore as weak and inactive through age, now lookedon him as an object of fear and horror.Besides, while he endeavored to reform the extra-vagance and profusion with which money used to begiven away by Nero, he missed the mark of propriety.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.When Canus, a celebrated performer on the flute,played to him one evening at court, after expressingthe highest satisfaction at the excellence of his music,he ordered his purse to be brought, and taking out afew pieces of gold, gave them to Canus, telling him, atthe same time, that this was a gratuity out of his own,not the public money. As for the money which Nerohad given to persons that pleased him on the stage, orin the palaestra, he insisted with great rigor that itshould be all returned, except a tenth part. And aspersons of such dissolute lives, who mind nothing buta provision for the day, could produce very little, hecaused inquiry to be made for all who had bought anything of them, or received presents, and obliged themto refund. This affair extending to great numbers ofpeople, and seeming to have no end, it reflected dis-grace on Vinius, because he made the emperor sordidand mean to others, while he pillaged the treasuryhimself in the most insatiable manner, and took andsold whatever he thought proper.In short, as Hesiod says,Spare not the full cask, nor, when shallow streamsDeclare the bottom near, withdraw your hand.So Vinius, seeing Galba old and infirm, drank freely ofthe favors of fortune, as only beginning, and yet, at thesame time, drawing to an end.But the aged emperor was greatly injured by Vinius,not only through his neglect or misapplication of thingscommitted to his trust, but by his condemning or de-feating the most salutary intentions of his master. Thiswas the case with respect to punishing Nero's ministers.Some bad ones, it is true, were put to death, amongstwhom were Elius, Polycletus, Petinus, and Patrobius.The people expressed their joy by loud plaudits whenthese were led through the forum to the place of exe-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.cution, and called it a glorious and holy procession.But both gods and men, they said, demanded the pu-nishment of Tigellinus, who suggested the very worstmeasures, and taught Nero all his tyranny. Thatworthy minister however had secured himself by greatpresents to Vinius, which were only earnests of stillgreater. Turpilianus, though obnoxious only becausehe had not betrayed or hated his master, on account ofhis bad qualities, and though guilty of no remarkablecrime, was, notwithstanding, put to death; while theman who had made Nero unfit to live, and, after hehad made him such, deserted and betrayed him, livedand florished: a proof that there was nothing whichYinius would not sell, and that no man had reason todespair who had money: for there was no sight whichthe people of Rome so passionately longed for, as thatof Tigellinus carried to execution; and in the theatreand the circus they continually demanded it, till at lastthe emperor checked them by an edict, importing, thatTigellinus was in a deep consumption, which would de-stroy him ere long, and that their sovereign intreatedthem not to turn his government into a tyranny byneedless acts of severity.The people were highly displeased; but the mis-creants only laughed at them. Tigellinus offered sacri-fice in acknowlegement to the gods for his recovery,and provided a great entertainment; and Vinius rosefrom the emperor's table, to go and carouse with Ti-gellinus, accompanied by his daughter, who was awidow. Tigellinus drank to her, and said, 'I willmake this cup worth two hundred and fifty thousanddrachmas to you.' At the same time he ordered hischief mistress to take off her own necklace and give ither. This was said to be worth a hundred and fiftythousand more.PLUT. VoL. VII. V??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?306PLUTARCH.From this time the most moderate of Galba's pro-ceedings were misrepresented: for instance, his lenityto the Gauls, who had conspired with Vindex, did notescape censure: for it was believed that they had notgained a remission of tribute and the freedom of Romefrom the emperor's indulgence, but that they purchasedthem of Vinius. Hence the people had a general aver-sion to Galba's administration. As for the soldiers,though they did not receive what had been promisedthem, they let it pass, hoping that, if they had not thatgratuity, they should certainly have as much as Nerohad given them. But when they began to murmur,and their complaints were brought to Galba, he said,what well became a great prince, ' That it was his cus-tom to choose, not to buy his soldiers.' This saying,however, being reported to the troops, filled them withthe most deadly and irreconcileable hatred to Galba:for it seemed to them that he not only wanted to de-prive them of the gratuity himself, but to set a prece-dent for future emperors.The disaffection to the government that prevailed inRome was as yet kept secret in some measure, partlybecause some remaining reverence for the presence ofthe emperor prevented the flame of sedition from break-ing out, and partly for want of an open occasion to at-tempt a change. But the troops which served underVirginhis, and were now commanded by Flaccus inGermany, thinking they deserved great things for thebattle which they fought with Vindex, and finding thatthey obtained nothing, began to behave in a very re-fractory manner, and could not be appeased by theirofficers. Their general himself they utterly despised,as well on account of his inactivity (for he had the goutin a violent manner), as his want of experience in mili-tary affairs. One day, at some public games, when the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.307tribunes and centurions, according to custom, madevows for the happiness of the emperor, the commonsoldiers murmured; and when the officers repeatedtheir good wishes, they answered, ' if he is worthy.'The legions that were under the command of Tigel-linus behaved with equal insolence; of which Galba'sagents wrote him an account. He was now appre-hensive that it was not only his age, but his want ofchildren, that brought him into contempt; and thereforehe formed a design to adopt some young man of noblebirth, and declare him his successor. Marcus Othowas of a family by no means obscure ; but, at the sametime, he was more remarkable from his infancy forluxury and love of pleasure than most of the Romanyouth. And, as Homer often calls Paris the husbandof the beauteous Helen, because he had nothing else todistinguish him, so Otho was noted in Rome as thehusband of Poppaea. This was the lady whom Nerofell in love with while she was wife to Crispinus; butretaining as yet some respect for his own wife, andsome reverence for his mother, he privately employedOtho to solicit her: for Otho's debauchery had recom-mended him to Nero as a friend and companion, andhe had an agreeable way of rallying him on what hecalled his avarice and sordid manner of living.We are told, that one day when Nero was perfuminghimself with a very rich essence, he sprinkled a littleof it on Otho. Otho invited the emperor the day fol-lowing, when suddenly gold and silver pipes openedon all sides of the apartment, and poured out essencesfor them in as much plenty as if it had been water. Heapplied to Poppa?a according to Nero's desire, and firstseduced her for him, with the flattering idea of havingan emperor for her lover: after which he persuadedher to leave her husband. But when he took her??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARGH.home as his own wife, he was not so happy in havingher, as miserable in the thought of her being loved byanother. And Poppaea is said not to have been dis-pleased with this jealousy; for it seems she refusedto admit Nero when Otho was absent; whether it wasthat she studied to keep Nero's love from decaying, orwhether, (as some say,) she did not choose to receivethe emperor as a husband, but, in her playful way,took more pleasure in having him approach her as agallant. Otho's life therefore was in great danger onaccount of that, marriage; and it is. astonishing, thatthe man who could sacrifice his wife and sister for thesake of Poppaea should afterwards spare Otho.But Otho had a friend in Seneca ; and it was he whopersuaded Nero to send him out governor of Lusitania,on the borders of the ocean. Otho made himself agree-able to the inhabitants by his lenity; for he knew thatthis command was given him only as a more honorableexile. On Galba's revolt, he was the first governor ofa province that came over to him, and he carried withhim all the gold and silver vessels he had, to be melteddown and coined for his use. He likewise presentedhim with such of his servants as knew best how to waiton an emperor. He behaved to him, indeed, in all re-spects with great fidelity; and it appeared from thespecimen he gave, that there was no department in thegovernment for which he had not talents. He accom-panied him in his whole journey, and was many daysin the same carriage with him; during all which timehe lost no opportunity to pay his court to Vinius,either by assiduities or presents: and as he alwaystook care to leave him the first place, he was secure byhis means of having the second. Besides that therewas nothing invidious in this station, he recommendedhimself by granting his favors and services without re-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALEA.309ward, and by his general affability and politeness. Hetook most pleasure in serving the officers of the army,and obtained governments for many of them, partly byapplications to the emperor, and partly to Vinius andhis freedmen, Icelns and Asiaticus, for these had thechief influence at court.Whenever Galba visited him, he complimented thecompany of guards that was on duty with a piece ofgold for each man; thus practising on and gaining thesoldiers, while he seemed only to be doing honor totheir master. When Galba was deliberating on thechoice of a successor, Vinius proposed Otho. Norwas this a disinterested overture, for Otho had pro-mised to marry Vinius' daughter, after Galba hadadopted him, and appointed him his successor. ButGalba always showed that he preferred the good of thepublic to any private considerations; and in this casehe sought not for the man who might be most agree-able to himself, but one who promised to be the great-est blessing to the Romans. Indeed it can hardly besupposed that he would have appointed Otho heir evento his private patrimony, when he knew how expensiveand profuse he was, and that he was loaded with a debtof five millions of drachmas. He therefore gave Vi-nius a patient hearing, without returning him any an-swer, and put off the affair to another time. However,as he declared himself consul, and chose Vinius forhis colleague, it was supposed that he would appoint asuccessor at the beginning of the next year, and thesoldiers wished that Otho might be the man.But while Galba delayed the appointment, and con-tinued deliberating, the army mutinied in Germany.All the troops throughout the empire hated Galba, be-cause they had not received the promised donations,but those in Germany had a particular apology for??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?310PLUTARCH.their aversion. They alleged 'that Virginias Rufus,their general, had been removed with ignominy, andthat the Gauls, who had fought against them, were theonly people that were rewarded; whilst all who hadnot joined Vindex were punished; and Galba, as if hehad obligations to none but him for the imperial dia-dem, honored his memory with sacrifices and publiclibations.'Such speeches as this were common in the camp,when the calends of January were at hand, and Flaccusassembled the soldiers, that they might take tjje custo-mary oath of fealty to the emperor. But, instead ofthat, they overturned and broke to pieces the statuesof Galba; and, having taken an oath of allegiance tothe senate and people of Rome, they retired to theirtents. Their officers were now as apprehensive ofanarchy as rebellion, and the following speech is saidto have been made on the occasion: 'What are wedoing; my fellow-soldiers? We neither appoint ano-ther emperor, nor keep our allegiance to the present,as if we had renounced not only Galba, but every othersovereign, and all manner of obedience. It is true,Hordeonius Flaccus is no more than the shadow ofGalba. Let us quit him. But at the distance of oneday's march only, there is Vitellius, who commandsin the lower Germany, whose father was censor, andthrice consul, and in a manner colleague to the empe-ror Claudius. And though his poverty be a circum-stance for which some people may despise him, it is astrong proof of his probity and greatness of mind.Let us go and declare him emperor, and show theworld that we know how to choose a person for thathigh dignity better than the Spaniards and Lusita-nians.' ?Some approved, and others rejected this motion*??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.One of the standard-bearers, however, marched offprivately, and carried the news to Vitellius that night.He found him at table, for he was giving a great en-tertainment to his officers. The news soon spreadthrough the army, and Fabius Valens, who commandedone of the legions, went next day, at the head of aconsiderable party of horse, and saluted Vitellius em-peror. For some days before he seemed to dread theweight of sovereign power, and totally to decline it;but now being fortified with the indulgences of thetable, to which he had sat down at mid-day, he wentout, and accepted the title of Germanicus, which thearmy conferred on him, though he refused that of Cae-sar. Soon after, Flaccus' troops forgot the republicanoaths they had taken to the senate and the people, andswore allegiance to Vitellius. Thus Vitellius was pro-claimed emperor in Germany.As soon as Galba was informed of the insurrectionthere, he resolved, without farther delay, to proceedto the adoption. He knew some of his friends werefor Dolabella, and a still greater number for Otho;but without being guided by the judgment of eitherparty, or making the least mention of his design, hesent suddenly for Piso, the son of Crassus and Scri-bonia, who were put to death by Nero; a young manformed by nature for every virtue, and distinguishedfor his modesty and sobriety of manners. In pursu-ance of his intentions, he went down with him to thecamp, to give him the title of Caesar, and declare himhis successor. But he was no sooner out of his palacethan very inauspicious presages appeared: and in thecamp, when he delivered a speech to the army, read-ing some parts, and pronouncing others from memory,the many claps of thunder and flashes of lightning, theviolent rain that fell, and the darkness that covered??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.both the camp and the city, plainly announced that thegods did not admit of the adoption, and that the issuewould be unfortunate. The countenances of the sol-diers, too, were black and lowering, because there wasno donation even on that occasion.As to Piso, all that were present could not but won-der that, so fair as they could conjecture from his voiceand look, he was not disconcerted with so great an ho-nor, though he did not receive it without sensibility.On the contrary, in Otho's countenance there appearedstrong marks of resentment, and of the impatience withwhich he bore the disappointment of his hopes: for hisfailing of that honor which he had been thought worthyto aspire to, and which he lately believed himself verynear attaining, seemed a proof of Galba's hatred andill intentions to him. He was not therefore withoutapprehensions of what might befall him afterwards;and dreading Galba, execrating Piso, and full of in-dignation against Vinius, he retired with this confusionof passions in his heart. But the Chaldaeans and otherdiviners, whom he had always about him, would notsuffer him intirely to give up his hopes or abandon hisdesign. In particular, he relied on Ptolemy, becausehe had formerly predicted that he should not fall bythe hand of Nero, but survive him, and live to ascendthe imperial throne: for, as the former part of theprophecy proved true, he thought he had no reason todespair of the latter. None however exasperated himmore against Galba than those who condoled with himin private, and pretended that he had been treatedwith great ingratitude. Besides, there was a numberof people that had florished under Tigellinus and Nym-phidius, and now lived in poverty and disgrace, who,to recommend themselves to Otho, expressed great in-dignation at the slight he had suffered, and urged him??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALEA.313to revenge it. Amongst these were Veturius, who wasoptio, or centurion's deputy, and Barbius, who wastesserarius, or one of those that carry the word fromthe tribunes to the centurions. Onomastus, one ofOtho's freedmen, joined them, and went from troop totroop, corrupting some with money, and others withpromises. Indeed, they were corrupt enough already,and wanted only an opportunity to put their designs inexecution. If they had not been extremely disaffected,they could not have been prepared for a revolt in soshort a space of time as that of four days, which wasall that passed between the adoption and the assassina-tion ; for Piso and Galba were both slain the sixth dayafter, which was the fifteenth of January. Early inthe morning Galba sacrificed in the palace in presenceof his friends. Umbricius the diviner no sooner tookthe entrails in his hands than he declared, not in enig-matical expressions, but plainly, that there were signsof great troubles, and of treason that threatened imme-diate danger to the emperor. Thus Otho was almostdelivered up to Galba by the hand of the gods; for hestood behind the emperor, listening with great atten-tion to the observations made by Umbricius. Theseput him in great confusion, and his fears were disco-vered by his change of color, when his freedman Ono-mastus came and told him that the architects werecome, and waited for him at his house. This was thesignal for Otho's meeting the soldiers. He pretendedtherefore that he had bought an old house which thesearchitects were to examine; and, going down by whatis called Tiberius' palace, went to that part of the fo-rum where stands the gilded pillar which terminatesall the great roads in Italy.The soldiers who received him, and saluted him em-peror, are said not to have been more than twenty-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?314PLUTARCH.three: so that, though he had nothing of that dastardlyspirit which the delicacy of his constitution, and theeffeminacy of his life, seemed to declare, but, on thecontrary, was firm and resolute in time of danger; yet,on this occasion, he was intimidated, and wanted toretire; but the soldiers would not suffer it. They sur-rounded the chair with drawn swords, and insisted onits proceeding to the camp. Meantime Otho desiredthe bearers to make haste, often declaring that he wasa lost man. There were some who overheard him,and they rather wondered at the hardiness of the at-tempt with so small a party, than disturbed themselvesabout the consequences. As he was carried throughthe forum, about the same number as the first joinedhim, and others afterwards by three or four at atime. The whole party then saluted him Caesar, andconducted him to the camp, fiorishing their swordsbefore him. Martialis, the tribune who kept guardthat day, knowing nothing (as they tell us) of the con-spiracy, was surprised and terrified at so unexpecteda sight, and suffered them to enter. When Otho waswithin the camp, he met with no resistance, for theconspirators gathered about such as were strangers tothe design, and made it their business to explain it tothem; on which, they joined them by one or two at atime, at first out of fear, and afterwards out of choice.The news was immediately carried to Galba, whilethe diviner yet attended, and had the entrails in hishands: so that they who had been most incredulous inmatters of divination, and even held it in contemptbefore, were astonished at the divine interposition inthe accomplishment of this presage. People of allsorts now orowding from the forum to the palace, Vi-nius and Laco, with some of the emperor's freedmen,stood before him with drawn swords to defend him.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALEA.Piso went out to speak to the life-guards, and MariusCelsus, a man of great courage and honor, was sent tosecure the Illyrian legion, which lay in Vipsanius'portico.Galba was inclined to go out to the people. Viniusendeavored to dissuade him from it; but Celsus andLaco encouraged him to go, and expressed themselveswith some sharpness against Vinius. Meantime a strongreport prevailed that Otho was slain in the camp; soonafter which, Julius Atticus, a soldier of some noteamongst the guards, came up, and crying he was theman that had killed Caesar's enemy, made his waythrough the crowd, and showed his bloody sword toGalba. The emperor fixing his eye on him, said,'Who gave you orders V He answered, 'My alle-giance, and the oath I had taken;' and the people ex-pressed their approbation in loud plaudits. Galbathen went out in a sedan-chair, with a design to sacri-fice to Jupiter, and show himself to the people. Buthe had no sooner reached the forum than the rumorchanged like the wind, and news met him that Othowas master of the camp. On this occasion, as it wasnatural amongst a multitude of people, some called outto him to advance, and some to retire; some to takecourage, and some to be cautious. His chair wastossed backward and forward, as in a tempest, andready to be overset, when there appeared first a partyof horse, and then another of foot, issuing from theBasilica of Paulus, and crying out, 'Away with thisprivate man!' Numbers were then running about, notto separate by flight, but to possess themselves of theporticos and eminences about the forum, as it were toenjoy some public spectacle. Atilius Virgilio beatdown one of Galba's statues, which served as a signal??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?316PLUTARCH.for hostilities, and they attacked the chair on all sideswith javelins. As those did not despatch him, theyadvanced sword in hand. In this time of trial nonestood up in his defence hut one' man, who, indeed,amongst so many millions, was the only one that didhonor to the Roman empire. This was SemproniusDensus, a centurion, who, without any particular obli-gations to Galha, and only from a regard to honor andthe law, stood forth to defend the chair. First of allhe lifted up the vine-branch with which the centurionschastise such as deserve stripes, and then called out tothe soldiers who were pressing on, and commandedthem to spare the emperor. They fell on him notwith-standing, and he drew his sword and fought a longtime, till he received a stroke in the ham, which broughthim to the ground.The chair was overturned at what is called the Cur-tian lake, and Galba tumbling out of it, they ran to de-spatch him. At the same time he presented his throat,and said, ' Strike, if it be for the good of Rome.' Hereceived many strokes on his arms and legs, for hehad a coat of mail on his body. According to mostaccounts, it was Camurius, a soldier of the fifteenthlegion, that despatched him; though some say it wasTerentius, some Arcadius, and others Fabius Fabulus.They add, that when Fabius had cut off his head, hewrapped it up in the skirt of his garment, because itwas so bald that he could take no hold of it. His asso-ciates, however, would not suffer him to conceal it, butinsisted that he should let the world see what an ex-ploit he had performed; he therefore fixed it on thepoint of his spear, and swinging about the head of avenerable old man, and a mild prince, who was bothpontifex maximus and consul, he ran on, (like the??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?GALBA.317Bacchanals with the head of Pentheus,) brandishinghis spear, that was dyed with the blood that trickledfrom it.When the head was presented to Otho, he cried out,'This is nothing, my fellow-soldiers; show me thehead of Piso.' It was brought not long after; for thatyoung prince being wounded, and pursued by oneMurcus, was killed by him at the gates of the templeof Vesta. Vinius also was put to the sword, though hedeclared himself an accomplice in the conspiracy, andprotested that it was against Otho's orders that he suf-fered. However, they cut off his head, and that ofLaco, and carrying them to Otho, demanded their re-ward: for, as Archilochus says,We bring seven warriors only to your tent,Yet thousands of us kill'd them.So in this case many who had no share in the actionbathed their hands and swords in the blood, and show-ing them to Otho, petitioned for their reward. It ap-peared afterwards from the petitions given in, that thenumber of them was a hundred and twenty; andVitellius having searched them out, put them all todeath. Marius Celsus also coming to the camp, manyaccused him of having exhorted the soldiers to standby Galba, and the bulk of the army insisted that heshould suffer. But Otho being desirous to save him,and yet afraid of contradicting them, told them, 'hedid not choose to have him executed so soon, becausehe had several important questions to put to him.'He ordered him therefore to be kept in chains, anddelivered him to persons in whom he could best con-fide.The senate was immediately assembled; and as ifthey were become different men, or had other gods toswear by, they took the oath to Otho, which he had??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.before taken to Galba, but had not kept; and theygave him the titles of Caesar and Augustus, while thebodies of those that had been beheaded lay in theirconsular robes in the forum. As for the heads, thesoldiers, after they had no farther use for them, soldthat of Vinius to his daughter for two thousand fivehundred drachmas. Piso's was given to his wife Ve-rania, at her request; and Galba's to the servants ofPatrobius and Vitellius, who, after they had treated itwith the utmost insolence and outrage, threw it into aplace called Sestertium, where the bodies of those arecast that are put to death by the emperors. Galba'scorpse was carried away by Helvidius Priscus, withOtho's permission, and buried in the night by his freed-man Argius.Such is the history of Galba; a man who, in thepoints of family and fortune distinctly considered, wasexceeded by few of the Romans, and who, in the unionof both, was superior to all. He had lived, too, in greathonor, and with the best reputation, under five empe-rors; and it was rather by his character than by forceof arms that he deposed Nero. As to the rest whoconspired against the tyrant, some of them were thoughtunworthy of the imperial diadem by the people, andothers thought themselves unworthy. But Galba wasinvited to accept it, and only followed the sense ofthose who called him to that high dignity. Nay, whenhe gave the sanction of his name to Vindex, that whichbefore was called rebellion, was considered only as acivil war, because a man of princely talents was thenat the head of it. So that he did not so much wantthe empire, as the empire wanted him: and with theseprinciples he attempted to govern a people corruptedby Tigellinus and Nymphidius, as Scipio, Fabricius,and Camillus, governed the Romans of their times.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?OALBA.319Notwithstanding his great age, he showed himself achief worthy of ancient Rome through all the militarydepartment. But, in the civil administration, he de-livered himself up to Vinius, to Laco, and to his en-franchised slaves, who sold every thing, in the samemanner as Nero had left all to his insatiable vermin.The consequence of this was, that no man regrettedhim as an emperor, though almost all were moved withpity at his miserable fate.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?OTHO.The new emperor went early in the morning to thecapitol, and sacrificed; after which he ordered MariusCelsus to be brought before him. He received thatofficer with great marks of his regard, and desired himrather to forget the cause of his confinement, than toremember his release. Celsus neither showed anymeanness in his acknowlegements, nor any want ofgratitude. He said, ' The very charge brought againsthim bore witness to his character; since he was ac-cused only of having been faithful to Galba, fromwhom he had never received any personal obligations.'All who were present at the audience admired both theemperor and Celsus, and the soldiers in particular tes-tified their approbation.Otho made a mild and gracious speech to the senate.The remaining time of his consulship he divided withVirginius Rufus, and he left those who had been ap-pointed to that dignity by Nero and Galba to enjoy itin their course. Such as were respectable for theirage and character he promoted to the priesthood; andto those senators who had been banished by Nero, andrecalled by Galba, he restored all their goods andestates that he found unsold. So that the first and bestof the citizens, who had before not considered him asa man, but dreaded him as a fury or destroying demon,that had suddenly seized the seat of government, nowentertained more pleasing hopes from so promising abeginning.But nothing gave the people in general so high apleasure, or contributed so much to gain him their af-fections, as his punishing Tigelliuus. It is true he had??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHo.long suffered under the fear of punishment, which theRomans demanded as a public debt, and under a com-plication of incurable distempers. These, together withhis infamous connexions with the worst of women, intowhich his passions drew him, though almost in thearms of death, were considered by the thinking part ofmankind as the greatest of punishments, and worsethan many deaths. Yet it was a pain to the commonpeople, that he should see the light of the sun, afterso many excellent men had been deprived of it throughhis means. He was then at his, country-house nearSinuessa, and had vessels at anchor, ready to carryhim on occasion to some distant country. Otho sentto him there; and he first attempted to bribe the mes-senger with large sums to suffer him to escape. Whenhe found that did not take effect, he gave him the mo-ney notwithstanding; and desiring only to be indulgeda few moments till he had shaved himself, he took therazor and cut his own throat.Besides this just satisfaction that Otho gave the peo-ple, it was a most agreeable circumstance that he re-membered none of his private quarrels. To gratify thepopulace, he suffered them also at first to give him inthe theatres the name of Nero, and he made no oppo-sition to those who erected publicly the statues of thatemperor. Nay, Claudius Rufus tells us, that in theletters with which the couriers were sent to Spain, hejoined the name of Nero to that of Otho. But per-ceiving that the nobility were offended, he made use ofit no more.After his government was thus established, the pre-torian cohorts gave him no small trouble, by exhortinghim to beware of many persons of rank, and to forbidthem the court; whether it was that their affectionmade them really apprehensive for him, or whether itPLUT. VoL. VII. X??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.was only a color for raising commotions and wars.One day the emperor himself had sent Crispinus ordersto bring the seventeenth cohort from Ostia; and inorder to do it without interruption, that officer beganto prepare for it as soon as it grew dark, and to packup the arms in waggons. On which some of the mostturbulent cried out, that Crispinus 'was come with nogood intention ; that the senate had some design againstthe government; and that the arms he was going tocarry were to be made use of against Caesar, not forhim. This notion soon spread, and exasperated num-bers; some laid hold on the waggons, while otherskilled two centurions who endeavored to quell themutiny, and Crispinus himself. Then the whole partyarmed, and exhorting each other to go to the emperor'sassistance, they marched straight to Rome. Being in-formed there that eighty senators supped with him thatevening, they hastened to the palace, saying,' Then wasthe time to crush all Caesar's enemies at once.' Thecity was greatly alarmed, expecting to be plunderedimmediately. The palace, too, was in the utmost con-fusion, and Otho himself in unspeakable distress: forhe was under fear and concern for the senators, whilethey were afraid of him; and he saw they kept theireyes fixed on him in silence and extreme consternation;some having even brought their wives with them tosupper. He therefore ordered the principal officers ofthe guards to go and speak to the soldiers, and endeavorto appease them, and at the same time sent out hisguests at another door. They had scarce made theirescape when the soldiers rushed into the room, andasked what was become of the enemies of Caesar. Theemperor then rising from his couch, used many argu-ments to satisfy them, and by intreaties and tears atlast prevailed on them with much difficulty to desist.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHo.323Next day, having presented the soldiers with twelvehundred and fifty drachmas a man, he entered thecamp. On this occasion he commended the troops asin general well-affected to his government; but at thesame time he told them there were some designing menamongst them, who by their cabals brought his mode-ration and their fidelity both into question: these, hesaid, deserved their resentment, and he hoped theywould assist him in punishing them. They applaudedhis speech, and desired him to chastise whatever per-sons he thought proper; but he pitched on two onlyfor capital punishment, whom no man could possiblyregret, and then returned to his palace.Those who had conceived an affection for Otho andplaced a confidence in him, admired this change in hisconduct. But others thought it was no more than apiece of policy which the times necessarily required,and that he assumed a popular behavior on account ofthe impending war; for now he had undoubted intelli-gence that Vitellius had taken the title of emperor andall the ensigns of supreme power, and couriers dailyarrived with news of continual additions to his party.Other messengers also arrived with accounts that theforces in Pannonia, Dalmatia, and Mysia, with theirgenerals, had declared for Otho. And a few daysafter, he received obliging letters from Mucianus andVespasian, who both commanded numerous armies, theone in Syria, and the other in Judea.Elated with its intelligence, he wrote to Vitellius,advising him not to aspire to things above his rank,and promised, in case he desisted, to supply him libe-rally with money, and gave him a city in which hemight spend his days in pleasure and repose. Vitel-lius at first gave him an answer, in which ridicule wastempered with civility; but afterwards, being both??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?324 PLUTARCH.thoroughly exasperated, they wrote to each other in astyle of the hitterest invective; not that their mutualreproaches were groundless, but it was absurd for theone to insult the other with what might with equaljustice be objected to both: for their charges consistedof prodigality, effeminacy, incapacity for war, theirformer poverty and immense debts; such articles, thatit is hard to say which of them had the advantage.As to the stories of prodigies and apparitions at thattime, many of them were founded on vague reportsthat could not be traced to their author: but in thecapitol there was a Victory mounted on a chariot, andnumbers of people saw her let the reins fall out of herhands, as if she had lost the power to hold them: andin the island of the Tiber, the statue of Julius Caesarturned from west to east, without either earthquake orwhirlwind to move it; a circumstance which is saidlikewise to have happened when Vespasian openlytook on him the direction of affairs. The inundationof the Tiber, too, was considered by the populace as abad omen. It was at a time, indeed, when rivers usu-ally overflow their banks; but the flood never rose sohigh before, nor was so ruinous in its effects; for nowit laid great part of the city under water, particularlythe corn-market, and caused a famine which continuedfor some days.About this time news was brought that Cecina andValens, who acted for Vitellins, had seized the passesof the Alps. And in Rome, Dolabella, who was of anillustrious family, was suspected by the guards of somedisloyal design. Otho, either fearing him, or someother whom he could influence, sent him to Aquinum,with assurances of friendly treatment. When the em-peror came to select the officers that were to attendhim on his march, he appointed Lucius, the brother of??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHo.Vitellius, to be of the number, without either pro-moting or lowering him in point of rank. He tookalso particular care of the mother and wife of Vitel-lius, and endeavored to put them in a situation wherethey had nothing to fear. The government of Romehe gave to Flavius Sabinus, the brother of Vespasian;either with an intention to do honor to Nero, (for hehad formerly given him that appointment, and Galbahad deprived him of it,) or else to show his affection toVespasian by promoting his brother.Otho himself stopped at Brixellum, a town in Italy,near the Po, and ordered the army to march on underthe conduct of his lieutenants, Marius Celsus, Sueto-nius Paulinus, Gallus and Spurina, officers of greatreputation. But they could not pursue the plan ofoperations they had formed, by reason of the obstinacyand disorderly behavior of the soldiers, who declaredthat they had made the emperor, and they would becommanded by him only. .The enemy's troops werenot under much better discipline: they, too, were re-fractory and disobedient to their officers, and on thesame account. Yet they had seen service, and wereaccustomed to fatigue: whereas Otho's men had beenused to idleness, and their manner of living was quitedifferent from that in the field. Indeed they had spentmost of their time at public spectacles and the enter-tainments of the theatre, and were come to that degreeof insolence, that they did not pretend to be unable toperform the services they were ordered on, but affectedto be above them. Spurina, who attempted to use com-pulsion, was in danger of being killed by them. Theyspared no manner of abuse, calling him traitor, andtelling him that it was he who ruined the affairs ofCaesar, and purposely missed the fairest opportunities.Some of them came in the night intoxicated with liquor??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.to his tent, and demanded their discharge; 'for theyhad to go,' they said, 'to Caesar, to accuse him/The cause, however, and Spurina with it, receivedsome benefit from the insult which these troops metwith at Placentia. Those of Vitellius came Up to thewalls, and ridiculed Otho's men, who were appointedto defend them; calling them players and dancers, fitonly to attend the Pythian and Olympic games; fel-lows who knew nothing of war, who had not evenmade one campaign, who were swoln up with pridemerely because they had cut off the head of a poor un-armed old man (meaning Galba); wretches that durstnot look men in the face, or stand any thing like a fairand open battle. They were so cut with these re-proaches, and so desirous of revenge, that they threwthemselves at Spurina's feet, and begged of him tocommand and employ them on whatever service hethought proper, assuring him that there was neitherdanger nor labor which they would decline. Afterthis the enemy made a vigorous attack on the town,and plied their battering-engines with all their force jbut Spurina's men repulsed them with great slaughter,and by that means kept possession of one of the mostrespectable and most florishing towns in Italy.It must be observed of Otho's officers in genera],that they were more obliging in their behavior both tocities and private persons than those of Vitellius. Ce-cilia, one of the latter, had nothing popular either inhis address or his figure. He was of a gigantic size,and most uncouth appearance; for he wore breechesand long sleeves in the manner of the Gauls, evenwhile his standard was Roman, and whilst he gave hisinstructions to Roman officers. His wife followed himon horseback, in a rich dress, and was attended by aselect party of cavalry. Fabius Yalens, the other ge.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?OTHO.neral, had a passion for money, which was not to hesatisfied by any plunder from the enemy, or exactionsand contributions from the allies. Insomuch, that hewas believed to proceed more slowly for the sake ofcollecting gold as he went, and therefore was not up atthe first action. Some indeed accuse Cecina of has-tening to give battle before the arrival of Valens, inorder that the victory might be all his own; and, be-sides other less faults, they charged him not only withattacking at an unseasonable time, bnt with not main-taining the combat so gallantly as he ought to havedone; all which errors nearly ruined the affairs of hisparty.Cecina, after his repulse at Placentia, marchedagainst Cremona, another rich and great city. In themean time Annius Gallus, who was going to join Spu-rina at Placentia, had intelligence by the way that hewas victorious, and that the siege was raised. Butbeing informed at the same time that Cremona was indanger, he led his forces thither, and encamped verynear the enemy. Afterwards other officers brought inreinforcements. Caecina posted a strong body of in-fantry under cover of some trees and thickets; afterwhich he ordered his cavalry to advance, and if theenemy attacked them, to give way by degrees, and re-tire, till they had drawn them into the ambuscade.But Celsus, being informed of his intention by somedeserters, advanced with his best cavalry against Cae-cina's troops; and, on their retreating, he pursuedwith so much caution, that he surrounded the corpsthat lay in ambush. Having thus put them in confu-sion, he called the legions from the camp; and it ap-pears that, if they had come up in time to support thehorse, Csecina's whole army would have been cut inpieces. But, as Paulinus advanced very slowly, he??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.was censured for having used more precaution thanbecame a general of his character. Nay, the soldiersaccused him of treachery, and endeavored to incenseOtho against him; insisting that the victory was intheir hands, and that if it was not complete, it wasowing intirely to the mismanagement of their generals.Otho did not so much believe these representations ashe was willing to appear not to disbelieve them. Hetherefore sent his brother Titianus to the army, withProculus, the captain of his guard; Titianus had thecommand in appearance, and Proculus in reality. Cel-sus and Paulinus had the title of friends and coun-sellors, but not the least authority in the direction ofaffairs.The enemy, too, were not without their dissatisfac-tions and disorder, particularly amongst the forces ofValens: for when they were informed of what hap-pened at the ambuscade, they expressed their indigna-tion that their general did not put it in their power tobe there, that they might have used their endeavors tosave so many brave men who perished in that action.They were even inclined to despatch him; but havingpacified them with much difficulty, he decamped, andjoined Caecina.In the mean time Otho came to the camp at Bedri-acum, a small town near Cremona, and there held acouncil of war. Proculus and Titianus were of opi-nion, ' That he ought to give battle, while the army re-tained those high spirits with which the late victoryhad inspired them, and not suffer that ardor to cool,nor wait till Vitellius came in person from Gaul.' ButPaulinus was against it. 'The enemy,' said he, ' havereceived all their troops, and have no farther prepara-tions to make for the combat; whereas Otho will havefrom Mysia and Pannonia forces as numerous as those??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?OTHo.329he has already, if he will wait his own opportunity, in-stead of giving one to the enemy. And certainly thearmy he now has, if with their small numbers theyhave so much ardor, will not fight with less, but greaterspirit when they see their numbers so much increased.Besides, the gaining of time makes for us, because wehave every thing in abundance; but delays must greatlydistress Cecina and his colleague for necessaries, be-cause they lie in an enemy's country.'Marius Celsus supported the opinion of Paulinus.Annius Gallus could not attend, because he had re-ceived some hurt by a fall from his horse, and wasunder cure. Otho therefore wrote to him, and Gallusadvised him not to precipitate matters, but to wait forthe army from Mysia, which was already on the way.Otho however would not be guided by these counsels,and the opinion of those prevailed who were for ha-zarding a battle immediately. Different reasons are,indeed, alleged for this resolution. The most probableis, that the pretorian cohorts, which composed the em-peror's guards, now coming to taste what real war was,longed to be once more at a distance from it, to returnto the ease, the company, and public diversions ofRome; and therefore they could not be restrained intheir eagerness for a battle, for they imagined thatthey could overpower the enemy at the first charge.Besides, Otho seems to have been no longer able tosupport himself in a state of suspense; such an aver-sion to the thoughts of danger had his dissipation andeffeminacy given him! Overburdened then by hiscares, he hastened to free himself from their weight:he covered his eyes, and leaped down the precipice:he committed all at once to fortune. Such is the ac-count given of the matter by the orator Secundus, whowas Otho's secretary.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.Others say that the two parties were much inclinedto lay down their arms, and unite in choosing an em-peror out of the best generals they had; or, if theycould not agree on it, to leave the election to the se-nate. Nor is it improbable, as the two who werecalled emperors were neither of them men of reputa-tion, that the experienced and prudent part of the sol-diers should form such a design: for they could notbut reflect how unhappy and dreadful a thing it wouldbe to plunge themselves into the same calamities,which the Romans could not bring on each other with-out aching hearts, in the quarrels of Sylla and Man us,of Caeear and Pompey; and for what? but to providean empire to minister to the insatiable appetite andthe drunkenness of Vitellius, or to the luxury and de-baucheries of Otho. These considerations are sup-posed to have induced Celsus to endeavor to gain time,in hopes that matters might be compromised withoutthe sword; while Otho, out of fear of such an agree-ment, hastened the battle.In the mean time he returned to Brixellum, whichcertainly was an additional error: for by that step hedeprived the combatants of the reverence and emula-tion which his presence might have inspired, and tooka considerable limb from the body of the army ; I mean,some of the best and most active men, both horse andfoot, for his body-guard. There happened about thattime a rencounter on the Po, while Cecilia's troops en-deavored to lay a bridge over that river, and Otho's toprevent it. The latter finding their other efforts inef-fectual, put a quantity of torches well covered withbrimstone and pitch into some boats, which were car-ried by the wind and current on the enemy's work.First smoke, and afterwards a bright flame arose; onwhich Cecina's men were so terrified, that they leaped??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHO.331into the river, overset their boats, and were intirelyexposed to their enemies, who laughed at their awk-ward distress.The German troops, however, beat Otho's gladiatorsin a little island of the Po, and killed a considerablenumber of them. Otho's army that was in Bedriacum,resenting this affront, insisted on being led out to battle.Accordingly Proculus marched, and pitched his campat the distance of fifty furlongs from Bedriacum. Buthe chose his ground in a very unskilful manner; for,though it was in the spring season, and the countryafforded many springs and rivulets, his army was dis-tressed for water. Next day Proculus was for march-ing against the enemy, who lay not less than a hundredfurlongs off: but Paulinus would not agree to it. Hesaid, 'They ought to keep the post they had taken,rather than fatigue themselves first, and then imme-diately engage an enemy, who could arm and put them-selves in order of battle at their leisure, while theywere making such a march with all the incumbrance ofbaggage and servants. The generals disputed the point,till a Nuiaidian horseman came with letters from Otho,ordering them to make no longer delay, but proceedto the attack without losing a moment's time. Theythen decamped of course, and went to seek the enemy.The news of their approach threw Cecina into greatconfusion; and immediately quitting bis works andpost on the river, he repaired to the camp, where hefound most of the soldiers armed, and the word alreadygiven by Valens.During the time that the infantry were forming thebest of the cavalry were directed to skirmish. At thatmoment a report was spread, from what cause we can-not tell, amongst Otho's van, that Vitellius' officerswere coming over to their party. As soon, therefore,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.as they approached, they saluted them in a friendlymanner, calling them fellow-soldiers: but instead ofreceiving the appellation, they answered with a furiousand hostile shout. The consequence was, that thepersons who made the compliment were dispirited,and the rest suspected them of treason. This was thefirst thing that disconcerted Otho's troops, for by thistime the enemy had charged. Besides, they couldpreserve no order, the intermixture of the baggage,and the nature of the ground, preventing any regularmovement: for the ground was so full of ditches andother inequalities, that they were forced to break theirranks and wheel about to avoid them, and could onlyfight in small parties. There were but two legions,one of Vitellius' called the Devourer, and one of Otho'scalled the Succorer, which could disentangle them-selves from the defiles and gain the open plain. Theseengaged in a regular battle, and fought a long time.Otho's men were vigorous and brave; but they hadnot seen so much as one action before this; on theother hand, those of Vitellius had much experiencein the field; but they were old, and their strength de-caying.Otho's legion coming on with great fury, moweddown the first ranks, and took the eagle. The enemy,filled with shame and resentment, advanced to chastisethem, slewOrphidius, who commanded the legion, andtook several standards. Against the gladiators, whohad the reputation of being brave fellows, and ex-cellent at close fighting, Alphenus Varus brought upthe Batavians, who come from an island formed by theRhine, and are the best cavalry in Germany. A fewof the gladiators made head against them; but thegreatest part fled to the river, and falling in with someof the enemy's infantry that was posted there, were all??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHo.cut in pieces. But none behaved so ill that day as thepretorian bands. They did not even wait to receivethe enemy's charge, and in their flight they brokethrough the troops that as yet stood their ground, andput them in disorder. Nevertheless, many of Otho'smen were irresistible in the quarter where they fought,and opened a way through the victorious enemy totheir camp. But Proculus and Paulinus took anotherway; for they dreaded the soldiers, who alreadyblamed their generals for the loss of the day.Annius Gallus received into the city all the scatteredparties, and endeavored to encourage them by assur-ances that the advantage on the whole was equal, andthat their troops had the superiority in many parts ofthe field. But Marius Celsus assembled the principalofficers, and desired them to consider of measures thatmight save their country. 'After such an expense ofRoman blood,' said he, ' Otho himself, if he has a pa-triotic principle, would not tempt Fortune any more;since Cato and Scipio, in refusing to submit to Caesarafter the battle of Pharsalia, are accused of having un-necessarily sacrificed the lives of so many brave menin Africa, notwithstanding that they fought for theliberties of their country. Fortune indeed is capri-cious, and all men are liable to suffer by her incon-stancy: yet good men have one advantage which shecannot deprive them of, and that is, to avail themselvesof their reason in whatever may befall them.' Thesearguments prevailed with the officers, and on soundingthe private men, they found them desirous of peace.Titianus himself was of opinion that they ought to sendambassadors to treat for a coalition. In pursuance ofwhich, Celsus and Gallus were charged with a commis-sion to Cecina and Valens. As they were on the road,they met some centurions, who informed them that Vi--??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?PLUTARCH.Cellini' army was advancing to Bedriacum, and that theywere sent before by their generals with proposals foran accommodation. Celsus and Gallus commendedtheir design, and desired them to go back with them tomeet Cecina.When they approached that general's army, Celsuswas in great danger; for the cavalry that were beatenin the affair of the ambuscade happened to be in thevan; and they no sooner saw Celsus than they ad-vanced with loud shouts against him. The centurionshowever put themselves before him, and the other offi-cers called out to them to do him no violence. Cecinahimself, when he was informed of the tumult, rode upand quelled it, and after he had made his complimentsto Celsus in a very obliging manner, accompanied himto Bedriacum.In the mean time, Titianus repenting that he had sentthe ambassadors, placed the most resolute of the sol-diers again on the walls, and exhorted the rest toassist. But when Cecina rode up and offered hishand, not a man of them could resist him. Some sa-luted his men from the walls, and others opened thegates; after which they went out and mixed with thetroops that were coming up. Instead of acts of hos-tility, there was nothing but mutual caresses and otherdemonstrations of friendship; in consequence of which,they all took the oath to Vitellius, and ranged them-selves under his banner.This is the account which most of those that were inthe battle give of it; but at the same time they confessthat they did not know all the particulars, because ofthe confused manner in which they fought and the in-equality of the ground. Long after, when I was pass-ing over the field of battle, Mestrius Florus, a personof consular dignity, showed me an old man, who in his??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHo.youth had served under Otho with others of the sameage with himself, not from inclination, but by con-straint. He told me also, that on visiting the field afterthe battle, he saw a large pile of dead bodies as high asthe head of a man; and on inquiring into the reason,he could neither discover it himself, nor get any infor-mation about it. It was no wonder that there was agreat carnage in case of a general rout, because in acivil war they make no prisoners; for such captiveswould be of no advantage to the conquerors; but it isdifficult to assign a reason why the carcasses should bepiled up in that manner.An uncertain rumor (as it commonly happens) wasfirst brought to Otho, and afterwards some of thewounded came and assured him that the battle was lost.On this occasion, it was nothing extraordinary that hisfriends strove to encourage him and keep him fromdesponding; but the attachment of the soldiers to himexceeds all belief. None of them left him, or wentover to the enemy, or consulted his own safety, evenwhen their chief despaired of his. On the contrary,they crowded his gates; they called him emperor;they left no form of application untried; they kissedhis hands; they fell at his feet, and with groans andtears intreated him not to forsake them, nor give themup to their enemies, but to employ their hearts andhands to the last moment of their lives. They alljoined in this request: and one of the private mendrawing his sword, thus addressed himself to Otho,'Know, Caesar, what your soldiers are ready to dofor you,' and immediately plunged the steel into hisheart.Otho was not moved at this affecting scene, but witha cheerful and steady countenance looking round onthe company, he spoke as follows: 'This day, my fel-??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?336PLUTARCH.low-soldiers, I consider as a more happy one, thanthat on which you made me emperor, when I see youthus disposed, and am so great in your opinion. Butdeprive me not of a still greater happiness, that of lay-ing down my life with honor for so many generous Ro-mans. If I am worthy of the Roman empire, I oughtto shed my blood for my country. I know the victorymy adversaries has gained is by no means decisive. Ihave intelligence that my army from Mysia is at thedistance of but a few days' march; Asia, Syria, andEgypt, are pouring their legions on the Adriatic; theforces in Judea declare for us; the senate is with us;and the very wives and children of our enemies are somany pledges in our hands. But we are not fightingfor Italy with Hannibal or Pyrrhus, or the Cimbrians;our dispute is with the Romans; and whatever partyprevails, whether we conquer or are conquered, ourcountry must suffer. Under the victor's joy she bleeds.Believe, then, my friends, that I can die with greaterglory than reign: for I know no benefit that Rome canreap from my victory, equal to what I shall confer onher by sacrificing myself for peace and unanimity,and to prevent Italy from beholding such another dayas this!'After he had made this speech, and showed himselfimmovable to those who attempted to alter his resolu-tion, he desired his friends, and such senators as werepresent, to leave him, and provide for their own safety.To those that were absent he sent the same commands,and signified his pleasure to the cities by letters, thatthey should receive them honorably, and supply themwith good convoys.He then called his nephew Cocceius, who was yetvery young, and bade him compose himself, and notfear Vitellius. 'I have taken the same care,' said he,??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHo.337'of his mother, his wife and children, as if they hadbeen my own. And for the same reason, I mean foryour sake, I deferred the adoption which I intendedyou: for I thought proper to wait the issue of this war,that you might reign with me if I conquered, and notfall with me if I was overcome. The last thing, myson, I have to recommend to you, is, neither intirelyto forget, nor yet to remember too well that you hadan emperor for your uncle.'A moment after he heard a great noise and tumultat his gate. The soldiers seeing the senators retiring,threatened to kill them if they moved a step farther orabandoned the emperor. Otho, in great concern forthem, showed himself again at the door, but no longerwith a mild and supplicating air; on the contrary, hecast such a stern and angry look on the most turbulentpart of them, that they withdrew in great fear and con-fusion.In the evening he was thirsty, and drank a littlewater. Then he had two swords brought him, andhaving examined the points of both a long time, hesent away the one, and put the other under his arm.After this he called his servants, and with many ex-pressions of kindness gave them money: not that hechose to be lavish of what would soon be another's, forhe gave to some more, and to some less, proportioninghis bounty to their merit, and paying a strict regard topropriety.When he had dismissed them, he dedicated the re-mainder of the night to repose, and slept so sound,that his chamberlains heard him at the door. Earlyin the morning he called his freedman, who assistedhim in the care of the senators, and ordered him tomake the proper inquiries about them. The answerhe brought was, that they were gone, and had beenPLUT. VoL, VII. y??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?338PLUTARCH.provided with every thing they desired. On which hesaid, 'Go you, then, and show yourself to the sol-diers, that they may not imagine you have assisted mein despatching myself, and put you to some crueldeath for it.'As soon as the freedman was gone out he fixed thehilt of his sword on the ground, and holding it withhoth hands, fell on it with so much force, that he ex-pired with one groan. The servants who waited withoutheard the groan, and burst into a loud lamentation,which was echoed through the camp and the city. Thesoldiers ran to the gates with the most pitiable wailingsand most unfeigned grief, reproaching themselves fornot guarding their emperor, and prevent his dying forthem. Not one of them would leave him to providefor himself, though the enemy was approaching. Theyattired the body in a magnificent manner, and prepareda funeral pile; after which they attended the proces-sion in their armor, and happy was the man that couldcome to support his bier. Some kneeled and kissedhis wound, some grasped his hand, and others pros-trated themselves on the ground, and adored him at adistance. Nay, there were some who threw theirtorches on the pile, and then slew themselves. Notthat they had received any extraordinary favors fromthe deceased, or were afraid of suffering under thehands of the conqueror; but it seems that no king ortyrant was ever so passionately fond of governing, asthey were of being governed by Otho. Nor did theiraffection cease with his death; it survived the grave,and terminated in the hatred and destruction of Vi-tellius. Of that we shall give an account in its properplace.After they had interred the remains of Otho theyerected a monument over them, which, neither by its??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?oTHo.339size nor any pomp of epitaph, could excite the leastenvy. I have seen it at Brixillum; it was very modest,and the inscription only thus,To the Memory of Marcus Otho.Otho died at the age of thirty-seven, having reignedonly three months. Those who find fault with his lifeare not more respectable either for their numbers orfor their rank, than those who applaud his death; for,though his life was not so much better than that ofNero, yet his death was nobler.The soldiers were extremely incensed against Pollio,one of the principal officers of the guards, for per-suading them to take the oath immediately to Vitel-lius; and being informed that there were still somesenators on the spot, they let the others pass, but so-licited Verginius Rufus in a very troublesome man-ner. They went in arms to his house, and insistedthat he should take the imperial title, or at least betheir mediator with the conqueror. But he who had re-fused to accept that title from them when they werevictorious, thought it would be the greatest madnessto embrace it after they were beaten. And .he wasafraid of applying to the Germans in their behalf, be-cause he had obliged that people to do many thingscontrary to their inclinations. He therefore went outprivately at another door. When the soldiers foundthat he had left them, they took the oath to Vitellius,and having obtained their pardon, were inrolled amongstthe troops of Caecina.END oF PLUTARCH.??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?0??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?P6P1-90129 IM 'uosjpen??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?c??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?B89099228256A??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google???Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google?B89099228256ASB??Generated for Christian Pecaut (University of Chicago) on 2014-12-26 09:39 GMT / http://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89099228256 Public Domain, Google-digitized / http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google