?The Project Gutenberg EBook of Flame and Shadow, by Sara Teasdale

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Flame and Shadow

Author: Sara Teasdale

Posting Date: July 30, 2008 [EBook #591]
Release Date: July, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLAME AND SHADOW ***




Produced by A. Light.








Flame and Shadow


By

Sara Teasdale



[Note on text:  Italicized stanzas are indented 5 spaces.
Italicized words or phrases are marked by tildes (~).
Lines longer than 78 characters are broken according to metre,
and the continuation is indented two spaces.  Also, some obvious errors
may have been corrected.]





Flame and Shadow


By

Sara Teasdale



Author of "Rivers to the Sea", "Love Songs", etc.





  To E.

  "Recois la flamme ou l'ombre
     De tous mes jours."





  Contents



      I

  Blue Squills
  Stars
  "What Do I Care?"
  Meadowlarks
  Driftwood
  "I Have Loved Hours at Sea"
  August Moonrise



  Memories


      II

  Places
  Old Tunes
  "Only in Sleep"
  Redbirds
  Sunset:  St. Louis
  The Coin
  The Voice


      III

  Day and Night
  Compensation
  I Remembered
  "Oh You Are Coming"
  The Return
  Gray Eyes
  The Net
  The Mystery



  In a Hospital

      IV

  Open Windows
  The New Moon
  Eight O'Clock
  Lost Things
  Pain
  The Broken Field
  The Unseen
  A Prayer


      V

  Spring Torrents
  "I Know the Stars"
  Understanding
  Nightfall
  "It Is Not a Word"
  "My Heart Is Heavy"
  The Nights Remember
  "Let It Be Forgotten"



  The Dark Cup

      VI

  May Day
  "Since There Is No Escape"
  "The Dreams of My Heart"
  "A Little While"
  The Garden
  The Wine
  In a Cuban Garden
  "If I Must Go"


      VII

  In Spring, Santa Barbara
  White Fog
  Arcturus
  Moonlight
  Morning Song
  Gray Fog
  Bells
  Lovely Chance


      VIII

  "There Will Come Soft Rains"
  In a Garden
  Nahant
  Winter Stars
  A Boy
  Winter Dusk



  By the Sea

      IX

  The Unchanging
  June Night
  "Like Barley Bending"
  "Oh Day of Fire and Sun"
  "I Thought of You"
  On the Dunes
  Spray
  If Death Is Kind


      X

  Thoughts
  Faces
  Evening:  New York
  Snowfall
  The Silent Battle
  The Sanctuary
  At Sea
  Dust
  The Long Hill


      XI

  Summer Storm
  In the End
  "It Will Not Change"
  Change
  Water Lilies
  "Did You Never Know?"
  The Treasure
  The Storm



  Songs For Myself

      XII

  The Tree
  At Midnight
  Song Making
  Alone
  Red Maples
  Debtor
  The Wind in the Hemlock




  Flame and Shadow




      I


  Blue Squills


  How many million Aprils came
   Before I ever knew
  How white a cherry bough could be,
   A bed of squills, how blue!

  And many a dancing April
   When life is done with me,
  Will lift the blue flame of the flower
   And the white flame of the tree.

  Oh burn me with your beauty, then,
   Oh hurt me, tree and flower,
  Lest in the end death try to take
   Even this glistening hour.

  O shaken flowers, O shimmering trees,
   O sunlit white and blue,
  Wound me, that I, through endless sleep,
   May bear the scar of you.




  Stars



  Alone in the night
   On a dark hill
  With pines around me
   Spicy and still,

  And a heaven full of stars
   Over my head,
  White and topaz
   And misty red;

  Myriads with beating
   Hearts of fire
  That aeons
   Cannot vex or tire;

  Up the dome of heaven
   Like a great hill,
  I watch them marching
   Stately and still,

  And I know that I
   Am honored to be
  Witness
   Of so much majesty.




  "What Do I Care?"



  What do I care, in the dreams and the languor of spring,
   That my songs do not show me at all?
  For they are a fragrance, and I am a flint and a fire,
   I am an answer, they are only a call.

  But what do I care, for love will be over so soon,
   Let my heart have its say and my mind stand idly by,
  For my mind is proud and strong enough to be silent,
   It is my heart that makes my songs, not I.




  Meadowlarks



  In the silver light after a storm,
   Under dripping boughs of bright new green,
  I take the low path to hear the meadowlarks
   Alone and high-hearted as if I were a queen.

  What have I to fear in life or death
   Who have known three things:  the kiss in the night,
  The white flying joy when a song is born,
   And meadowlarks whistling in silver light.




  Driftwood



  My forefathers gave me
   My spirit's shaken flame,
  The shape of hands, the beat of heart,
   The letters of my name.

  But it was my lovers,
   And not my sleeping sires,
  Who gave the flame its changeful
   And iridescent fires;

  As the driftwood burning
   Learned its jewelled blaze
  From the sea's blue splendor
   Of colored nights and days.




  "I Have Loved Hours at Sea"



  I have loved hours at sea, gray cities,
   The fragile secret of a flower,
  Music, the making of a poem
   That gave me heaven for an hour;

  First stars above a snowy hill,
   Voices of people kindly and wise,
  And the great look of love, long hidden,
   Found at last in meeting eyes.

  I have loved much and been loved deeply--
   Oh when my spirit's fire burns low,
  Leave me the darkness and the stillness,
   I shall be tired and glad to go.




  August Moonrise



  The sun was gone, and the moon was coming
  Over the blue Connecticut hills;
  The west was rosy, the east was flushed,
  And over my head the swallows rushed
  This way and that, with changeful wills.
  I heard them twitter and watched them dart
  Now together and now apart
  Like dark petals blown from a tree;
  The maples stamped against the west
  Were black and stately and full of rest,
  And the hazy orange moon grew up
  And slowly changed to yellow gold
  While the hills were darkened, fold on fold
  To a deeper blue than a flower could hold.
  Down the hill I went, and then
  I forgot the ways of men,
  For night-scents, heady, and damp and cool
  Wakened ecstasy in me
  On the brink of a shining pool.

  O Beauty, out of many a cup
  You have made me drunk and wild
  Ever since I was a child,
  But when have I been sure as now
  That no bitterness can bend
  And no sorrow wholly bow
  One who loves you to the end?
  And though I must give my breath
  And my laughter all to death,
  And my eyes through which joy came,
  And my heart, a wavering flame;
  If all must leave me and go back
  Along a blind and fearful track
  So that you can make anew,
  Fusing with intenser fire,
  Something nearer your desire;
  If my soul must go alone
  Through a cold infinity,
  Or even if it vanish, too,
  Beauty, I have worshipped you.

  Let this single hour atone
  For the theft of all of me.






  Memories
      II






  Places



  Places I love come back to me like music,
   Hush me and heal me when I am very tired;
  I see the oak woods at Saxton's flaming
   In a flare of crimson by the frost newly fired;
  And I am thirsty for the spring in the valley
   As for a kiss ungiven and long desired.

  I know a bright world of snowy hills at Boonton,
   A blue and white dazzling light on everything one sees,
  The ice-covered branches of the hemlocks sparkle
   Bending low and tinkling in the sharp thin breeze,
  And iridescent crystals fall and crackle on the snow-crust
   With the winter sun drawing cold blue shadows from the trees.

  Violet now, in veil on veil of evening
   The hills across from Cromwell grow dreamy and far;
  A wood-thrush is singing soft as a viol
   In the heart of the hollow where the dark pools are;
  The primrose has opened her pale yellow flowers
   And heaven is lighting star after star.

  Places I love come back to me like music--
   Mid-ocean, midnight, the waves buzz drowsily;
  In the ship's deep churning the eerie phosphorescence
   Is like the souls of people who were drowned at sea,
  And I can hear a man's voice, speaking, hushed, insistent,
   At midnight, in mid-ocean, hour on hour to me.




  Old Tunes



  As the waves of perfume, heliotrope, rose,
  Float in the garden when no wind blows,
  Come to us, go from us, whence no one knows;

  So the old tunes float in my mind,
  And go from me leaving no trace behind,
  Like fragrance borne on the hush of the wind.

  But in the instant the airs remain
  I know the laughter and the pain
  Of times that will not come again.

  I try to catch at many a tune
  Like petals of light fallen from the moon,
  Broken and bright on a dark lagoon,

  But they float away--for who can hold
  Youth, or perfume or the moon's gold?




  "Only in Sleep"



  Only in sleep I see their faces,
   Children I played with when I was a child,
  Louise comes back with her brown hair braided,
   Annie with ringlets warm and wild.

  Only in sleep Time is forgotten--
   What may have come to them, who can know?
   Yet we played last night as long ago,
  And the doll-house stood at the turn of the stair.

  The years had not sharpened their smooth round faces,
   I met their eyes and found them mild--
  Do they, too, dream of me, I wonder,
   And for them am I too a child?




  Redbirds



  Redbirds, redbirds,
   Long and long ago,
  What a honey-call you had
   In hills I used to know;

  Redbud, buckberry,
   Wild plum-tree
  And proud river sweeping
   Southward to the sea,

  Brown and gold in the sun
   Sparkling far below,
  Trailing stately round her bluffs
   Where the poplars grow--

  Redbirds, redbirds,
   Are you singing still
  As you sang one May day
   On Saxton's Hill?




  Sunset:  St. Louis



  Hushed in the smoky haze of summer sunset,
  When I came home again from far-off places,
  How many times I saw my western city
   Dream by her river.

  Then for an hour the water wore a mantle
  Of tawny gold and mauve and misted turquoise
  Under the tall and darkened arches bearing
   Gray, high-flung bridges.

  Against the sunset, water-towers and steeples
  Flickered with fire up the slope to westward,
  And old warehouses poured their purple shadows
   Across the levee.

  High over them the black train swept with thunder,
  Cleaving the city, leaving far beneath it
  Wharf-boats moored beside the old side-wheelers
   Resting in twilight.




  The Coin



  Into my heart's treasury
   I slipped a coin
  That time cannot take
   Nor a thief purloin,--
  Oh better than the minting
   Of a gold-crowned king
  Is the safe-kept memory
   Of a lovely thing.




  The Voice



  Atoms as old as stars,
  Mutation on mutation,
  Millions and millions of cells
  Dividing yet still the same,
  From air and changing earth,
  From ancient Eastern rivers,
  From turquoise tropic seas,
  Unto myself I came.

  My spirit like my flesh
  Sprang from a thousand sources,
  From cave-man, hunter and shepherd,
  From Karnak, Cyprus, Rome;
  The living thoughts in me
  Spring from dead men and women,
  Forgotten time out of mind
  And many as bubbles of foam.

  Here for a moment's space
  Into the light out of darkness,
  I come and they come with me
  Finding words with my breath;
  From the wisdom of many life-times
  I hear them cry:  "Forever
  Seek for Beauty, she only
  Fights with man against Death!"






      III






  Day and Night



  In Warsaw in Poland
   Half the world away,
  The one I love best of all
   Thought of me to-day;

  I know, for I went
   Winged as a bird,
  In the wide flowing wind
   His own voice I heard;

  His arms were round me
   In a ferny place,
  I looked in the pool
   And there was his face--

  But now it is night
   And the cold stars say:
  "Warsaw in Poland
   Is half the world away."




  Compensation



  I should be glad of loneliness
   And hours that go on broken wings,
  A thirsty body, a tired heart
   And the unchanging ache of things,
  If I could make a single song
   As lovely and as full of light,
  As hushed and brief as a falling star
   On a winter night.




  I Remembered



  There never was a mood of mine,
   Gay or heart-broken, luminous or dull,
  But you could ease me of its fever
   And give it back to me more beautiful.

  In many another soul I broke the bread,
   And drank the wine and played the happy guest,
  But I was lonely, I remembered you;
   The heart belongs to him who knew it best.




  "Oh You Are Coming"



  Oh you are coming, coming, coming,
   How will hungry Time put by the hours till then?--
  But why does it anger my heart to long so
   For one man out of the world of men?

  Oh I would live in myself only
   And build my life lightly and still as a dream--
  Are not my thoughts clearer than your thoughts
   And colored like stones in a running stream?

  Now the slow moon brightens in heaven,
   The stars are ready, the night is here--
  Oh why must I lose myself to love you,
   My dear?




  The Return



  He has come, he is here,
  My love has come home,
  The minutes are lighter
  Than flying foam,
  The hours are like dancers
  On gold-slippered feet,
  The days are young runners
  Naked and fleet--
  For my love has returned,
  He is home, he is here,
  In the whole world no other
  Is dear as my dear!




  Gray Eyes



  It was April when you came
   The first time to me,
  And my first look in your eyes
   Was like my first look at the sea.

  We have been together
   Four Aprils now
  Watching for the green
   On the swaying willow bough;

  Yet whenever I turn
   To your gray eyes over me,
  It is as though I looked
   For the first time at the sea.




  The Net



  I made you many and many a song,
   Yet never one told all you are--
  It was as though a net of words
   Were flung to catch a star;

  It was as though I curved my hand
   And dipped sea-water eagerly,
  Only to find it lost the blue
   Dark splendor of the sea.




  The Mystery



  Your eyes drink of me,
   Love makes them shine,
  Your eyes that lean
   So close to mine.

  We have long been lovers,
   We know the range
  Of each other's moods
   And how they change;

  But when we look
   At each other so
  Then we feel
   How little we know;

  The spirit eludes us,
   Timid and free--
  Can I ever know you
   Or you know me?






  In a Hospital
      IV






  Open Windows



  Out of the window a sea of green trees
   Lift their soft boughs like the arms of a dancer,
  They beckon and call me, "Come out in the sun!"
   But I cannot answer.

  I am alone with Weakness and Pain,
   Sick abed and June is going,
  I cannot keep her, she hurries by
   With the silver-green of her garments blowing.

  Men and women pass in the street
   Glad of the shining sapphire weather,
  But we know more of it than they,
   Pain and I together.

  They are the runners in the sun,
   Breathless and blinded by the race,
  But we are watchers in the shade
   Who speak with Wonder face to face.




  The New Moon



  Day, you have bruised and beaten me,
  As rain beats down the bright, proud sea,
  Beaten my body, bruised my soul,
  Left me nothing lovely or whole--
  Yet I have wrested a gift from you,
  Day that dies in dusky blue:

  For suddenly over the factories
  I saw a moon in the cloudy seas--
  A wisp of beauty all alone
  In a world as hard and gray as stone--
  Oh who could be bitter and want to die
  When a maiden moon wakes up in the sky?




  Eight O'Clock



  Supper comes at five o'clock,
   At six, the evening star,
  My lover comes at eight o'clock--
   But eight o'clock is far.

  How could I bear my pain all day
   Unless I watched to see
  The clock-hands laboring to bring
   Eight o'clock to me.




  Lost Things



  Oh, I could let the world go by,
   Its loud new wonders and its wars,
  But how will I give up the sky
   When winter dusk is set with stars?

  And I could let the cities go,
   Their changing customs and their creeds,--
  But oh, the summer rains that blow
   In silver on the jewel-weeds!




  Pain



  Waves are the sea's white daughters,
   And raindrops the children of rain,
  But why for my shimmering body
   Have I a mother like Pain?

  Night is the mother of stars,
   And wind the mother of foam--
  The world is brimming with beauty,
   But I must stay at home.




  The Broken Field



  My soul is a dark ploughed field
   In the cold rain;
  My soul is a broken field
   Ploughed by pain.

  Where grass and bending flowers
   Were growing,
  The field lies broken now
   For another sowing.

  Great Sower when you tread
   My field again,
  Scatter the furrows there
   With better grain.




  The Unseen



  Death went up the hall
   Unseen by every one,
  Trailing twilight robes
   Past the nurse and the nun.

  He paused at every door
   And listened to the breath
  Of those who did not know
   How near they were to Death.

  Death went up the hall
   Unseen by nurse and nun;
  He passed by many a door--
   But he entered one.




  A Prayer



  When I am dying, let me know
  That I loved the blowing snow
   Although it stung like whips;
  That I loved all lovely things
  And I tried to take their stings
   With gay unembittered lips;
  That I loved with all my strength,
  To my soul's full depth and length,
   Careless if my heart must break,
  That I sang as children sing
  Fitting tunes to everything,
   Loving life for its own sake.






      V






  Spring Torrents



  Will it always be like this until I am dead,
   Every spring must I bear it all again
  With the first red haze of the budding maple boughs,
   And the first sweet-smelling rain?

  Oh I am like a rock in the rising river
   Where the flooded water breaks with a low call--
  Like a rock that knows the cry of the waters
   And cannot answer at all.




  "I Know the Stars"



  I know the stars by their names,
   Aldebaran, Altair,
  And I know the path they take
   Up heaven's broad blue stair.

  I know the secrets of men
   By the look of their eyes,
  Their gray thoughts, their strange thoughts
   Have made me sad and wise.

  But your eyes are dark to me
   Though they seem to call and call--
  I cannot tell if you love me
   Or do not love me at all.

  I know many things,
   But the years come and go,
  I shall die not knowing
   The thing I long to know.




  Understanding



  I understood the rest too well,
   And all their thoughts have come to be
  Clear as grey sea-weed in the swell
   Of a sunny shallow sea.

  But you I never understood,
   Your spirit's secret hides like gold
  Sunk in a Spanish galleon
   Ages ago in waters cold.




  Nightfall



  We will never walk again
   As we used to walk at night,
  Watching our shadows lengthen
   Under the gold street-light
   When the snow was new and white.

  We will never walk again
   Slowly, we two,
  In spring when the park is sweet
   With midnight and with dew,
   And the passers-by are few.

  I sit and think of it all,
   And the blue June twilight dies,--
  Down in the clanging square
   A street-piano cries
   And stars come out in the skies.




  "It Is Not a Word"



  It is not a word spoken,
   Few words are said;
  Nor even a look of the eyes
   Nor a bend of the head,
  But only a hush of the heart
   That has too much to keep,
  Only memories waking
   That sleep so light a sleep.




  "My Heart Is Heavy"



  My heart is heavy with many a song
   Like ripe fruit bearing down the tree,
  But I can never give you one--
   My songs do not belong to me.

  Yet in the evening, in the dusk
   When moths go to and fro,
  In the gray hour if the fruit has fallen,
   Take it, no one will know.




  The Nights Remember



  The days remember and the nights remember
   The kingly hours that once you made so great,
  Deep in my heart they lie, hidden in their splendor,
   Buried like sovereigns in their robes of state.

  Let them not wake again, better to lie there,
   Wrapped in memories, jewelled and arrayed--
  Many a ghostly king has waked from death-sleep
   And found his crown stolen and his throne decayed.




  "Let It Be Forgotten"



  Let it be forgotten, as a flower is forgotten,
   Forgotten as a fire that once was singing gold,
  Let it be forgotten for ever and ever,
   Time is a kind friend, he will make us old.

  If anyone asks, say it was forgotten
   Long and long ago,
  As a flower, as a fire, as a hushed footfall
   In a long forgotten snow.






  The Dark Cup
      VI






  May Day



  A delicate fabric of bird song
   Floats in the air,
  The smell of wet wild earth
   Is everywhere.

  Red small leaves of the maple
   Are clenched like a hand,
  Like girls at their first communion
   The pear trees stand.

  Oh I must pass nothing by
   Without loving it much,
  The raindrop try with my lips,
   The grass with my touch;

  For how can I be sure
   I shall see again
  The world on the first of May
   Shining after the rain?




  "Since There Is No Escape"



  Since there is no escape, since at the end
   My body will be utterly destroyed,
  This hand I love as I have loved a friend,
   This body I tended, wept with and enjoyed;
  Since there is no escape even for me
   Who love life with a love too sharp to bear:
  The scent of orchards in the rain, the sea
   And hours alone too still and sure for prayer--
  Since darkness waits for me, then all the more
  Let me go down as waves sweep to the shore
   In pride; and let me sing with my last breath;
  In these few hours of light I lift my head;
  Life is my lover--I shall leave the dead
   If there is any way to baffle death.




  "The Dreams of My Heart"



  The dreams of my heart and my mind pass,
   Nothing stays with me long,
  But I have had from a child
   The deep solace of song;

  If that should ever leave me,
   Let me find death and stay
  With things whose tunes are played out and forgotten
   Like the rain of yesterday.




  "A Little While"



  A little while when I am gone
   My life will live in music after me,
  As spun foam lifted and borne on
   After the wave is lost in the full sea.

  A while these nights and days will burn
   In song with the bright frailty of foam,
  Living in light before they turn
   Back to the nothingness that is their home.




  The Garden



  My heart is a garden tired with autumn,
   Heaped with bending asters and dahlias heavy and dark,
  In the hazy sunshine, the garden remembers April,
   The drench of rains and a snow-drop quick and clear as a spark;

  Daffodils blowing in the cold wind of morning,
   And golden tulips, goblets holding the rain--
  The garden will be hushed with snow, forgotten soon, forgotten--
   After the stillness, will spring come again?




  The Wine



  I cannot die, who drank delight
   From the cup of the crescent moon,
  And hungrily as men eat bread,
   Loved the scented nights of June.

  The rest may die--but is there not
   Some shining strange escape for me
  Who sought in Beauty the bright wine
   Of immortality?




  In a Cuban Garden



  Hibiscus flowers are cups of fire,
   (Love me, my lover, life will not stay)
  The bright poinsettia shakes in the wind,
   A scarlet leaf is blowing away.

  A lizard lifts his head and listens--
   Kiss me before the noon goes by,
  Here in the shade of the ceiba hide me
   From the great black vulture circling the sky.




  "If I Must Go"



  If I must go to heaven's end
   Climbing the ages like a stair,
  Be near me and forever bend
   With the same eyes above me there;
  Time will fly past us like leaves flying,
   We shall not heed, for we shall be
  Beyond living, beyond dying,
   Knowing and known unchangeably.






      VII






  In Spring, Santa Barbara



  I have been happy two weeks together,
   My love is coming home to me,
  Gold and silver is the weather
   And smooth as lapis is the sea.

  The earth has turned its brown to green
   After three nights of humming rain,
  And in the valleys peck and preen
   Linnets with a scarlet stain.

  High in the mountains all alone
   The wild swans whistle on the lakes,
  But I have been as still as stone,
   My heart sings only when it breaks.




  White Fog



  Heaven-invading hills are drowned
   In wide moving waves of mist,
  Phlox before my door are wound
   In dripping wreaths of amethyst.

  Ten feet away the solid earth
   Changes into melting cloud,
  There is a hush of pain and mirth,
   No bird has heart to speak aloud.

  Here in a world without a sky,
   Without the ground, without the sea,
  The one unchanging thing is I,
   Myself remains to comfort me.




  Arcturus



  Arcturus brings the spring back
   As surely now as when
  He rose on eastern islands
   For Grecian girls and men;

  The twilight is as clear a blue,
   The star as shaken and as bright,
  And the same thought he gave to them
   He gives to me to-night.




  Moonlight



  It will not hurt me when I am old,
     A running tide where moonlight burned
      Will not sting me like silver snakes;
  The years will make me sad and cold,
      It is the happy heart that breaks.

  The heart asks more than life can give,
     When that is learned, then all is learned;
      The waves break fold on jewelled fold,
  But beauty itself is fugitive,
      It will not hurt me when I am old.




  Morning Song



  A diamond of a morning
   Waked me an hour too soon;
  Dawn had taken in the stars
   And left the faint white moon.

  O white moon, you are lonely,
   It is the same with me,
  But we have the world to roam over,
   Only the lonely are free.




  Gray Fog



  A fog drifts in, the heavy laden
   Cold white ghost of the sea--
  One by one the hills go out,
   The road and the pepper-tree.

  I watch the fog float in at the window
   With the whole world gone blind,
  Everything, even my longing, drowses,
   Even the thoughts in my mind.

  I put my head on my hands before me,
   There is nothing left to be done or said,
  There is nothing to hope for, I am tired,
   And heavy as the dead.




  Bells



  At six o'clock of an autumn dusk
   With the sky in the west a rusty red,
  The bells of the mission down in the valley
   Cry out that the day is dead.

  The first star pricks as sharp as steel--
   Why am I suddenly so cold?
  Three bells, each with a separate sound
   Clang in the valley, wearily tolled.

  Bells in Venice, bells at sea,
   Bells in the valley heavy and slow--
  There is no place over the crowded world
   Where I can forget that the days go.




  Lovely Chance



  O lovely chance, what can I do
  To give my gratefulness to you?
  You rise between myself and me
  With a wise persistency;
  I would have broken body and soul,
  But by your grace, still I am whole.
  Many a thing you did to save me,
  Many a holy gift you gave me,
  Music and friends and happy love
  More than my dearest dreaming of;
  And now in this wide twilight hour
  With earth and heaven a dark, blue flower,
  In a humble mood I bless
  Your wisdom--and your waywardness.
  You brought me even here, where I
  Live on a hill against the sky
  And look on mountains and the sea
  And a thin white moon in the pepper tree.






      VIII






  "There Will Come Soft Rains"

  (War Time)



  There will come soft rains and the smell of the ground,
  And swallows circling with their shimmering sound;

  And frogs in the pools singing at night,
  And wild plum-trees in tremulous white;

  Robins will wear their feathery fire
  Whistling their whims on a low fence-wire;

  And not one will know of the war, not one
  Will care at last when it is done.

  Not one would mind, neither bird nor tree
  If mankind perished utterly;

  And Spring herself, when she woke at dawn,
  Would scarcely know that we were gone.




  In a Garden



  The world is resting without sound or motion,
   Behind the apple tree the sun goes down
  Painting with fire the spires and the windows
   In the elm-shaded town.

  Beyond the calm Connecticut the hills lie
   Silvered with haze as fruits still fresh with bloom,
  The swallows weave in flight across the zenith
   On an aerial loom.

  Into the garden peace comes back with twilight,
   Peace that since noon had left the purple phlox,
  The heavy-headed asters, the late roses
   And swaying hollyhocks.

  For at high-noon I heard from this same garden
   The far-off murmur as when many come;
  Up from the village surged the blind and beating
   Red music of a drum;

  And the hysterical sharp fife that shattered
   The brittle autumn air,
  While they came, the young men marching
   Past the village square. . . .

  Across the calm Connecticut the hills change
   To violet, the veils of dusk are deep--
  Earth takes her children's many sorrows calmly
   And stills herself to sleep.




  Nahant



  Bowed as an elm under the weight of its beauty,
  So earth is bowed, under her weight of splendor,
  Molten sea, richness of leaves and the burnished
   Bronze of sea-grasses.

  Clefts in the cliff shelter the purple sand-peas
  And chicory flowers bluer than the ocean
  Flinging its foam high, white fire in sunshine,
   Jewels of water.

  Joyous thunder of blown waves on the ledges,
  Make me forget war and the dark war-sorrow--
  Against the sky a sentry paces the sea-cliff
   Slim in his khaki.




  Winter Stars



  I went out at night alone;
   The young blood flowing beyond the sea
  Seemed to have drenched my spirit's wings--
   I bore my sorrow heavily.

  But when I lifted up my head
   From shadows shaken on the snow,
  I saw Orion in the east
   Burn steadily as long ago.

  From windows in my father's house,
   Dreaming my dreams on winter nights,
  I watched Orion as a girl
   Above another city's lights.

  Years go, dreams go, and youth goes too,
   The world's heart breaks beneath its wars,
  All things are changed, save in the east
   The faithful beauty of the stars.




  A Boy



  Out of the noise of tired people working,
   Harried with thoughts of war and lists of dead,
  His beauty met me like a fresh wind blowing,
   Clean boyish beauty and high-held head.

  Eyes that told secrets, lips that would not tell them,
   Fearless and shy the young unwearied eyes--
  Men die by millions now, because God blunders,
   Yet to have made this boy he must be wise.




  Winter Dusk



  I watch the great clear twilight
   Veiling the ice-bowed trees;
  Their branches tinkle faintly
   With crystal melodies.

  The larches bend their silver
   Over the hush of snow;
  One star is lighted in the west,
   Two in the zenith glow.

  For a moment I have forgotten
   Wars and women who mourn--
  I think of the mother who bore me
   And thank her that I was born.






  By the Sea
      IX






  The Unchanging



  Sun-swept beaches with a light wind blowing
   From the immense blue circle of the sea,
  And the soft thunder where long waves whiten--
   These were the same for Sappho as for me.

  Two thousand years--much has gone by forever,
   Change takes the gods and ships and speech of men--
  But here on the beaches that time passes over
   The heart aches now as then.




  June Night



  Oh Earth, you are too dear to-night,
   How can I sleep while all around
  Floats rainy fragrance and the far
   Deep voice of the ocean that talks to the ground?

  Oh Earth, you gave me all I have,
   I love you, I love you,--oh what have I
  That I can give you in return--
   Except my body after I die?




  "Like Barley Bending"



  Like barley bending
   In low fields by the sea,
  Singing in hard wind
   Ceaselessly;

  Like barley bending
   And rising again,
  So would I, unbroken,
   Rise from pain;

  So would I softly,
   Day long, night long,
  Change my sorrow
   Into song.




  "Oh Day of Fire and Sun"



  Oh day of fire and sun,
   Pure as a naked flame,
  Blue sea, blue sky and dun
   Sands where he spoke my name;

  Laughter and hearts so high
   That the spirit flew off free,
  Lifting into the sky
   Diving into the sea;

  Oh day of fire and sun
   Like a crystal burning,
  Slow days go one by one,
   But you have no returning.




  "I Thought of You"



  I thought of you and how you love this beauty,
   And walking up the long beach all alone
  I heard the waves breaking in measured thunder
   As you and I once heard their monotone.

  Around me were the echoing dunes, beyond me
   The cold and sparkling silver of the sea--
  We two will pass through death and ages lengthen
   Before you hear that sound again with me.




  On the Dunes



  If there is any life when death is over,
   These tawny beaches will know much of me,
  I shall come back, as constant and as changeful
   As the unchanging, many-colored sea.

  If life was small, if it has made me scornful,
   Forgive me; I shall straighten like a flame
  In the great calm of death, and if you want me
   Stand on the sea-ward dunes and call my name.




  Spray



  I knew you thought of me all night,
   I knew, though you were far away;
    I felt your love blow over me
    As if a dark wind-riven sea
   Drenched me with quivering spray.

  There are so many ways to love
   And each way has its own delight--
    Then be content to come to me
    Only as spray the beating sea
   Drives inland through the night.




  If Death Is Kind



  Perhaps if Death is kind, and there can be returning,
   We will come back to earth some fragrant night,
  And take these lanes to find the sea, and bending
   Breathe the same honeysuckle, low and white.

  We will come down at night to these resounding beaches
   And the long gentle thunder of the sea,
  Here for a single hour in the wide starlight
   We shall be happy, for the dead are free.






      X






  Thoughts



  When I am all alone
   Envy me most,
  Then my thoughts flutter round me
   In a glimmering host;

  Some dressed in silver,
   Some dressed in white,
  Each like a taper
   Blossoming light;

  Most of them merry,
   Some of them grave,
  Each of them lithe
   As willows that wave;

  Some bearing violets,
   Some bearing bay,
  One with a burning rose
   Hidden away--

  When I am all alone
   Envy me then,
  For I have better friends
   Than women and men.




  Faces



  People that I meet and pass
   In the city's broken roar,
  Faces that I lose so soon
   And have never found before,

  Do you know how much you tell
   In the meeting of our eyes,
  How ashamed I am, and sad
   To have pierced your poor disguise?

  Secrets rushing without sound
   Crying from your hiding places--
  Let me go, I cannot bear
   The sorrow of the passing faces.

  --People in the restless street,
   Can it be, oh can it be
  In the meeting of our eyes
   That you know as much of me?




  Evening:  New York



  Blue dust of evening over my city,
   Over the ocean of roofs and the tall towers
  Where the window-lights, myriads and myriads,
   Bloom from the walls like climbing flowers.




  Snowfall



  "She can't be unhappy," you said,
   "The smiles are like stars in her eyes,
  And her laugh is thistledown
   Around her low replies."
  "Is she unhappy?" you said--
   But who has ever known
  Another's heartbreak--
   All he can know is his own;
  And she seems hushed to me,
   As hushed as though
  Her heart were a hunter's fire
   Smothered in snow.




  The Silent Battle

  (In Memory of J. W. T. Jr.)



  He was a soldier in that fight
   Where there is neither flag nor drum,
  And without sound of musketry
   The stealthy foemen come.

  Year in, year out, by day and night
   They forced him to a slow retreat,
  And for his gallant fight alone
   No fife was blown, and no drum beat.

  In winter fog, in gathering mist
   The gray grim battle had its end--
  And at the very last we knew
   His enemy had turned his friend.




  The Sanctuary



  If I could keep my innermost Me
  Fearless, aloof and free
  Of the least breath of love or hate,
  And not disconsolate
  At the sick load of sorrow laid on men;
  If I could keep a sanctuary there
  Free even of prayer,
  If I could do this, then,
  With quiet candor as I grew more wise
  I could look even at God with grave forgiving eyes.




  At Sea



  In the pull of the wind I stand, lonely,
   On the deck of a ship, rising, falling,
  Wild night around me, wild water under me,
   Whipped by the storm, screaming and calling.

  Earth is hostile and the sea hostile,
   Why do I look for a place to rest?
  I must fight always and die fighting
   With fear an unhealing wound in my breast.




  Dust



  When I went to look at what had long been hidden,
   A jewel laid long ago in a secret place,
  I trembled, for I thought to see its dark deep fire--
   But only a pinch of dust blew up in my face.

  I almost gave my life long ago for a thing
   That has gone to dust now, stinging my eyes--
  It is strange how often a heart must be broken
   Before the years can make it wise.




  The Long Hill



  I must have passed the crest a while ago
   And now I am going down--
  Strange to have crossed the crest and not to know,
   But the brambles were always catching the hem of my gown.

  All the morning I thought how proud I should be
   To stand there straight as a queen,
  Wrapped in the wind and the sun with the world under me--
   But the air was dull, there was little I could have seen.

  It was nearly level along the beaten track
   And the brambles caught in my gown--
  But it's no use now to think of turning back,
   The rest of the way will be only going down.






      XI






  Summer Storm



  The panther wind
   Leaps out of the night,
  The snake of lightning
   Is twisting and white,
  The lion of thunder
   Roars--and we
  Sit still and content
   Under a tree--
  We have met fate together
   And love and pain,
  Why should we fear
   The wrath of the rain!




  In the End



  All that could never be said,
   All that could never be done,
  Wait for us at last
   Somewhere back of the sun;

  All the heart broke to forego
   Shall be ours without pain,
  We shall take them as lightly as girls
   Pluck flowers after rain.

  And when they are ours in the end
   Perhaps after all
  The skies will not open for us
   Nor heaven be there at our call.




  "It Will Not Change"



  It will not change now
   After so many years;
  Life has not broken it
   With parting or tears;
  Death will not alter it,
   It will live on
  In all my songs for you
   When I am gone.




  Change



  Remember me as I was then;
   Turn from me now, but always see
  The laughing shadowy girl who stood
   At midnight by the flowering tree,
  With eyes that love had made as bright
  As the trembling stars of the summer night.

  Turn from me now, but always hear
   The muted laughter in the dew
  Of that one year of youth we had,
   The only youth we ever knew--
  Turn from me now, or you will see
  What other years have done to me.




  Water Lilies



  If you have forgotten water lilies floating
   On a dark lake among mountains in the afternoon shade,
  If you have forgotten their wet, sleepy fragrance,
   Then you can return and not be afraid.

  But if you remember, then turn away forever
   To the plains and the prairies where pools are far apart,
  There you will not come at dusk on closing water lilies,
   And the shadow of mountains will not fall on your heart.




  "Did You Never Know?"



  Did you never know, long ago, how much you loved me--
   That your love would never lessen and never go?
  You were young then, proud and fresh-hearted,
   You were too young to know.

  Fate is a wind, and red leaves fly before it
   Far apart, far away in the gusty time of year--
  Seldom we meet now, but when I hear you speaking,
   I know your secret, my dear, my dear.




  The Treasure



  When they see my songs
   They will sigh and say,
  "Poor soul, wistful soul,
   Lonely night and day."

  They will never know
   All your love for me
  Surer than the spring,
   Stronger than the sea;

  Hidden out of sight
   Like a miser's gold
  In forsaken fields
   Where the wind is cold.




  The Storm



  I thought of you when I was wakened
   By a wind that made me glad and afraid
  Of the rushing, pouring sound of the sea
   That the great trees made.

  One thought in my mind went over and over
   While the darkness shook and the leaves were thinned--
  I thought it was you who had come to find me,
   You were the wind.






  Songs For Myself
      XII






  The Tree



  Oh to be free of myself,
   With nothing left to remember,
  To have my heart as bare
   As a tree in December;

  Resting, as a tree rests
   After its leaves are gone,
  Waiting no more for a rain at night
   Nor for the red at dawn;

  But still, oh so still
   While the winds come and go,
  With no more fear of the hard frost
   Or the bright burden of snow;

  And heedless, heedless
   If anyone pass and see
  On the white page of the sky
   Its thin black tracery.




  At Midnight



  Now at last I have come to see what life is,
   Nothing is ever ended, everything only begun,
  And the brave victories that seem so splendid
   Are never really won.

  Even love that I built my spirit's house for,
   Comes like a brooding and a baffled guest,
  And music and men's praise and even laughter
   Are not so good as rest.




  Song Making



  My heart cried like a beaten child
   Ceaselessly all night long;
  I had to take my own cries
   And thread them into a song.

  One was a cry at black midnight
   And one when the first cock crew--
  My heart was like a beaten child,
   But no one ever knew.

  Life, you have put me in your debt
   And I must serve you long--
  But oh, the debt is terrible
   That must be paid in song.




  Alone



  I am alone, in spite of love,
   In spite of all I take and give--
  In spite of all your tenderness,
   Sometimes I am not glad to live.

  I am alone, as though I stood
   On the highest peak of the tired gray world,
  About me only swirling snow,
   Above me, endless space unfurled;

  With earth hidden and heaven hidden,
   And only my own spirit's pride
  To keep me from the peace of those
   Who are not lonely, having died.




  Red Maples



  In the last year I have learned
  How few men are worth my trust;
  I have seen the friend I loved
  Struck by death into the dust,
  And fears I never knew before
  Have knocked and knocked upon my door--
  "I shall hope little and ask for less,"
  I said, "There is no happiness."

  I have grown wise at last--but how
  Can I hide the gleam on the willow-bough,
  Or keep the fragrance out of the rain
  Now that April is here again?
  When maples stand in a haze of fire
  What can I say to the old desire,
  What shall I do with the joy in me
  That is born out of agony?




  Debtor



  So long as my spirit still
   Is glad of breath
  And lifts its plumes of pride
   In the dark face of death;
  While I am curious still
   Of love and fame,
  Keeping my heart too high
   For the years to tame,
  How can I quarrel with fate
   Since I can see
  I am a debtor to life,
   Not life to me?




  The Wind in the Hemlock



  Steely stars and moon of brass,
  How mockingly you watch me pass!
  You know as well as I how soon
  I shall be blind to stars and moon,
  Deaf to the wind in the hemlock tree,
  Dumb when the brown earth weighs on me.

  With envious dark rage I bear,
  Stars, your cold complacent stare;
  Heart-broken in my hate look up,
  Moon, at your clear immortal cup,
  Changing to gold from dusky red--
  Age after age when I am dead
  To be filled up with light, and then
  Emptied, to be refilled again.

  What has man done that only he
  Is slave to death--so brutally
  Beaten back into the earth
  Impatient for him since his birth?

  Oh let me shut my eyes, close out
  The sight of stars and earth and be
  Sheltered a minute by this tree.
  Hemlock, through your fragrant boughs
  There moves no anger and no doubt,
  No envy of immortal things.
  The night-wind murmurs of the sea
  With veiled music ceaselessly,
  That to my shaken spirit sings.
  From their frail nest the robins rouse,
  In your pungent darkness stirred,
  Twittering a low drowsy word--
  And me you shelter, even me.
  In your quietness you house
  The wind, the woman and the bird.
  You speak to me and I have heard:

       If I am peaceful, I shall see
       Beauty's face continually;
       Feeding on her wine and bread
       I shall be wholly comforted,
       For she can make one day for me
       Rich as my lost eternity.






  [End of original text.]




Biographical Note:


Sara Teasdale (1884-1933):

Teasdale was born in St. Louis, Missouri, where she attended a school
that was founded by the grandfather of another great poet from St. Louis--
T. S. Eliot.  She later associated herself more with New York City.
Her first book of poems was "Sonnets to Duse" (1907),
but "Helen of Troy" (1911) was the true launch of her career,
followed by "Rivers to the Sea" (1915), "Love Songs" (1917),
"Flame and Shadow" (1920) and more.  Her final volume, "Strange Victory",
is considered by many to be predictive of her suicide in 1933.

----

From an anthology of verse by Jessie B. Rittenhouse (1913, 1917):

"Teasdale, Sara (Mrs. Ernst B. Filsinger).  Born in St. Louis, Missouri,
August 10, 1884.  Educated at private schools.  She is the author
of "Sonnets to Duse", 1907; "Helen of Troy, and Other Poems", 1911;
"Rivers to the Sea", 1915; "Love Songs", 1917.  Editor of
"The Answering Voice:  A Hundred Love Lyrics by Women", 1917.
Miss Teasdale is a lyric poet of an unusually pure and spontaneous gift."










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Flame and Shadow, by Sara Teasdale

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLAME AND SHADOW ***

***** This file should be named 591.txt or 591.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/591/

Produced by A. Light.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
?Project Gutenberg's Helen of Troy and Other Poems, by Sara Teasdale

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Helen of Troy and Other Poems

Author: Sara Teasdale

Posting Date: July 20, 2008 [EBook #400]
Release Date: January, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HELEN OF TROY AND OTHER POEMS ***




Produced by A. Light and L. Bowser.  For Gwenette.









[Note on text:  Italicized stanzas are indented 5 spaces.  Italicized
words or phrases are capitalized.  Lines longer than 78 characters are
broken, and the continuation is indented two spaces.  Some obvious
errors may be corrected.]

[This etext has been transcribed from the original edition, which was
published in New York in 1911.]






Helen of Troy And Other Poems

By

Sara Teasdale

[American (Missouri & New York) Poet]


Author of "Sonnets to Duse, and Other Poems"




To Marion Cummings Stanley




Contents


Helen of Troy

Beatrice

Sappho

Marianna Alcoforando

Guenevere

Erinna

Love Songs
   Song
   The Rose and the Bee
   The Song Maker
   Wild Asters
   When Love Goes
   The Wayfarer
   The Princess in the Tower
   When Love Was Born
   The Shrine
   The Blind
   Love Me
   The Song for Colin
   Four Winds
   Roundel
   Dew
   A Maiden
   "I Love You"
   But Not to Me
   Hidden Love
   Snow Song
   Youth and the Pilgrim
   The Wanderer
   I Would Live in Your Love
   May
   Rispetto
   Less than the Cloud to the Wind
   Buried Love
   Song
   Pierrot
   At Night
   Song
   Love in Autumn
   The Kiss
   November
   A Song of the Princess
   The Wind
   A Winter Night
   The Metropolitan Tower
   Gramercy Park
   In the Metropolitan Museum
   Coney Island
   Union Square
   Central Park at Dusk
   Young Love

Sonnets and Lyrics
   Primavera Mia
   Soul's Birth
   Love and Death
   For the Anniversary of John Keats' Death
   Silence
   The Return
   Fear
   Anadyomene
   Galahad in the Castle of the Maidens
   To an Aeolian Harp
   To Erinna
   To Cleis
   Paris in Spring
   Madeira from the Sea
   City Vignettes
   By the Sea
   On the Death of Swinburne
   Triolets
   Vox Corporis
   A Ballad of Two Knights
   Christmas Carol
   The Faery Forest
   A Fantasy
   A Minuet of Mozart's
   Twilight
   The Prayer
   Two Songs for a Child

On the Tower




Helen of Troy and Other Poems




Helen of Troy


Wild flight on flight against the fading dawn
The flames' red wings soar upward duskily.
This is the funeral pyre and Troy is dead
That sparkled so the day I saw it first,
And darkened slowly after.  I am she
Who loves all beauty--yet I wither it.
Why have the high gods made me wreak their wrath--
Forever since my maidenhood to sow
Sorrow and blood about me?  Lo, they keep
Their bitter care above me even now.
It was the gods who led me to this lair,
That tho' the burning winds should make me weak,
They should not snatch the life from out my lips.
Olympus let the other women die;
They shall be quiet when the day is done
And have no care to-morrow.  Yet for me
There is no rest.  The gods are not so kind
To her made half immortal like themselves.
It is to you I owe the cruel gift,
Leda, my mother, and the Swan, my sire,
To you the beauty and to you the bale;
For never woman born of man and maid
Had wrought such havoc on the earth as I,
Or troubled heaven with a sea of flame
That climbed to touch the silent whirling stars
And blotted out their brightness ere the dawn.
Have I not made the world to weep enough?
Give death to me.  Yet life is more than death;
How could I leave the sound of singing winds,
The strong sweet scent that breathes from off the sea,
Or shut my eyes forever to the spring?
I will not give the grave my hands to hold,
My shining hair to light oblivion.
Have those who wander through the ways of death,
The still wan fields Elysian, any love
To lift their breasts with longing, any lips
To thirst against the quiver of a kiss?
Lo, I shall live to conquer Greece again,
To make the people love, who hate me now.
My dreams are over, I have ceased to cry
Against the fate that made men love my mouth
And left their spirits all too deaf to hear
The little songs that echoed through my soul.
I have no anger now.  The dreams are done;
Yet since the Greeks and Trojans would not see
Aught but my body's fairness, till the end,
In all the islands set in all the seas,
And all the lands that lie beneath the sun,
Till light turn darkness, and till time shall sleep,
Men's lives shall waste with longing after me,
For I shall be the sum of their desire,
The whole of beauty, never seen again.
And they shall stretch their arms and starting, wake
With "Helen!" on their lips, and in their eyes
The vision of me.  Always I shall be
Limned on the darkness like a shaft of light
That glimmers and is gone.  They shall behold
Each one his dream that fashions me anew;--
With hair like lakes that glint beneath the stars
Dark as sweet midnight, or with hair aglow
Like burnished gold that still retains the fire.
Yea, I shall haunt until the dusk of time
The heavy eyelids filled with fleeting dreams.

I wait for one who comes with sword to slay--
The king I wronged who searches for me now;
And yet he shall not slay me.  I shall stand
With lifted head and look within his eyes,
Baring my breast to him and to the sun.
He shall not have the power to stain with blood
That whiteness--for the thirsty sword shall fall
And he shall cry and catch me in his arms,
Bearing me back to Sparta on his breast.
Lo, I shall live to conquer Greece again!




Beatrice


Send out the singers--let the room be still;
They have not eased my pain nor brought me sleep.
Close out the sun, for I would have it dark
That I may feel how black the grave will be.
The sun is setting, for the light is red,
And you are outlined in a golden fire,
Like Ursula upon an altar-screen.
Come, leave the light and sit beside my bed,
For I have had enough of saints and prayers.
Strange broken thoughts are beating in my brain,
They come and vanish and again they come.
It is the fever driving out my soul,
And Death stands waiting by the arras there.

Ornella, I will speak, for soon my lips
Shall keep a silence till the end of time.
You have a mouth for loving--listen then:
Keep tryst with Love before Death comes to tryst;
For I, who die, could wish that I had lived
A little closer to the world of men,
Not watching always thro' the blazoned panes
That show the world in chilly greens and blues
And grudge the sunshine that would enter in.
I was no part of all the troubled crowd
That moved beneath the palace windows here,
And yet sometimes a knight in shining steel
Would pass and catch the gleaming of my hair,
And wave a mailed hand and smile at me,
Whereat I made no sign and turned away,
Affrighted and yet glad and full of dreams.
Ah, dreams and dreams that asked no answering!
I should have wrought to make my dreams come true,
But all my life was like an autumn day,
Full of gray quiet and a hazy peace.

What was I saying?  All is gone again.
It seemed but now I was the little child
Who played within a garden long ago.
Beyond the walls the festal trumpets blared.
Perhaps they carried some Madonna by
With tossing ensigns in a sea of flowers,
A painted Virgin with a painted Child,
Who saw for once the sweetness of the sun
Before they shut her in an altar-niche
Where tapers smoke against the windy gloom.
I gathered roses redder than my gown
And played that I was Saint Elizabeth,
Whose wine had turned to roses in her hands.
And as I played, a child came thro' the gate,
A boy who looked at me without a word,
As tho' he saw stretch far behind my head
Long lines of radiant angels, row on row.
That day we spoke a little, timidly,
And after that I never heard the voice
That sang so many songs for love of me.
He was content to stand and watch me pass,
To seek for me at matins every day,
Where I could feel his eyes the while I prayed.
I think if he had stretched his hands to me,
Or moved his lips to say a single word,
I might have loved him--he had wondrous eyes.

Ornella, are you there?  I cannot see--
Is every one so lonely when he dies?

The room is filled with lights--with waving lights--
Who are the men and women 'round the bed?
What have I said, Ornella?  Have they heard?
There was no evil hidden in my life,
And yet, and yet, I would not have them know--

Am I not floating in a mist of light?
O lift me up and I shall reach the sun!




Sappho


The twilight's inner flame grows blue and deep,
And in my Lesbos, over leagues of sea,
The temples glimmer moonwise in the trees.
Twilight has veiled the little flower face
Here on my heart, but still the night is kind
And leaves her warm sweet weight against my breast.
Am I that Sappho who would run at dusk
Along the surges creeping up the shore
When tides came in to ease the hungry beach,
And running, running, till the night was black,
Would fall forespent upon the chilly sand
And quiver with the winds from off the sea?
Ah, quietly the shingle waits the tides
Whose waves are stinging kisses, but to me
Love brought no peace, nor darkness any rest.
I crept and touched the foam with fevered hands
And cried to Love, from whom the sea is sweet,
From whom the sea is bitterer than death.
Ah, Aphrodite, if I sing no more
To thee, God's daughter, powerful as God,
It is that thou hast made my life too sweet
To hold the added sweetness of a song.
There is a quiet at the heart of love,
And I have pierced the pain and come to peace.
I hold my peace, my Cleis, on my heart;
And softer than a little wild bird's wing
Are kisses that she pours upon my mouth.
Ah, never any more when spring like fire
Will flicker in the newly opened leaves,
Shall I steal forth to seek for solitude
Beyond the lure of light Alcaeus' lyre,
Beyond the sob that stilled Erinna's voice.
Ah, never with a throat that aches with song,
Beneath the white uncaring sky of spring,
Shall I go forth to hide awhile from Love
The quiver and the crying of my heart.
Still I remember how I strove to flee
The love-note of the birds, and bowed my head
To hurry faster, but upon the ground
I saw two winged shadows side by side,
And all the world's spring passion stifled me.
Ah, Love, there is no fleeing from thy might,
No lonely place where thou hast never trod,
No desert thou hast left uncarpeted
With flowers that spring beneath thy perfect feet.
In many guises didst thou come to me;
I saw thee by the maidens while they danced,
Phaon allured me with a look of thine,
In Anactoria I knew thy grace,
I looked at Cercolas and saw thine eyes;
But never wholly, soul and body mine,
Didst thou bid any love me as I loved.
Now I have found the peace that fled from me;
Close, close, against my heart I hold my world.
Ah, Love that made my life a lyric cry,
Ah, Love that tuned my lips to lyres of thine,
I taught the world thy music, now alone
I sing for one who falls asleep to hear.




Marianna Alcoforando

(The Portuguese Nun--1640-1723)


The sparrows wake beneath the convent eaves;
I think I have not slept the whole night through.
But I am old; the aged scarcely know
The times they wake and sleep, for life burns down;
They breathe the calm of death before they die.
The long night ends, the day comes creeping in,
Showing the sorrows that the darkness hid,
The bended head of Christ, the blood, the thorns,
The wall's gray stains of damp, the pallet bed
Where little Sister Marta dreams of saints,
Waking with arms outstretched imploringly
That seek to stay a vision's vanishing.
I never had a vision, yet for me
Our Lady smiled while all the convent slept
One winter midnight hushed around with snow--
I thought she might be kinder than the rest,
And so I came to kneel before her feet,
Sick with love's sorrow and love's bitterness.
But when I would have made the blessed sign,
I found the water frozen in the font,
And touched but ice within the carved stone.
The saints had hid themselves away from me,
Leaving the windows black against the night;
And when I sank upon the altar steps,
Before the Virgin Mother and her Child,
The last, pale, low-burnt taper flickered out,
But in the darkness, smooth and fathomless,
Still twinkled like a star the holy lamp
That cast a dusky glow upon her face.
Then through the numbing cold peace fell on me,
Submission and the gracious gift of tears,
For when I looked, Oh! blessed miracle,
Her lips had parted and Our Lady smiled!
And then I knew that Love is worth its pain
And that my heart was richer for his sake,
Since lack of love is bitterest of all.

The day is broad awake--the first long beam
Of level sun finds Sister Marta's face,
And trembling there it lights a timid smile
Upon the lips that say so many prayers,
And have no words for hate and none for love.
But when she passes where her prayers have gone,
Will God not smile a little sadly then,
And send her back with gentle words to earth
That she may hold a child against her breast
And feel its little hands upon her hair?
We weep before the Blessed Mother's shrine,
To think upon her sorrows, but her joys
What nun could ever know a tithing of?
The precious hours she watched above His sleep
Were worth the fearful anguish of the end.
Yea, lack of love is bitterest of all;
Yet I have felt what thing it is to know
One thought forever, sleeping or awake;
To say one name whose sweetness grows so strange
That it might work a spell on those who weep;
To feel the weight of love upon my heart
So heavy that the blood can scarcely flow.
Love comes to some unlooked-for, quietly,
As when at twilight, with a soft surprise,
We see the new-born crescent in the blue;
And unto others love is planet-like,
A cold and placid gleam that wavers not,
And there are those who wait the call of love
Expectant of his coming, as we watch
To see the east grow pallid ere the moon
Lifts up her flower-like head against the night.
Love came to me as comes a cruel sun,
That on some rain-drenched morning, when the leaves
Are bowed beneath their clinging weight of drops,
Tears through the mist, and burns with fervent heat
The tender grasses and the meadow flowers;
Then suddenly the heavy clouds close in
And through the dark the thunder's muttering
Is drowned amid the dashing of the rain.

But I have seen my day grow calm again.
The sun sets slowly on a peaceful world,
And sheds a quiet light across the fields.




Guenevere


I was a queen, and I have lost my crown;
A wife, and I have broken all my vows;
A lover, and I ruined him I loved:--
There is no other havoc left to do.
A little month ago I was a queen,
And mothers held their babies up to see
When I came riding out of Camelot.
The women smiled, and all the world smiled too.
And now, what woman's eyes would smile on me?
I still am beautiful, and yet what child
Would think of me as some high, heaven-sent thing,
An angel, clad in gold and miniver?
The world would run from me, and yet am I
No different from the queen they used to love.
If water, flowing silver over stones,
Is forded, and beneath the horses' feet
Grows turbid suddenly, it clears again,
And men will drink it with no thought of harm.
Yet I am branded for a single fault.

I was the flower amid a toiling world,
Where people smiled to see one happy thing,
And they were proud and glad to raise me high;
They only asked that I should be right fair,
A little kind, and gowned wondrously,
And surely it were little praise to me
If I had pleased them well throughout my life.

I was a queen, the daughter of a king.
The crown was never heavy on my head,
It was my right, and was a part of me.
The women thought me proud, the men were kind,
And bowed right gallantly to kiss my hand,
And watched me as I passed them calmly by,
Along the halls I shall not tread again.
What if, to-night, I should revisit them?
The warders at the gates, the kitchen-maids,
The very beggars would stand off from me,
And I, their queen, would climb the stairs alone,
Pass through the banquet-hall, a loathed thing,
And seek my chambers for a hiding-place,
And I should find them but a sepulchre,
The very rushes rotted on the floors,
The fire in ashes on the freezing hearth.
I was a queen, and he who loved me best
Made me a woman for a night and day,
And now I go unqueened forevermore.
A queen should never dream on summer eves,
When hovering spells are heavy in the dusk:--
I think no night was ever quite so still,
So smoothly lit with red along the west,
So deeply hushed with quiet through and through.
And strangely clear, and deeply dyed with light,
The trees stood straight against a paling sky,
With Venus burning lamp-like in the west.

I walked alone amid a thousand flowers,
That drooped their heads and drowsed beneath the dew,
And all my thoughts were quieted to sleep.
Behind me, on the walk, I heard a step--
I did not know my heart could tell his tread,
I did not know I loved him till that hour.
Within my breast I felt a wild, sick pain,
The garden reeled a little, I was weak,
And quick he came behind me, caught my arms,
That ached beneath his touch; and then I swayed,
My head fell backward and I saw his face.

All this grows bitter that was once so sweet,
And many mouths must drain the dregs of it.
But none will pity me, nor pity him
Whom Love so lashed, and with such cruel thongs.




Erinna


They sent you in to say farewell to me,
No, do not shake your head; I see your eyes
That shine with tears.  Sappho, you saw the sun
Just now when you came hither, and again,
When you have left me, all the shimmering
Great meadows will laugh lightly, and the sun
Put round about you warm invisible arms
As might a lover, decking you with light.
I go toward darkness tho' I lie so still.
If I could see the sun, I should look up
And drink the light until my eyes were blind;
I should kneel down and kiss the blades of grass,
And I should call the birds with such a voice,
With such a longing, tremulous and keen,
That they would fly to me and on the breast
Bear evermore to tree-tops and to fields
The kiss I gave them.  Sappho, tell me this,
Was I not sometimes fair?  My eyes, my mouth,
My hair that loved the wind, were they not worth
The breath of love upon them?  Yet he passed,
And he will pass to-night when all the air
Is blue with twilight; but I shall not see.
I shall have gone forever.  Hold my hands,
Hold fast that Death may never come between;
Swear by the gods you will not let me go;
Make songs for Death as you would sing to Love--
But you will not assuage him.  He alone
Of all the gods will take no gifts from men.
I am afraid, afraid.

                      Sappho, lean down.
Last night the fever gave a dream to me,
It takes my life and gives a little dream.
I thought I saw him stand, the man I love,
Here in my quiet chamber, with his eyes
Fixed on me as I entered, while he drew
Silently toward me--he who night by night
Goes by my door without a thought of me--
Neared me and put his hand behind my head,
And leaning toward me, kissed me on the mouth.
That was a little dream for Death to give,
Too short to take the whole of life for, yet
I woke with lips made quiet by a kiss.
The dream is worth the dying.  Do not smile
So sadly on me with your shining eyes,
You who can set your sorrow to a song
And ease your hurt by singing.  But to me
My songs are less than sea-sand that the wind
Drives stinging over me and bears away.
I have no care what place the grains may fall,
Nor of my songs, if Time shall blow them back,
As land-wind breaks the lines of dying foam
Along the bright wet beaches, scattering
The flakes once more against the laboring sea,
Into oblivion.  What care have I
To please Apollo since Love hearkens not?
Your words will live forever, men will say
"She was the perfect lover"--I shall die,
I loved too much to live.  Go Sappho, go--
I hate your hands that beat so full of life,
Go, lest my hatred hurt you.  I shall die,
But you will live to love and love again.
He might have loved some other spring than this;
I should have kept my life--I let it go.
He would not love me now tho' Cypris bound
Her girdle round me.  I am Death's, not Love's.
Go from me, Sappho, back to find the sun.


I am alone, alone.  O Cyprian . . .




Love Songs



   Song


You bound strong sandals on my feet,
 You gave me bread and wine,
And bade me out, 'neath sun and stars,
 For all the world was mine.

Oh take the sandals off my feet,
 You know not what you do;
For all my world is in your arms,
 My sun and stars are you.




   The Rose and the Bee


If I were a bee and you were a rose,
Would you let me in when the gray wind blows?
Would you hold your petals wide apart,
Would you let me in to find your heart,
    If you were a rose?

"If I were a rose and you were a bee,
You should never go when you came to me,
I should hold my love on my heart at last,
I should close my leaves and keep you fast,
    If you were a bee."




   The Song Maker


I made a hundred little songs
 That told the joy and pain of love,
And sang them blithely, tho' I knew
 No whit thereof.

I was a weaver deaf and blind;
 A miracle was wrought for me,
But I have lost my skill to weave
 Since I can see.

For while I sang--ah swift and strange!
 Love passed and touched me on the brow,
And I who made so many songs
 Am silent now.




   Wild Asters


In the spring I asked the daisies
 If his words were true,
And the clever little daisies
 Always knew.

Now the fields are brown and barren,
 Bitter autumn blows,
And of all the stupid asters
 Not one knows.




   When Love Goes


  I

O mother, I am sick of love,
 I cannot laugh nor lift my head,
My bitter dreams have broken me,
 I would my love were dead.

"Drink of the draught I brew for thee,
Thou shalt have quiet in its stead."


  II

Where is the silver in the rain,
 Where is the music in the sea,
Where is the bird that sang all day
 To break my heart with melody?

"The night thou badst Love fly away,
He hid them all from thee."




   The Wayfarer


Love entered in my heart one day,
 A sad, unwelcome guest;
But when he begged that he might stay,
 I let him wait and rest.

He broke my sleep with sorrowing,
 And shook my dreams with tears,
And when my heart was fain to sing,
 He stilled its joy with fears.

But now that he has gone his way,
 I miss the old sweet pain,
And sometimes in the night I pray
 That he may come again.




   The Princess in the Tower


  I

The Princess sings:

  I am the princess up in the tower
   And I dream the whole day thro'
  Of a knight who shall come with a silver spear
   And a waving plume of blue.

  I am the princess up in the tower,
   And I dream my dreams by day,
  But sometimes I wake, and my eyes are wet,
   When the dusk is deep and gray.

  For the peasant lovers go by beneath,
   I hear them laugh and kiss,
  And I forget my day-dream knight,
   And long for a love like this.


  II

The Minstrel sings:

  I lie beside the princess' tower,
   So close she cannot see my face,
  And watch her dreaming all day long,
   And bending with a lily's grace.

  Her cheeks are paler than the moon
   That sails along a sunny sky,
  And yet her silent mouth is red
   Where tender words and kisses lie.

  I am a minstrel with a harp,
   For love of her my songs are sweet,
  And yet I dare not lift the voice
   That lies so far beneath her feet.


  III

The Knight sings:

  O princess cease your dreams awhile
   And look adown your tower's gray side--
  The princess gazes far away,
   Nor hears nor heeds the words I cried.

  Perchance my heart was overbold,
   God made her dreams too pure to break,
  She sees the angels in the air
   Fly to and fro for Mary's sake.

  Farewell, I mount and go my way,
  --But oh her hair the sun sifts thro'--
  The tilts and tourneys wait my spear,
   I am the Knight of the Plume of Blue.




   When Love Was Born


When Love was born I think he lay
 Right warm on Venus' breast,
And whiles he smiled and whiles would play
 And whiles would take his rest.

But always, folded out of sight,
 The wings were growing strong
That were to bear him off in flight
 Erelong, erelong.




   The Shrine


There is no lord within my heart,
 Left silent as an empty shrine
 Where rose and myrtle intertwine,
Within a place apart.

No god is there of carven stone
 To watch with still approving eyes
 My thoughts like steady incense rise;
I dream and weep alone.

But if I keep my altar fair,
 Some morning I shall lift my head
 From roses deftly garlanded
To find the god is there.




   The Blind


The birds are all a-building,
 They say the world's a-flower,
And still I linger lonely
 Within a barren bower.

I weave a web of fancies
 Of tears and darkness spun.
How shall I sing of sunlight
 Who never saw the sun?

I hear the pipes a-blowing,
 But yet I may not dance,
I know that Love is passing,
 I cannot catch his glance.

And if his voice should call me
 And I with groping dim
Should reach his place of calling
 And stretch my arms to him,

The wind would blow between my hands
 For Joy that I shall miss,
The rain would fall upon my mouth
 That his will never kiss.




   Love Me


Brown-thrush singing all day long
 In the leaves above me,
Take my love this little song,
 "Love me, love me, love me!"

When he harkens what you say,
 Bid him, lest he miss me,
Leave his work or leave his play,
 And kiss me, kiss me, kiss me!




   The Song for Colin


I sang a song at dusking time
 Beneath the evening star,
And Terence left his latest rhyme
 To answer from afar.

Pierrot laid down his lute to weep,
 And sighed, "She sings for me,"
But Colin slept a careless sleep
 Beneath an apple tree.




   Four Winds


"Four winds blowing thro' the sky,
You have seen poor maidens die,
Tell me then what I shall do
That my lover may be true."
Said the wind from out the south,
"Lay no kiss upon his mouth,"
And the wind from out the west,
"Wound the heart within his breast,"
And the wind from out the east,
"Send him empty from the feast,"
And the wind from out the north,
"In the tempest thrust him forth,
When thou art more cruel than he,
Then will Love be kind to thee."




   Roundel


If he could know my songs are all for him,
At silver dawn or in the evening glow,
Would he not smile and think it but a whim,
    If he could know?

Or would his heart rejoice and overflow,
As happy brooks that break their icy rim
When April's horns along the hillsides blow?

I may not speak till Eros' torch is dim,
The god is bitter and will have it so;
And yet to-night our fate would seem less grim
    If he could know.




   Dew


I dream that he is mine,
 I dream that he is true,
And all his words I keep
 As rose-leaves hold the dew.

O little thirsty rose,
 O little heart beware,
Lest you should hope to hold
 A hundred roses' share.




   A Maiden


Oh if I were the velvet rose
 Upon the red rose vine,
I'd climb to touch his window
 And make his casement fine.

And if I were the little bird
 That twitters on the tree,
All day I'd sing my love for him
 Till he should harken me.

But since I am a maiden
 I go with downcast eyes,
And he will never hear the songs
 That he has turned to sighs.

And since I am a maiden
 My love will never know
That I could kiss him with a mouth
 More red than roses blow.




   "I Love You"


When April bends above me
 And finds me fast asleep,
Dust need not keep the secret
 A live heart died to keep.

When April tells the thrushes,
 The meadow-larks will know,
And pipe the three words lightly
 To all the winds that blow.

Above his roof the swallows,
 In notes like far-blown rain,
Will tell the little sparrow
 Beside his window-pane.

O sparrow, little sparrow,
 When I am fast asleep,
Then tell my love the secret
 That I have died to keep.




   But Not to Me


The April night is still and sweet
 With flowers on every tree;
Peace comes to them on quiet feet,
    But not to me.

My peace is hidden in his breast
 Where I shall never be,
Love comes to-night to all the rest,
    But not to me.




   Hidden Love


I hid the love within my heart,
 And lit the laughter in my eyes,
That when we meet he may not know
 My love that never dies.

But sometimes when he dreams at night
 Of fragrant forests green and dim,
It may be that my love crept out
 And brought the dream to him.

And sometimes when his heart is sick
 And suddenly grows well again,
It may be that my love was there
 To free his life of pain.




   Snow Song


Fairy snow, fairy snow,
Blowing, blowing everywhere,
 Would that I
 Too, could fly
Lightly, lightly through the air.

Like a wee, crystal star
I should drift, I should blow
 Near, more near,
 To my dear
Where he comes through the snow.

I should fly to my love
Like a flake in the storm,
 I should die,
 I should die,
On his lips that are warm.




   Youth and the Pilgrim


Gray pilgrim, you have journeyed far,
 I pray you tell to me
Is there a land where Love is not,
 By shore of any sea?

For I am weary of the god,
 And I would flee from him
Tho' I must take a ship and go
 Beyond the ocean's rim.

"I know a port where Love is not,
 The ship is in your hand,
Then plunge your sword within your breast
 And you will reach the land."




   The Wanderer


I saw the sunset-colored sands,
 The Nile like flowing fire between,
 Where Rameses stares forth serene,
And Ammon's heavy temple stands.

I saw the rocks where long ago,
 Above the sea that cries and breaks,
 Bright Perseus with Medusa's snakes
Set free the maiden white like snow.

And many skies have covered me,
 And many winds have blown me forth,
 And I have loved the green bright north,
And I have loved the cold sweet sea.

But what to me are north and south,
 And what the lure of many lands,
 Since you have leaned to catch my hands
And lay a kiss upon my mouth.




   I Would Live in Your Love


I would live in your love as the sea-grasses live in the sea,
Borne up by each wave as it passes, drawn down by each wave that recedes;
I would empty my soul of the dreams that have gathered in me,
I would beat with your heart as it beats, I would follow your soul
  as it leads.




   May


The wind is tossing the lilacs,
 The new leaves laugh in the sun,
And the petals fall on the orchard wall,
 But for me the spring is done.

Beneath the apple blossoms
 I go a wintry way,
For love that smiled in April
 Is false to me in May.




   Rispetto


Was that his step that sounded on the stair?
 Was that his knock I heard upon the door?
I grow so tired I almost cease to care,
 And yet I would that he might come once more.

It was the wind I heard, that mocks at me,
The bitter wind that is more cruel than he;
It was the wind that knocked upon the door,
But he will never knock nor enter more.




   Less than the Cloud to the Wind


Less than the cloud to the wind,
 Less than the foam to the sea,
Less than the rose to the storm
   Am I to thee.

More than the star to the night,
 More than the rain to the lea,
More than heaven to earth
   Art thou to me.




   Buried Love


I shall bury my weary Love
 Beneath a tree,
In the forest tall and black
 Where none can see.

I shall put no flowers at his head,
 Nor stone at his feet,
For the mouth I loved so much
 Was bittersweet.

I shall go no more to his grave,
 For the woods are cold.
I shall gather as much of joy
 As my hands can hold.

I shall stay all day in the sun
 Where the wide winds blow,
But oh, I shall weep at night
 When none will know.




   Song


O woe is me, my heart is sad,
 For I should never know
If Love came by like any lad,
 Without his silver bow.

Or if he left his arrows sharp
 And came a minstrel weary,
I'd never tell him by his harp
 Nor know him for my dearie.

"O go your ways and have no fear,
 For tho' Love passes by,
He'll come a hundred times, my dear,
 Before your turn to die."




   Pierrot


Pierrot stands in the garden
 Beneath a waning moon,
And on his lute he fashions
 A little silver tune.

Pierrot plays in the garden,
 He thinks he plays for me,
But I am quite forgotten
 Under the cherry tree.

Pierrot plays in the garden,
 And all the roses know
That Pierrot loves his music,
 But I love Pierrot.




   At Night


Love said, "Wake still and think of me,"
 Sleep, "Close your eyes till break of day,"
But Dreams came by and smilingly
 Gave both to Love and Sleep their way.




   Song


When Love comes singing to his heart
 That would not wake for me,
I think that I shall know his joy
 By my own ecstasy.

And tho' the sea were all between,
 The time their hands shall meet,
My heart will know his happiness,
 So wildly it will beat.

And when he bends above her mouth,
 Rejoicing for his sake,
My soul will sing a little song,
 But oh, my heart will break.




   Love in Autumn


I sought among the drifting leaves,
 The golden leaves that once were green,
To see if Love were hiding there
 And peeping out between.

For thro' the silver showers of May
 And thro' the summer's heavy heat,
In vain I sought his golden head
 And light, fast-flying feet.

Perhaps when all the world is bare
 And cruel winter holds the land,
The Love that finds no place to hide
 Will run and catch my hand.

I shall not care to have him then,
 I shall be bitter and a-cold--
It grows too late for frolicking
 When all the world is old.

Then little hiding Love, come forth,
 Come forth before the autumn goes,
And let us seek thro' ruined paths
 The garden's last red rose.




   The Kiss


I hoped that he would love me,
 And he has kissed my mouth,
But I am like a stricken bird
 That cannot reach the south.

For tho' I know he loves me,
 To-night my heart is sad;
His kiss was not so wonderful
 As all the dreams I had.




   November


The world is tired, the year is old,
 The little leaves are glad to die,
The wind goes shivering with cold
 Among the rushes dry.

Our love is dying like the grass,
 And we who kissed grow coldly kind,
Half glad to see our poor love pass
 Like leaves along the wind.




   A Song of the Princess


The princess has her lovers,
 A score of knights has she,
And each can sing a madrigal,
 And praise her gracefully.

But Love that is so bitter
 Hath put within her heart
A longing for the scornful knight
 Who silent stands apart.

And tho' the others praise and plead,
 She maketh no reply,
Yet for a single word from him,
 I ween that she would die.




   The Wind


A wind is blowing over my soul,
 I hear it cry the whole night thro'--
Is there no peace for me on earth
 Except with you?

Alas, the wind has made me wise,
 Over my naked soul it blew,--
There is no peace for me on earth
 Even with you.




   A Winter Night


My window-pane is starred with frost,
 The world is bitter cold to-night,
The moon is cruel and the wind
 Is like a two-edged sword to smite.

God pity all the homeless ones,
 The beggars pacing to and fro.
God pity all the poor to-night
 Who walk the lamp-lit streets of snow.

My room is like a bit of June,
 Warm and close-curtained fold on fold,
But somewhere, like a homeless child,
 My heart is crying in the cold.




   The Metropolitan Tower


We walked together in the dusk
 To watch the tower grow dimly white,
And saw it lift against the sky
 Its flower of amber light.

You talked of half a hundred things,
 I kept each little word you said;
And when at last the hour was full,
 I saw the light turn red.

You did not know the time had come,
 You did not see the sudden flower,
Nor know that in my heart Love's birth
 Was reckoned from that hour.




   Gramercy Park

     For W. P.


The little park was filled with peace,
 The walks were carpeted with snow,
But every iron gate was locked.
 Lest if we entered, peace would go.

We circled it a dozen times,
 The wind was blowing from the sea,
I only felt your restless eyes
 Whose love was like a cloak for me.

Oh heavy gates that fate has locked
 To bar the joy we may not win,
Peace would go out forevermore
 If we should dare to enter in.




   In the Metropolitan Museum


Within the tiny Pantheon
 We stood together silently,
Leaving the restless crowd awhile
 As ships find shelter from the sea.

The ancient centuries came back
 To cover us a moment's space,
And thro' the dome the light was glad
 Because it shone upon your face.

Ah, not from Rome but farther still,
 Beyond sun-smitten Salamis,
The moment took us, till you stooped
 To find the present with a kiss.




   Coney Island


Why did you bring me here?
The sand is white with snow,
Over the wooden domes
The winter sea-winds blow--
There is no shelter near,
 Come, let us go.

With foam of icy lace
The sea creeps up the sand,
The wind is like a hand
That strikes us in the face.
Doors that June set a-swing
Are bolted long ago;
We try them uselessly--
Alas, there cannot be
For us a second spring;
 Come, let us go.




   Union Square


With the man I love who loves me not,
 I walked in the street-lamps' flare;
We watched the world go home that night
 In a flood through Union Square.

I leaned to catch the words he said
 That were light as a snowflake falling;
Ah well that he never leaned to hear
 The words my heart was calling.

And on we walked and on we walked
 Past the fiery lights of the picture shows--
Where the girls with thirsty eyes go by
 On the errand each man knows.

And on we walked and on we walked,
 At the door at last we said good-bye;
I knew by his smile he had not heard
 My heart's unuttered cry.

With the man I love who loves me not
 I walked in the street-lamps' flare--
But oh, the girls who can ask for love
 In the lights of Union Square.




   Central Park at Dusk


Buildings above the leafless trees
 Loom high as castles in a dream,
While one by one the lamps come out
 To thread the twilight with a gleam.

There is no sign of leaf or bud,
 A hush is over everything--
Silent as women wait for love,
 The world is waiting for the spring.




   Young Love


  I

I cannot heed the words they say,
 The lights grow far away and dim,
Amid the laughing men and maids
 My eyes unbidden seek for him.

I hope that when he smiles at me
 He does not guess my joy and pain,
For if he did, he is too kind
 To ever look my way again.


  II

I have a secret in my heart
 No ears have ever heard,
And still it sings there day by day
 Most like a caged bird.

And when it beats against the bars,
 I do not set it free,
For I am happier to know
 It only sings for me.


  III

I wrote his name along the beach,
 I love the letters so.
Far up it seemed and out of reach,
 For still the tide was low.

But oh, the sea came creeping up,
 And washed the name away,
And on the sand where it had been
 A bit of sea-grass lay.

A bit of sea-grass on the sand,
 Dropped from a mermaid's hair--
Ah, had she come to kiss his name
 And leave a token there?


  IV

What am I that he should love me,
He who stands so far above me,
 What am I?
I am like a cowslip turning
 Toward the sky,
Where a planet's golden burning
Breaks the cowslip's heart with yearning,
What am I that he should love me,
 What am I?


  V

O dreams that flock about my sleep,
 I pray you bring my love to me,
And let me think I hear his voice
 Again ring free.

And if you care to please me well,
 And live to-morrow in my mind,
Let him who was so cold before,
 To-night seem kind.


  VI

I plucked a daisy in the fields,
 And there beneath the sun
I let its silver petals fall
    One after one.

I said, "He loves me, loves me not,"
 And oh, my heart beat fast,
The flower was kind, it let me say
   "He loves me," last.

I kissed the little leafless stem,
 But oh, my poor heart knew
The words the flower had said to me,
   They were not true.


  VII

I sent my love a letter,
 And if he loves me not,
He shall not find my love for him
 In any line or dot.

But if he loves me truly,
 He'll find it hidden deep,
As dawn gleams red thro' chilly clouds
 To eyes awaked from sleep.


  VIII

The world is cold and gray and wet,
And I am heavy-hearted, yet
When I am home and look to see
The place my letters wait for me,
If I should find ONE letter there,
I think I should not greatly care
If it were rainy or were fair,
For all the world would suddenly
Seem like a festival to me.


  IX

I hid three words within my heart,
 That longed to fly to him,
At dawn they woke me with a start,
 They sang till day was dim.

And now at last I let them fly,
 As little birds should do,
And he will know the first is "I",
 The others "Love" and "You".


  X

Across the twilight's violet
 His curtained window glimmers gold;
Oh happy light that round my love
   Can fold.

Oh happy book within his hand,
 Oh happy page he glorifies,
Oh happy little word beneath
   His eyes.

But oh, thrice happy, happy I
 Who love him more than songs can tell,
For in the heaven of his heart
   I dwell.




Sonnets and Lyrics




   Primavera Mia


As kings who see their little life-day pass,
Take off the heavy ermine and the crown,
So had the trees that autumn-time laid down
Their golden garments on the faded grass,
When I, who watched the seasons in the glass
Of mine own thoughts, saw all the autumn's brown
Leap into life and don a sunny gown
Of leafage such as happy April has.
Great spring came singing upward from the south;
For in my heart, far carried on the wind,
Your words like winged seeds took root and grew,
And all the world caught music from your mouth;
I saw the light as one who had been blind,
And knew my sun and song and spring were you.




   Soul's Birth


When you were born, beloved, was your soul
New made by God to match your body's flower,
And were they both at one same precious hour
Sent forth from heaven as a perfect whole?
Or had your soul since dim creation burned,
A star in some still region of the sky,
That leaping earthward, left its place on high
And to your little new-born body yearned?
No words can tell in what celestial hour
God made your soul and gave it mortal birth,
Nor in the disarray of all the stars
Is any place so sweet that such a flower
Might linger there until thro' heaven's bars,
It heard God's voice that bade it down to earth.




   Love and Death


Shall we, too, rise forgetful from our sleep,
And shall my soul that lies within your hand
Remember nothing, as the blowing sand
Forgets the palm where long blue shadows creep
When winds along the darkened desert sweep?
Or would it still remember, tho' it spanned
A thousand heavens, while the planets fanned
The vacant ether with their voices deep?
Soul of my soul, no word shall be forgot,
Nor yet alone, beloved, shall we see
The desolation of extinguished suns,
Nor fear the void wherethro' our planet runs,
For still together shall we go and not
Fare forth alone to front eternity.




   For the Anniversary of John Keats' Death

     (February 23, 1821)


At midnight when the moonlit cypress trees
Have woven round his grave a magic shade,
Still weeping the unfinished hymn he made,
There moves fresh Maia like a morning breeze
Blown over jonquil beds when warm rains cease.
And stooping where her poet's head is laid,
Selene weeps while all the tides are stayed
And swaying seas are darkened into peace.
But they who wake the meadows and the tides
Have hearts too kind to bid him wake from sleep
Who murmurs sometimes when his dreams are deep,
Startling the Quiet Land where he abides,
And charming still, sad-eyed Persephone
With visions of the sunny earth and sea.




   Silence

     (To Eleonora Duse)


We are anhungered after solitude,
Deep stillness pure of any speech or sound,
Soft quiet hovering over pools profound,
The silences that on the desert brood,
Above a windless hush of empty seas,
The broad unfurling banners of the dawn,
A faery forest where there sleeps a Faun;
Our souls are fain of solitudes like these.
O woman who divined our weariness,
And set the crown of silence on your art,
From what undreamed-of depth within your heart
Have you sent forth the hush that makes us free
To hear an instant, high above earth's stress,
The silent music of infinity?




   The Return


I turned the key and opened wide the door
To enter my deserted room again,
Where thro' the long hot months the dust had lain.
Was it not lonely when across the floor
No step was heard, no sudden song that bore
My whole heart upward with a joyous pain?
Were not the pictures and the volumes fain
To have me with them always as before?
But Giorgione's Venus did not deign
To lift her lids, nor did the subtle smile
Of Mona Lisa deepen.  Madeleine
Still wept against the glory of her hair,
Nor did the lovers part their lips the while,
But kissed unheeding that I watched them there.




   Fear


I am afraid, oh I am so afraid!
The cold black fear is clutching me to-night
As long ago when they would take the light
And leave the little child who would have prayed,
Frozen and sleepless at the thought of death.
My heart that beats too fast will rest too soon;
I shall not know if it be night or noon,--
Yet shall I struggle in the dark for breath?
Will no one fight the Terror for my sake,
The heavy darkness that no dawn will break?
How can they leave me in that dark alone,
Who loved the joy of light and warmth so much,
And thrilled so with the sense of sound and touch,--
How can they shut me underneath a stone?




   Anadyomene


The wide, bright temple of the world I found,
And entered from the dizzy infinite
That I might kneel and worship thee in it;
Leaving the singing stars their ceaseless round
Of silver music sound on orbed sound,
For measured spaces where the shrines are lit,
And men with wisdom or with little wit
Implore the gods that mercy may abound.
Ah, Aphrodite, was it not from thee
My summons came across the endless spaces?
Mother of Love, turn not thy face from me
Now that I seek for thee in human faces;
Answer my prayer or set my spirit free
Again to drift along the starry places.




   Galahad in the Castle of the Maidens

     (To the maiden with the hidden face in Abbey's painting)


The other maidens raised their eyes to him
Who stumbled in before them when the fight
Had left him victor, with a victor's right.
I think his eyes with quick hot tears grew dim;
He scarcely saw her swaying white and slim,
And trembling slightly, dreaming of his might,
Nor knew he touched her hand, as strangely light
As a wan wraith's beside a river's rim.
The other maidens raised their eyes to see
And only she has hid her face away,
And yet I ween she loved him more than they,
And very fairly fashioned was her face.
Yet for Love's shame and sweet humility,
She dared not meet him with their queenlike grace.




   To an Aeolian Harp


The winds have grown articulate in thee,
And voiced again the wail of ancient woe
That smote upon the winds of long ago:
The cries of Trojan women as they flee,
The quivering moan of pale Andromache,
Now lifted loud with pain and now brought low.
It is the soul of sorrow that we know,
As in a shell the soul of all the sea.
So sometimes in the compass of a song,
Unknown to him who sings, thro' lips that live,
The voiceless dead of long-forgotten lands
Proclaim to us their heaviness and wrong
In sweeping sadness of the winds that give
Thy strings no rest from weariless wild hands.




   To Erinna


Was Time not harsh to you, or was he kind,
O pale Erinna of the perfect lyre,
That he has left no word of singing fire
Whereby you waked the dreaming Lesbian wind,
And kindled night along the lyric shore?
O girl whose lips Erato stooped to kiss,
Do you go sorrowing because of this
In fields where poets sing forevermore?
Or are you glad and is it best to be
A silent music men have never heard,
A dream in all our souls that we may say:
"Her voice had all the rapture of the sea,
And all the clear cool quiver of a bird
Deep in a forest at the break of day"?




   To Cleis

     "I have a fair daughter with a form like a golden flower,
   Cleis, the beloved."
                                        Sapphic fragment.


When the dusk was wet with dew,
 Cleis, did the muses nine
 Listen in a silent line
While your mother sang to you?

Did they weep or did they smile
 When she crooned to still your cries,
 She, a muse in human guise,
Who forsook her lyre awhile?

Did you feel her wild heart beat?
 Did the warmth of all the sun
 Thro' your little body run
When she kissed your hands and feet?

Did your fingers, babywise,
 Touch her face and touch her hair,
 Did you think your mother fair,
Could you bear her burning eyes?

Are the songs that soothed your fears
 Vanished like a vanished flame,
 Save the line where shines your name
Starlike down the graying years?

Cleis speaks no word to me,
 For the land where she has gone
 Lieth mute at dusk and dawn
Like a windless tideless sea.




   Paris in Spring


The city's all a-shining
 Beneath a fickle sun,
A gay young wind's a-blowing,
 The little shower is done.
But the rain-drops still are clinging
 And falling one by one--
Oh it's Paris, it's Paris,
 And spring-time has begun.

I know the Bois is twinkling
 In a sort of hazy sheen,
And down the Champs the gray old arch
 Stands cold and still between.
But the walk is flecked with sunlight
 Where the great acacias lean,
Oh it's Paris, it's Paris,
 And the leaves are growing green.

The sun's gone in, the sparkle's dead,
 There falls a dash of rain,
But who would care when such an air
 Comes blowing up the Seine?
And still Ninette sits sewing
 Beside her window-pane,
When it's Paris, it's Paris,
 And spring-time's come again.




   Madeira from the Sea


Out of the delicate dream of the distance an emerald emerges
Veiled in the violet folds of the air of the sea;
Softly the dream grows awakening--shimmering white of a city,
Splashes of crimson, the gay bougainvillea, the palms.
High in the infinite blue of its heaven a quiet cloud lingers,
Lost and forgotten of winds that have fallen asleep,
Fallen asleep to the tune of a Portuguese song in a garden.




   City Vignettes


  I
        Dawn

The greenish sky glows up in misty reds,
 The purple shadows turn to brick and stone,
The dreams wear thin, men turn upon their beds,
 And hear the milk-cart jangle by alone.


  II
        Dusk

The city's street, a roaring blackened stream
 Walled in by granite, thro' whose thousand eyes
A thousand yellow lights begin to gleam,
 And over all the pale untroubled skies.


  III
        Rain at Night

The street-lamps shine in a yellow line
 Down the splashy, gleaming street,
And the rain is heard now loud now blurred
 By the tread of homing feet.




   By the Sea


Beside an ebbing northern sea
While stars awaken one by one,
We walk together, I and he.

He woos me with an easy grace
That proves him only half sincere;
A light smile flickers on his face.

To him love-making is an art,
And as a flutist plays a flute,
So does he play upon his heart

A music varied to his whim.
He has no use for love of mine,
He would not have me answer him.

To hide my eyes within the night
I watch the changeful lighthouse gleam
Alternately with red and white.

My laughter smites upon my ears,
So one who cries and wakes from sleep
Knows not it is himself he hears.

What if my voice should let him know
The mocking words were all a sham,
And lips that laugh could tremble so?

What if I lost the power to lie,
And he should only hear his name
In one low, broken cry?




   On the Death of Swinburne


He trod the earth but yesterday,
And now he treads the stars.
 He left us in the April time
 He praised so often in his rhyme,
He left the singing and the lyre and went his way.

He drew new music from our tongue,
A music subtly wrought,
 And moulded words to his desire,
 As wind doth mould a wave of fire;
From strangely fashioned harps slow golden tones he wrung.

I think the singing understands
That he who sang is still,
 And Iseult cries that he is dead,--
 Does not Dolores bow her head
And Fragoletta weep and wring her little hands?

New singing now the singer hears
To lyre and lute and harp;
 Catullus waits to welcome him,
 And thro' the twilight sweet and dim,
Sappho's forgotten songs are falling on his ears.




   Triolets


  I

Love looked back as he took his flight,
 And lo, his eyes were filled with tears.
Was it for love of lost delight
Love looked back as he took his flight?
Only I know while day grew night,
 Turning still to the vanished years,
Love looked back as he took his flight,
 And lo, his eyes were filled with tears.


  II
        (Written in a copy of "La Vita Nuova".  For M. C. S.)

If you were Lady Beatrice
 And I the Florentine,
I'd never waste my time like this--
If you were Lady Beatrice
I'd woo and then demand a kiss,
 Nor weep like Dante here, I ween,
If you were Lady Beatrice
 And I the Florentine.


  III
        (Written in a copy of "The Poems of Sappho".)

Beyond the dim Hesperides,
 The girl who sang them long ago
Could never dream that over seas,
Beyond the dim Hesperides,
The wind would blow such songs as these--
 I wonder now if she can know,
Beyond the dim Hesperides,
 The girl who sang them long ago?


  IV

Dead leaves upon the stream
 And dead leaves on the air--
All of my lost hopes seem
Dead leaves upon the stream;
I watch them in a dream,
 Going I know not where,
Dead leaves upon the stream
 And dead leaves on the air.




   Vox Corporis


The beast to the beast is calling,
 And the soul bends down to wait;
Like the stealthy lord of the jungle,
 The white man calls his mate.

The beast to the beast is calling,
 They rush through the twilight sweet,
But the soul is a wary hunter,
 He will not let them meet.




   A Ballad of Two Knights


Two knights rode forth at early dawn
 A-seeking maids to wed,
Said one, "My lady must be fair,
 With gold hair on her head."

Then spake the other knight-at-arms:
 "I care not for her face,
But she I love must be a dove
 For purity and grace."

And each knight blew upon his horn
 And went his separate way,
And each knight found a lady-love
 Before the fall of day.

But she was brown who should have had
 The shining yellow hair--
I ween the knights forgot their words
 Or else they ceased to care.

For he who wanted purity
 Brought home a wanton wild,
And when each saw the other knight
 I ween that each knight smiled.




   Christmas Carol


The kings they came from out the south,
 All dressed in ermine fine,
They bore Him gold and chrysoprase,
 And gifts of precious wine.

The shepherds came from out the north,
 Their coats were brown and old,
They brought Him little new-born lambs--
 They had not any gold.

The wise-men came from out the east,
 And they were wrapped in white;
The star that led them all the way
 Did glorify the night.

The angels came from heaven high,
 And they were clad with wings;
And lo, they brought a joyful song
 The host of heaven sings.

The kings they knocked upon the door,
 The wise-men entered in,
The shepherds followed after them
 To hear the song begin.

And Mary held the little child
 And sat upon the ground;
She looked up, she looked down,
 She looked all around.

The angels sang thro' all the night
 Until the rising sun,
But little Jesus fell asleep
 Before the song was done.




   The Faery Forest


The faery forest glimmered
 Beneath an ivory moon,
The silver grasses shimmered
 Against a faery tune.

Beneath the silken silence
 The crystal branches slept,
And dreaming thro' the dew-fall
 The cold white blossoms wept.




   A Fantasy


Her voice is like clear water
 That drips upon a stone
In forests far and silent
 Where Quiet plays alone.

Her thoughts are like the lotus
 Abloom by sacred streams
Beneath the temple arches
 Where Quiet sits and dreams.

Her kisses are the roses
 That glow while dusk is deep
In Persian garden closes
 Where Quiet falls asleep.




   A Minuet of Mozart's


Across the dimly lighted room
 The violin drew wefts of sound,
 Airily they wove and wound
And glimmered gold against the gloom.

I watched the music turn to light,
 But at the pausing of the bow,
 The web was broken and the glow
Was drowned within the wave of night.




   Twilight


Dreamily over the roofs
 The cold spring rain is falling,
Out in the lonely tree
 A bird is calling, calling.

Slowly over the earth
 The wings of night are falling;
My heart like the bird in the tree
 Is calling, calling, calling.




   The Prayer


My answered prayer came up to me,
 And in the silence thus spake he:
"O you who prayed for me to come,
 Your greeting is but cold and dumb."

My heart made answer:  "You are fair,
 But I have prayed too long to care.
Why came you not when all was new,
 And I had died for joy of you."




   Two Songs for a Child


  I
        Grandfather's Love

They said he sent his love to me,
 They wouldn't put it in my hand,
And when I asked them where it was
 They said I couldn't understand.

I thought they must have hidden it,
 I hunted for it all the day,
And when I told them so at night
 They smiled and turned their heads away.

They say that love is something kind,
 That I can never see or touch.
I wish he'd sent me something else,
 I like his cough-drops twice as much.


  II
        The Kind Moon

I think the moon is very kind
 To take such trouble just for me.
He came along with me from home
 To keep me company.

He went as fast as I could run;
 I wonder how he crossed the sky?
I'm sure he hasn't legs and feet
 Or any wings to fly.

Yet here he is above their roof;
 Perhaps he thinks it isn't right
For me to go so far alone,
 Tho' mother said I might.




On the Tower



Under the leaf of many a Fable lies the Truth for those who look for it.
                                                            Jami.



On the Tower

(A play in one act.)


The Knight.
The Lady.

Voices of men and women on the ground at the foot of the tower.
The voice of the Knight's Page.



     The top of a high battlemented tower of a castle.  A stone ledge,
     which serves as a seat, extends part way around the parapet.
     Small clouds float by in the blue sky, and occasionally a swallow
     passes.
     Entrance R. from an unseen stairway which is supposed to extend
     around the outside of the tower.


The Lady (unseen).
 Oh do not climb so fast, for I am faint
 With looking down the tower to where the earth
 Lies dreaming in the sun.  I fear to fall.

The Knight (unseen).
 Lean on me, love, my love, and look not down.

L.
 Call me not "love", call me your conquered foe,
 That now, since you have battered down her gates,
 Gives you the keys that lock the highest tower
 And mounts with you to prove her homage true;
 Oh bid me go no farther lest I fall,
 My foot has slipped upon the rain-worn stones,
 Why are the stairs so narrow and so steep?
 Let us go back, my lord.

K.
                           Are you afraid,
 Who were so dauntless till the walls gave way?
 Courage, my sweet.  I would that I could climb
 A thousand times by wind-swept stairs like these,
 That lead so near to heaven.

L.
                              Sir, you may,
 You are a knight and very valorous;
 I am a woman.  I shall never come
 This way but once.
 (The Knight and the Lady appear on the top of the tower.)

K.
                     Kiss me at last, my love.

L.
 Oh, my sweet lord, I am too tired to kiss.
 Look how the earth is like an emerald,
 With rivers veined and flawed with fallow fields.

K.  (Lifting her veil)
 Then I kiss you, a thousand thousand kisses
 For all the days ere I had won to you
 Beyond the walls and gates you barred so close.
 Call me at last your love, your castle's lord.

L.  (After a pause)
 I love you.

 (She kisses him.  Her veil blows away like a white butterfly
 over the parapet.  Faint cries and laughter from men and women
 under the tower.)

Men and Women.
 The veil, the lady's veil!

 (The knight takes the lady in his arms.)

L.
 My lord, I pray you loose me from your arms
 Lest that my people see how much we love.

K.
 May they not see us?  All of them have loved.

L.
 But you have been an enemy, my lord,
 With walls between us and with moss-grown moats,
 Now on a sudden must I kiss your mouth?
 I who was taught before I learned to speak
 That all my house was hostile unto yours,
 Now can I put my head against your breast
 Here in the sight of all who choose to come?

K.
 Are we not past the caring for their eyes
 And nearer to the heaven than to earth?
 Look up and see.

L.
                   I only see your face.

 (She touches his hair with her hands.  Murmuring under the tower.)

K.
 Why came we here in all the noon-day light
 With only darting swallows over us
 To make a speck of darkness on the sun?
 Let us go down where walls will shut us round.
 Your castle has a hundred quiet halls,
 A hundred chambers, where the shadows lie
 On things put by, forgotten long ago.
 Forgotten lutes with strings that Time has slackened,
 We two shall draw them close and bid them sing--
 Forgotten games, forgotten books still open
 Where you had laid them by at vesper-time,
 And your embroidery, whereon half-worked
 Weeps Amor wounded by a rose's thorn.
 Shall I not see the room in which you slept,
 Palpitant still and breathing of your thoughts,
 Where maiden dreams adown the ways of sleep
 Swept noiselessly with damosels and knights
 To tourneys where the trumpet made no sound,
 Blow as he might, the scarlet trumpeter,
 And were the dreams not sometimes brimmed with tears
 That waked you when the night was loneliest?
 Will you not bring me to your oratory
 Where prayers arose like little birds set free
 Still upward, upward without sound of flight?
 Shall I not find your turrets toward the north,
 Where you defied white winter armed for war;
 Your southern casements where the sun blows in
 Between the leaf-bent boughs the wind has lifted?
 Shall we not see the sunrise toward the east,
 Watch dawn by dawn the rose of day unfolding
 Its golden-hearted beauty sovereignly;
 And toward the west look quietly at evening?
 Shall I not see all these and all your treasures?
 In carven coffers hidden in the dark
 Have you not laid a sapphire lit with flame
 And amethysts set round with deep-wrought gold,
 Perhaps a ruby?

L.
                  All my gems are yours
 And all my chambers curtained from the sun.
 My lord shall see them all, in time, in time.


 (The sun begins to sink.)

K.
 Shall I not see them now?  To-day, to-night?

L.
 How could I show you in one day, my lord,
 My castle and my treasures and my tower?
 Let all the days to come suffice for this
 Since all the past days made them what they are.
 You will not be impatient, my sweet lord.
 Some of the halls have long been locked and barred,
 And some have secret doors and hard to find
 Till suddenly you touch them unawares,
 And down a sable way runs silver light.
 We two will search together for the keys,
 But not to-day.  Let us sit here to-day,
 Since all is yours and always will be yours.

 (The stars appear faintly one by one.)

K.  (After a pause.)
 I grow a little drowsy with the dusk.

L.  (Singing.)
    There was a man that loved a maid,
    (Sleep and take your rest)
    Over her lips his kiss was laid,
    Over her heart, his breast.

 (The knight sleeps.)

    All of his vows were sweet to hear,
    Sweet was his kiss to take;
    Why was her breast so quick to fear,
    Why was her heart, to break?

    Why was the man so glad to woo?
    (Sleep and take your rest)
    Why were the maiden's words so few----

 (She sees that he is asleep, and slipping off her long cloak-like
 outer garment, she pillows his head upon it against the parapet,
 and half kneeling at his feet she sings very softly:)

    I love you, I love you, I love you,
    I am the flower at your feet,
    The birds and the stars are above you,
    My place is more sweet.

    The birds and the stars are above you,
    They envy the flower in the grass,
    For I, only I, while I love you
    Can die as you pass.

 (Light clouds veil the stars, growing denser constantly.
 The castle bell rings for vespers, and rising, the lady moves
 to a corner of the parapet and kneels there.)

L.
 Ave Maria! gratia plena, Dominus----

Voice of the Page (from the foot of the tower.)
 My lord, my lord, they call for you at court!

 (The knight wakes.  It is now quite dark.)

 There is a tourney toward; your enemy
 Has challenged you.  My lord, make haste to come!

 (The knight rises and gropes his way toward the stairs.)

K.
 I will make haste.  Await me where you are.

 (To himself.)
 There was a lady on this tower with me----

 (He glances around hurriedly but does not see her in the darkness.)

Page.
 My lord has far to ride before the dawn!

K.  (To himself.)
 Why should I tarry?

 (To the page.)
 Bring my horse and shield!

 (He descends.  As the noise of his footfall on the stairs dies away,
 the lady gropes toward the stairway, then turns suddenly, and going to
 the ledge where they have sat, she throws herself over the parapet.)


CURTAIN.




[End of Helen of Troy And Other Poems.]




Sara Teasdale

Sara Teasdale was born in St. Louis, Missouri, where she attended a
school that was founded by the grandfather of another great poet from
St. Louis--T. S. Eliot.  She later associated herself more with New
York City.  Her first book of poems was "Sonnets to Duse" (1907), but
"Helen of Troy" (1911) was the true launch of her career, followed by
"Rivers to the Sea" (1915), "Love Songs" (1917), "Flame and Shadow"
(1920) and more.  Her final volume, "Strange Victory", is considered
by many to be predictive of her suicide.

It is interesting to note that in Teasdale's Collected Works, about
half of the poems in this volume--some more justly than others--have
been excluded, and most of the rest have been slightly changed.  Most
of the poems from this volume which were selected to be included in
"Love Songs" also had some minor changes.  This edition preserves the
original readings, but they are not to be considered authoritative.









End of Project Gutenberg's Helen of Troy and Other Poems, by Sara Teasdale

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HELEN OF TROY AND OTHER POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 400.txt or 400.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/400/

Produced by A. Light and L. Bowser.  For Gwenette.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
?The Project Gutenberg EBook of Love Songs, by Sara Teasdale

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Love Songs

Author: Sara Teasdale

Posting Date: July 21, 2008 [EBook #442]
Release Date: February, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOVE SONGS ***




Produced by A. Light and L. Bowser.  For Gwenette.








[Note on text:  Italicized stanzas are indented 5 spaces.  Two
italicized lines are marked by asterisks (*).  Lines longer than 78
characters are broken, and the continuation is indented two spaces.]

[This etext was transcribed from a 1918 reprinting of the 1917 edition,
which was the original.  It is interesting that some of those poems
included from earlier volumes have been slightly changed in this book.]






Love Songs


By

Sara Teasdale

[American (Missouri & New York) poet, 1884-1933.]



Author of "Rivers to the Sea", "Helen of Troy and Other Poems", Etc.




  To E.


     I have remembered beauty in the night,
      Against black silences I waked to see
      A shower of sunlight over Italy
     And green Ravello dreaming on her height;
     I have remembered music in the dark,
      The clean swift brightness of a fugue of Bach's,
      And running water singing on the rocks
     When once in English woods I heard a lark.

     But all remembered beauty is no more
      Than a vague prelude to the thought of you--
      You are the rarest soul I ever knew,
         Lover of beauty, knightliest and best;
     My thoughts seek you as waves that seek the shore,
         And when I think of you, I am at rest.






Prefatory Note



Beside new poems, this book contains lyrics taken from "Rivers to the
Sea", "Helen of Troy and Other Poems", and one or two from an earlier
volume.




  Contents



    I

  Barter
  Twilight
  Night Song at Amalfi
  The Look
  A Winter Night
  A Cry
  Gifts
  But Not to Me
  Song at Capri
  Child, Child
  Love Me
  Pierrot
  Wild Asters
  The Song for Colin
  Four Winds
  Debt
  Faults
  Buried Love
  The Fountain
  I Shall Not Care
  After Parting
  A Prayer
  Spring Night
  May Wind
  Tides
  After Love
  New Love and Old
  The Kiss
  Swans
  The River
  November
  Spring Rain
  The Ghost
  Summer Night, Riverside
  Jewels


    II

  Interlude:  Songs out of Sorrow

     I.  Spirit's House
    II.  Mastery
   III.  Lessons
    IV.  Wisdom
     V.  In a Burying Ground
    VI.  Wood Song
   VII.  Refuge


    III

  The Flight
  Dew
  To-night
  Ebb Tide
  I Would Live in Your Love
  Because
  The Tree of Song
  The Giver
  April Song
  The Wanderer
  The Years
  Enough
  Come
  Joy
  Riches
  Dusk in War Time
  Peace
  Moods
  Houses of Dreams
  Lights
  "I Am Not Yours"
  Doubt
  The Wind
  Morning
  Other Men
  Embers
  Message
  The Lamp


    IV

  A November Night




  Love Songs


    I



  Barter


  Life has loveliness to sell,
   All beautiful and splendid things,
  Blue waves whitened on a cliff,
   Soaring fire that sways and sings,
  And children's faces looking up
  Holding wonder like a cup.

  Life has loveliness to sell,
   Music like a curve of gold,
  Scent of pine trees in the rain,
   Eyes that love you, arms that hold,
  And for your spirit's still delight,
  Holy thoughts that star the night.

  Spend all you have for loveliness,
   Buy it and never count the cost;
  For one white singing hour of peace
   Count many a year of strife well lost,
  And for a breath of ecstasy
  Give all you have been, or could be.




  Twilight


  Dreamily over the roofs
   The cold spring rain is falling;
  Out in the lonely tree
   A bird is calling, calling.

  Slowly over the earth
   The wings of night are falling;
  My heart like the bird in the tree
   Is calling, calling, calling.




  Night Song at Amalfi


  I asked the heaven of stars
   What I should give my love--
  It answered me with silence,
   Silence above.

  I asked the darkened sea
   Down where the fishers go--
  It answered me with silence,
   Silence below.

  Oh, I could give him weeping,
   Or I could give him song--
  But how can I give silence,
   My whole life long?




  The Look


  Strephon kissed me in the spring,
   Robin in the fall,
  But Colin only looked at me
   And never kissed at all.

  Strephon's kiss was lost in jest,
   Robin's lost in play,
  But the kiss in Colin's eyes
   Haunts me night and day.




  A Winter Night


  My window-pane is starred with frost,
   The world is bitter cold to-night,
  The moon is cruel, and the wind
   Is like a two-edged sword to smite.

  God pity all the homeless ones,
   The beggars pacing to and fro,
  God pity all the poor to-night
   Who walk the lamp-lit streets of snow.

  My room is like a bit of June,
   Warm and close-curtained fold on fold,
  But somewhere, like a homeless child,
   My heart is crying in the cold.




  A Cry


  Oh, there are eyes that he can see,
   And hands to make his hands rejoice,
  But to my lover I must be
   Only a voice.

  Oh, there are breasts to bear his head,
   And lips whereon his lips can lie,
  But I must be till I am dead
   Only a cry.




  Gifts


  I gave my first love laughter,
   I gave my second tears,
  I gave my third love silence
   Through all the years.

  My first love gave me singing,
   My second eyes to see,
  But oh, it was my third love
   Who gave my soul to me.




  But Not to Me


  The April night is still and sweet
   With flowers on every tree;
  Peace comes to them on quiet feet,
      But not to me.

  My peace is hidden in his breast
   Where I shall never be;
  Love comes to-night to all the rest,
      But not to me.




  Song at Capri


  When beauty grows too great to bear
   How shall I ease me of its ache,
  For beauty more than bitterness
   Makes the heart break.

  Now while I watch the dreaming sea
   With isles like flowers against her breast,
  Only one voice in all the world
   Could give me rest.




  Child, Child


  Child, child, love while you can
  The voice and the eyes and the soul of a man;
  Never fear though it break your heart--
  Out of the wound new joy will start;
  Only love proudly and gladly and well,
  Though love be heaven or love be hell.

  Child, child, love while you may,
  For life is short as a happy day;
  Never fear the thing you feel--
  Only by love is life made real;
  Love, for the deadly sins are seven,
  Only through love will you enter heaven.




  Love Me


  Brown-thrush singing all day long
   In the leaves above me,
  Take my love this April song,
   "Love me, love me, love me!"

  When he harkens what you say,
   Bid him, lest he miss me,
  Leave his work or leave his play,
   And kiss me, kiss me, kiss me!




  Pierrot


  Pierrot stands in the garden
   Beneath a waning moon,
  And on his lute he fashions
   A fragile silver tune.

  Pierrot plays in the garden,
   He thinks he plays for me,
  But I am quite forgotten
   Under the cherry tree.

  Pierrot plays in the garden,
   And all the roses know
  That Pierrot loves his music,--
   But I love Pierrot.




  Wild Asters


  In the spring I asked the daisies
   If his words were true,
  And the clever, clear-eyed daisies
   Always knew.

  Now the fields are brown and barren,
   Bitter autumn blows,
  And of all the stupid asters
   Not one knows.




  The Song for Colin


  I sang a song at dusking time
   Beneath the evening star,
  And Terence left his latest rhyme
   To answer from afar.

  Pierrot laid down his lute to weep,
   And sighed, "She sings for me."
  But Colin slept a careless sleep
   Beneath an apple tree.




  Four Winds


  "Four winds blowing through the sky,
  You have seen poor maidens die,
  Tell me then what I shall do
  That my lover may be true."
  Said the wind from out the south,
  "Lay no kiss upon his mouth,"
  And the wind from out the west,
  "Wound the heart within his breast,"
  And the wind from out the east,
  "Send him empty from the feast,"
  And the wind from out the north,
  "In the tempest thrust him forth;
  When thou art more cruel than he,
  Then will Love be kind to thee."




  Debt


  What do I owe to you
   Who loved me deep and long?
  You never gave my spirit wings
   Or gave my heart a song.

  But oh, to him I loved,
   Who loved me not at all,
  I owe the open gate
   That led through heaven's wall.




  Faults


  They came to tell your faults to me,
  They named them over one by one;
  I laughed aloud when they were done,
  I knew them all so well before,--
  Oh, they were blind, too blind to see
  Your faults had made me love you more.




  Buried Love


  I have come to bury Love
   Beneath a tree,
  In the forest tall and black
   Where none can see.

  I shall put no flowers at his head,
   Nor stone at his feet,
  For the mouth I loved so much
   Was bittersweet.

  I shall go no more to his grave,
   For the woods are cold.
  I shall gather as much of joy
   As my hands can hold.

  I shall stay all day in the sun
   Where the wide winds blow,--
  But oh, I shall cry at night
   When none will know.




  The Fountain


  All through the deep blue night
   The fountain sang alone;
  It sang to the drowsy heart
   Of the satyr carved in stone.

  The fountain sang and sang,
   But the satyr never stirred--
  Only the great white moon
   In the empty heaven heard.

  The fountain sang and sang
   While on the marble rim
  The milk-white peacocks slept,
   And their dreams were strange and dim.

  Bright dew was on the grass,
   And on the ilex, dew,
  The dreamy milk-white birds
   Were all a-glisten, too.

  The fountain sang and sang
   The things one cannot tell;
  The dreaming peacocks stirred
   And the gleaming dew-drops fell.




  I Shall Not Care


  When I am dead and over me bright April
   Shakes out her rain-drenched hair,
  Though you should lean above me broken-hearted,
   I shall not care.

  I shall have peace, as leafy trees are peaceful
   When rain bends down the bough,
  And I shall be more silent and cold-hearted
   Than you are now.




  After Parting


  Oh, I have sown my love so wide
   That he will find it everywhere;
  It will awake him in the night,
   It will enfold him in the air.

  I set my shadow in his sight
   And I have winged it with desire,
  That it may be a cloud by day,
   And in the night a shaft of fire.




  A Prayer


  Until I lose my soul and lie
   Blind to the beauty of the earth,
  Deaf though shouting wind goes by,
   Dumb in a storm of mirth;

  Until my heart is quenched at length
   And I have left the land of men,
  Oh, let me love with all my strength
   Careless if I am loved again.




  Spring Night


  The park is filled with night and fog,
   The veils are drawn about the world,
  The drowsy lights along the paths
   Are dim and pearled.

  Gold and gleaming the empty streets,
   Gold and gleaming the misty lake,
  The mirrored lights like sunken swords,
   Glimmer and shake.

  Oh, is it not enough to be
  Here with this beauty over me?
  My throat should ache with praise, and I
  Should kneel in joy beneath the sky.
  O, beauty, are you not enough?
  Why am I crying after love,
  With youth, a singing voice, and eyes
  To take earth's wonder with surprise?

  Why have I put off my pride,
  Why am I unsatisfied,--
  I, for whom the pensive night
  Binds her cloudy hair with light,--
  I, for whom all beauty burns
  Like incense in a million urns?
  O beauty, are you not enough?
  Why am I crying after love?




  May Wind


  I said, "I have shut my heart
   As one shuts an open door,
  That Love may starve therein
   And trouble me no more."

  But over the roofs there came
   The wet new wind of May,
  And a tune blew up from the curb
   Where the street-pianos play.

  My room was white with the sun
   And Love cried out in me,
  "I am strong, I will break your heart
   Unless you set me free."




  Tides


  Love in my heart was a fresh tide flowing
   Where the starlike sea gulls soar;
  The sun was keen and the foam was blowing
   High on the rocky shore.

  But now in the dusk the tide is turning,
   Lower the sea gulls soar,
  And the waves that rose in resistless yearning
   Are broken forevermore.




  After Love


  There is no magic any more,
   We meet as other people do,
  You work no miracle for me
   Nor I for you.

  You were the wind and I the sea--
   There is no splendor any more,
  I have grown listless as the pool
   Beside the shore.

  But though the pool is safe from storm
   And from the tide has found surcease,
  It grows more bitter than the sea,
   For all its peace.




  New Love and Old


  In my heart the old love
   Struggled with the new;
  It was ghostly waking
   All night through.

  Dear things, kind things,
   That my old love said,
  Ranged themselves reproachfully
   Round my bed.

  But I could not heed them,
   For I seemed to see
  The eyes of my new love
   Fixed on me.

  Old love, old love,
   How can I be true?
  Shall I be faithless to myself
   Or to you?




  The Kiss


  I hoped that he would love me,
   And he has kissed my mouth,
  But I am like a stricken bird
   That cannot reach the south.

  For though I know he loves me,
   To-night my heart is sad;
  His kiss was not so wonderful
   As all the dreams I had.




  Swans


  Night is over the park, and a few brave stars
   Look on the lights that link it with chains of gold,
  The lake bears up their reflection in broken bars
   That seem too heavy for tremulous water to hold.

  We watch the swans that sleep in a shadowy place,
   And now and again one wakes and uplifts its head;
  How still you are--your gaze is on my face--
   We watch the swans and never a word is said.




  The River


  I came from the sunny valleys
   And sought for the open sea,
  For I thought in its gray expanses
   My peace would come to me.

  I came at last to the ocean
   And found it wild and black,
  And I cried to the windless valleys,
   "Be kind and take me back!"

  But the thirsty tide ran inland,
   And the salt waves drank of me,
  And I who was fresh as the rainfall
   Am bitter as the sea.




  November


  The world is tired, the year is old,
   The fading leaves are glad to die,
  The wind goes shivering with cold
   Where the brown reeds are dry.

  Our love is dying like the grass,
   And we who kissed grow coldly kind,
  Half glad to see our old love pass
   Like leaves along the wind.




  Spring Rain


  I thought I had forgotten,
   But it all came back again
  To-night with the first spring thunder
   In a rush of rain.

  I remembered a darkened doorway
   Where we stood while the storm swept by,
  Thunder gripping the earth
   And lightning scrawled on the sky.

  The passing motor busses swayed,
   For the street was a river of rain,
  Lashed into little golden waves
   In the lamp light's stain.

  With the wild spring rain and thunder
   My heart was wild and gay;
  Your eyes said more to me that night
   Than your lips would ever say. . . .

  I thought I had forgotten,
   But it all came back again
  To-night with the first spring thunder
   In a rush of rain.




  The Ghost


  I went back to the clanging city,
   I went back where my old loves stayed,
  But my heart was full of my new love's glory,
   My eyes were laughing and unafraid.

  I met one who had loved me madly
   And told his love for all to hear--
  But we talked of a thousand things together,
   The past was buried too deep to fear.

  I met the other, whose love was given
   With never a kiss and scarcely a word--
  Oh, it was then the terror took me
   Of words unuttered that breathed and stirred.

  Oh, love that lives its life with laughter
   Or love that lives its life with tears
  Can die--but love that is never spoken
   Goes like a ghost through the winding years. . . .

  I went back to the clanging city,
   I went back where my old loves stayed,
  My heart was full of my new love's glory,--
   But my eyes were suddenly afraid.




  Summer Night, Riverside


  In the wild, soft summer darkness
  How many and many a night we two together
  Sat in the park and watched the Hudson
  Wearing her lights like golden spangles
  Glinting on black satin.
  The rail along the curving pathway
  Was low in a happy place to let us cross,
  And down the hill a tree that dripped with bloom
  Sheltered us,
  While your kisses and the flowers,
  Falling, falling,
  Tangled my hair. . . .


  The frail white stars moved slowly over the sky.


  And now, far off
  In the fragrant darkness
  The tree is tremulous again with bloom,
  For June comes back.

  To-night what girl
  Dreamily before her mirror shakes from her hair
  This year's blossoms, clinging in its coils?




  Jewels


  If I should see your eyes again,
   I know how far their look would go--
  Back to a morning in the park
   With sapphire shadows on the snow.

  Or back to oak trees in the spring
   When you unloosed my hair and kissed
  The head that lay against your knees
   In the leaf shadow's amethyst.

  And still another shining place
   We would remember--how the dun
  Wild mountain held us on its crest
   One diamond morning white with sun.

  But I will turn my eyes from you
   As women turn to put away
  The jewels they have worn at night
   And cannot wear in sober day.




    II

  Interlude:  Songs out of Sorrow



  I.  Spirit's House


  From naked stones of agony
  I will build a house for me;
  As a mason all alone
  I will raise it, stone by stone,
  And every stone where I have bled
  Will show a sign of dusky red.
  I have not gone the way in vain,
  For I have good of all my pain;
  My spirit's quiet house will be
  Built of naked stones I trod
  On roads where I lost sight of God.




  II.  Mastery


  I would not have a god come in
  To shield me suddenly from sin,
  And set my house of life to rights;
  Nor angels with bright burning wings
  Ordering my earthly thoughts and things;
  Rather my own frail guttering lights
  Wind blown and nearly beaten out;
  Rather the terror of the nights
  And long, sick groping after doubt;
  Rather be lost than let my soul
  Slip vaguely from my own control--
  Of my own spirit let me be
  In sole though feeble mastery.




  III.  Lessons


  Unless I learn to ask no help
   From any other soul but mine,
  To seek no strength in waving reeds
   Nor shade beneath a straggling pine;
  Unless I learn to look at Grief
   Unshrinking from her tear-blind eyes,
  And take from Pleasure fearlessly
   Whatever gifts will make me wise--
  Unless I learn these things on earth,
  Why was I ever given birth?




  IV.  Wisdom


  When I have ceased to break my wings
  Against the faultiness of things,
  And learned that compromises wait
  Behind each hardly opened gate,
  When I can look Life in the eyes,
  Grown calm and very coldly wise,
  Life will have given me the Truth,
  And taken in exchange--my youth.




  V.  In a Burying Ground


  This is the spot where I will lie
   When life has had enough of me,
  These are the grasses that will blow
   Above me like a living sea.

  These gay old lilies will not shrink
   To draw their life from death of mine,
  And I will give my body's fire
   To make blue flowers on this vine.

  "O Soul," I said, "have you no tears?
   Was not the body dear to you?"
  I heard my soul say carelessly,
   "The myrtle flowers will grow more blue."




  VI.  Wood Song


  I heard a wood thrush in the dusk
   Twirl three notes and make a star--
  My heart that walked with bitterness
   Came back from very far.

  Three shining notes were all he had,
   And yet they made a starry call--
  I caught life back against my breast
   And kissed it, scars and all.




  VII.  Refuge


  From my spirit's gray defeat,
  From my pulse's flagging beat,
  From my hopes that turned to sand
  Sifting through my close-clenched hand,
  From my own fault's slavery,
  If I can sing, I still am free.

  For with my singing I can make
  A refuge for my spirit's sake,
  A house of shining words, to be
  My fragile immortality.




    III



  The Flight


  Look back with longing eyes and know that I will follow,
  Lift me up in your love as a light wind lifts a swallow,
  Let our flight be far in sun or blowing rain--
  _But what if I heard my first love calling me again?_

  Hold me on your heart as the brave sea holds the foam,
  Take me far away to the hills that hide your home;
  Peace shall thatch the roof and love shall latch the door--
  _But what if I heard my first love calling me once more?_




  Dew


  As dew leaves the cobweb lightly
   Threaded with stars,
  Scattering jewels on the fence
   And the pasture bars;
  As dawn leaves the dry grass bright
   And the tangled weeds
  Bearing a rainbow gem
   On each of their seeds;
  So has your love, my lover,
   Fresh as the dawn,
  Made me a shining road
   To travel on,
  Set every common sight
   Of tree or stone
  Delicately alight
   For me alone.




  To-night


  The moon is a curving flower of gold,
   The sky is still and blue;
  The moon was made for the sky to hold,
   And I for you.

  The moon is a flower without a stem,
   The sky is luminous;
  Eternity was made for them,
   To-night for us.




  Ebb Tide


  When the long day goes by
   And I do not see your face,
  The old wild, restless sorrow
   Steals from its hiding place.

  My day is barren and broken,
   Bereft of light and song,
  A sea beach bleak and windy
   That moans the whole day long.

  To the empty beach at ebb tide,
   Bare with its rocks and scars,
  Come back like the sea with singing,
   And light of a million stars.




  I Would Live in Your Love


  I would live in your love as the sea-grasses live in the sea,
  Borne up by each wave as it passes, drawn down by each wave that recedes;
  I would empty my soul of the dreams that have gathered in me,
  I would beat with your heart as it beats, I would follow your soul
    as it leads.




  Because


  Oh, because you never tried
  To bow my will or break my pride,
  And nothing of the cave-man made
  You want to keep me half afraid,
  Nor ever with a conquering air
  You thought to draw me unaware--
  Take me, for I love you more
  Than I ever loved before.

  And since the body's maidenhood
  Alone were neither rare nor good
  Unless with it I gave to you
  A spirit still untrammeled, too,
  Take my dreams and take my mind
  That were masterless as wind;
  And "Master!" I shall say to you
  Since you never asked me to.




  The Tree of Song


  I sang my songs for the rest,
   For you I am still;
  The tree of my song is bare
   On its shining hill.

  For you came like a lordly wind,
   And the leaves were whirled
  Far as forgotten things
   Past the rim of the world.

  The tree of my song stands bare
   Against the blue--
  I gave my songs to the rest,
   Myself to you.




  The Giver


  You bound strong sandals on my feet,
   You gave me bread and wine,
  And sent me under sun and stars,
   For all the world was mine.

  Oh, take the sandals off my feet,
   You know not what you do;
  For all my world is in your arms,
   My sun and stars are you.




  April Song


  Willow, in your April gown
   Delicate and gleaming,
  Do you mind in years gone by
   All my dreaming?

  Spring was like a call to me
   That I could not answer,
  I was chained to loneliness,
   I, the dancer.

  Willow, twinkling in the sun,
   Still your leaves and hear me,
  I can answer spring at last,
   Love is near me!




  The Wanderer


  I saw the sunset-colored sands,
   The Nile like flowing fire between,
   Where Rameses stares forth serene,
  And Ammon's heavy temple stands.

  I saw the rocks where long ago,
   Above the sea that cries and breaks,
   Swift Perseus with Medusa's snakes
  Set free the maiden white like snow.

  And many skies have covered me,
   And many winds have blown me forth,
   And I have loved the green, bright north,
  And I have loved the cold, sweet sea.

  But what to me are north and south,
   And what the lure of many lands,
   Since you have leaned to catch my hands
  And lay a kiss upon my mouth.




  The Years


  To-night I close my eyes and see
  A strange procession passing me--
  The years before I saw your face
  Go by me with a wistful grace;
  They pass, the sensitive, shy years,
  As one who strives to dance, half blind with tears.

  The years went by and never knew
  That each one brought me nearer you;
  Their path was narrow and apart
  And yet it led me to your heart--
  Oh, sensitive, shy years, oh, lonely years,
  That strove to sing with voices drowned in tears.




  Enough


  It is enough for me by day
   To walk the same bright earth with him;
  Enough that over us by night
   The same great roof of stars is dim.

  I do not hope to bind the wind
   Or set a fetter on the sea--
  It is enough to feel his love
   Blow by like music over me.




  Come


  Come, when the pale moon like a petal
   Floats in the pearly dusk of spring,
  Come with arms outstretched to take me,
   Come with lips pursed up to cling.

  Come, for life is a frail moth flying,
   Caught in the web of the years that pass,
  And soon we two, so warm and eager,
   Will be as the gray stones in the grass.




  Joy


  I am wild, I will sing to the trees,
   I will sing to the stars in the sky,
  I love, I am loved, he is mine,
   Now at last I can die!

  I am sandaled with wind and with flame,
   I have heart-fire and singing to give,
  I can tread on the grass or the stars,
   Now at last I can live!




  Riches


  I have no riches but my thoughts,
   Yet these are wealth enough for me;
  My thoughts of you are golden coins
   Stamped in the mint of memory;

  And I must spend them all in song,
   For thoughts, as well as gold, must be
  Left on the hither side of death
   To gain their immortality.




  Dusk in War Time


  A half-hour more and you will lean
   To gather me close in the old sweet way--
  But oh, to the woman over the sea
   Who will come at the close of day?

  A half-hour more and I will hear
   The key in the latch and the strong, quick tread--
  But oh, the woman over the sea
   Waiting at dusk for one who is dead!




  Peace


  Peace flows into me
   As the tide to the pool by the shore;
   It is mine forevermore,
  It will not ebb like the sea.

  I am the pool of blue
   That worships the vivid sky;
   My hopes were heaven-high,
  They are all fulfilled in you.

  I am the pool of gold
   When sunset burns and dies--
   You are my deepening skies;
  Give me your stars to hold.




  Moods


  I am the still rain falling,
   Too tired for singing mirth--
  Oh, be the green fields calling,
   Oh, be for me the earth!

  I am the brown bird pining
   To leave the nest and fly--
  Oh, be the fresh cloud shining,
   Oh, be for me the sky!




  Houses of Dreams


  You took my empty dreams
   And filled them every one
  With tenderness and nobleness,
   April and the sun.

  The old empty dreams
   Where my thoughts would throng
  Are far too full of happiness
   To even hold a song.

  Oh, the empty dreams were dim
   And the empty dreams were wide,
  They were sweet and shadowy houses
   Where my thoughts could hide.

  But you took my dreams away
   And you made them all come true--
  My thoughts have no place now to play,
   And nothing now to do.




  Lights


  When we come home at night and close the door,
   Standing together in the shadowy room,
   Safe in our own love and the gentle gloom,
  Glad of familiar wall and chair and floor,

  Glad to leave far below the clanging city;
   Looking far downward to the glaring street
   Gaudy with light, yet tired with many feet,
  In both of us wells up a wordless pity;

  Men have tried hard to put away the dark;
   A million lighted windows brilliantly
      Inlay with squares of gold the winter night,
  But to us standing here there comes the stark
      Sense of the lives behind each yellow light,
   And not one wholly joyous, proud, or free.




  "I Am Not Yours"


  I am not yours, not lost in you,
   Not lost, although I long to be
  Lost as a candle lit at noon,
   Lost as a snowflake in the sea.

  You love me, and I find you still
   A spirit beautiful and bright,
  Yet I am I, who long to be
   Lost as a light is lost in light.

  Oh plunge me deep in love--put out
   My senses, leave me deaf and blind,
  Swept by the tempest of your love,
   A taper in a rushing wind.




  Doubt


  My soul lives in my body's house,
   And you have both the house and her--
  But sometimes she is less your own
   Than a wild, gay adventurer;
  A restless and an eager wraith,
   How can I tell what she will do--
  Oh, I am sure of my body's faith,
   But what if my soul broke faith with you?




  The Wind


  A wind is blowing over my soul,
   I hear it cry the whole night through--
  Is there no peace for me on earth
   Except with you?

  Alas, the wind has made me wise,
   Over my naked soul it blew,--
  There is no peace for me on earth
   Even with you.




  Morning


  I went out on an April morning
   All alone, for my heart was high,
  I was a child of the shining meadow,
   I was a sister of the sky.

  There in the windy flood of morning
   Longing lifted its weight from me,
  Lost as a sob in the midst of cheering,
   Swept as a sea-bird out to sea.




  Other Men


  When I talk with other men
   I always think of you--
  Your words are keener than their words,
   And they are gentler, too.

  When I look at other men,
   I wish your face were there,
  With its gray eyes and dark skin
   And tossed black hair.

  When I think of other men,
   Dreaming alone by day,
  The thought of you like a strong wind
   Blows the dreams away.




  Embers


  I said, "My youth is gone
   Like a fire beaten out by the rain,
  That will never sway and sing
   Or play with the wind again."

  I said, "It is no great sorrow
   That quenched my youth in me,
  But only little sorrows
   Beating ceaselessly."

  I thought my youth was gone,
   But you returned--
  Like a flame at the call of the wind
   It leaped and burned;

  Threw off its ashen cloak,
   And gowned anew
  Gave itself like a bride
   Once more to you.




  Message


  I heard a cry in the night,
   A thousand miles it came,
  Sharp as a flash of light,
   My name, my name!

  It was your voice I heard,
   You waked and loved me so--
  I send you back this word,
   I know, I know!




  The Lamp


  If I can bear your love like a lamp before me,
  When I go down the long steep Road of Darkness,
  I shall not fear the everlasting shadows,
      Nor cry in terror.

  If I can find out God, then I shall find Him,
  If none can find Him, then I shall sleep soundly,
  Knowing how well on earth your love sufficed me,
      A lamp in darkness.




    IV



  A November Night


       There!  See the line of lights,
       A chain of stars down either side the street--
       Why can't you lift the chain and give it to me,
       A necklace for my throat?  I'd twist it round
       And you could play with it.  You smile at me
       As though I were a little dreamy child
       Behind whose eyes the fairies live. . . .  And see,
       The people on the street look up at us
       All envious.  We are a king and queen,
       Our royal carriage is a motor bus,
       We watch our subjects with a haughty joy. . . .
       How still you are!  Have you been hard at work
       And are you tired to-night?  It is so long
       Since I have seen you--four whole days, I think.
       My heart is crowded full of foolish thoughts
       Like early flowers in an April meadow,
       And I must give them to you, all of them,
       Before they fade.  The people I have met,
       The play I saw, the trivial, shifting things
       That loom too big or shrink too little, shadows
       That hurry, gesturing along a wall,
       Haunting or gay--and yet they all grow real
       And take their proper size here in my heart
       When you have seen them. . . .  There's the Plaza now,
       A lake of light!  To-night it almost seems
       That all the lights are gathered in your eyes,
       Drawn somehow toward you.  See the open park
       Lying below us with a million lamps
       Scattered in wise disorder like the stars.
       We look down on them as God must look down
       On constellations floating under Him
       Tangled in clouds. . . .  Come, then, and let us walk
       Since we have reached the park.  It is our garden,
       All black and blossomless this winter night,
       But we bring April with us, you and I;
       We set the whole world on the trail of spring.
       I think that every path we ever took
       Has marked our footprints in mysterious fire,
       Delicate gold that only fairies see.
       When they wake up at dawn in hollow tree-trunks
       And come out on the drowsy park, they look
       Along the empty paths and say, "Oh, here
       They went, and here, and here, and here!  Come, see,
       Here is their bench, take hands and let us dance
       About it in a windy ring and make
       A circle round it only they can cross
       When they come back again!" . . .  Look at the lake--
       Do you remember how we watched the swans
       That night in late October while they slept?
       Swans must have stately dreams, I think.  But now
       The lake bears only thin reflected lights
       That shake a little.  How I long to take
       One from the cold black water--new-made gold
       To give you in your hand!  And see, and see,
       There is a star, deep in the lake, a star!
       Oh, dimmer than a pearl--if you stoop down
       Your hand could almost reach it up to me. . . .

       There was a new frail yellow moon to-night--
       I wish you could have had it for a cup
       With stars like dew to fill it to the brim. . . .

       How cold it is!  Even the lights are cold;
       They have put shawls of fog around them, see!
       What if the air should grow so dimly white
       That we would lose our way along the paths
       Made new by walls of moving mist receding
       The more we follow. . . .  What a silver night!
       That was our bench the time you said to me
       The long new poem--but how different now,
       How eerie with the curtain of the fog
       Making it strange to all the friendly trees!
       There is no wind, and yet great curving scrolls
       Carve themselves, ever changing, in the mist.
       Walk on a little, let me stand here watching
       To see you, too, grown strange to me and far. . . .
       I used to wonder how the park would be
       If one night we could have it all alone--
       No lovers with close arm-encircled waists
       To whisper and break in upon our dreams.
       And now we have it!  Every wish comes true!
       We are alone now in a fleecy world;
       Even the stars have gone.  We two alone!




[End of Love Songs.]



{As an item of interest to the reader, the following, which was at the
end of this edition, is included.  Only the advertisement for the same
author is included}.




By the same author

Rivers to the Sea


"There is hardly another American woman-poet whose poetry is generally
known and loved like that of Sara Teasdale.  'Rivers to the Sea', her
latest volume of lyrics, possesses the delicacy of imagery, the inward
illumination, the high vision that characterize the poetry that will
endure the test of time."--'Review of Reviews'.

"'Rivers to the Sea' is a book of sheer delight. . . .  Her touch turns
everything to song."--Edward J. Wheeler, in 'Current Opinion'.

"Sara Teasdale's lyrics have the clarity, the precision, the grace and
fragrance of flowers."--Harriet Monroe, in 'Poetry'.

"Sara Teasdale has a genius for the song, for the perfect lyric, in
which the words seem to have fallen into place without art or
effort."--Louis Untermeyer, in 'The Chicago Evening Post'.

"'Rivers to the Sea' is the best book of pure lyrics that has appeared
in English since A. E. Housman's 'A Shropshire Lad'."--William Marion
Reedy, in 'The Mirror'.

"'Rivers to the Sea' is the most beautiful book of pure lyrics that has
come to my hand in years."--'Los Angeles Graphic'.

"Sara Teasdale sings about love better than any other contemporary
American poet."--'The Boston Transcript'.

"'Rivers to the Sea' is the most charming volume of poetry that has
appeared on either side of the Atlantic in a score of years."--'St.
Louis Republic'.




Sara Teasdale (1884-1933):

Teasdale was born in St. Louis, Missouri, where she attended a school
that was founded by the grandfather of another great poet from St.
Louis--T. S. Eliot.  She later associated herself more with New York
City.

Her first book of poems was "Sonnets to Duse" (1907), [at least one poem
in the current volume, "Faults", is from this book,] but "Helen of Troy"
(1911) was the true launch of her career, followed by "Rivers to the Sea"
(1915), "Love Songs" (1917), "Flame and Shadow" (1920) and more.  Her
final volume, "Strange Victory", is considered by many to be predictive
of her suicide in 1933.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Love Songs, by Sara Teasdale

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOVE SONGS ***

***** This file should be named 442.txt or 442.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/442/

Produced by A. Light and L. Bowser.  For Gwenette.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
?The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rivers to the Sea, by Sara Teasdale

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Rivers to the Sea

Author: Sara Teasdale

Posting Date: July 30, 2008 [EBook #596]
Release Date: July, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIVERS TO THE SEA ***




Produced by Judith Boss








RIVERS TO THE SEA


BY

SARA TEASDALE




  To
  ERNST



  CONTENTS


  PART I


  SPRING NIGHT
  THE FLIGHT
  NEW LOVE AND OLD
  THE LOOK
  SPRING
  THE LIGHTED WINDOW
  THE KISS
  SWANS
  THE OLD MAID
  FROM THE WOOLWORTH TOWER
  AT NIGHT
  THE YEARS
  PEACE
  APRIL
  COME
  MOODS
  APRIL SONG
  MAY DAY
  CROWNED
  TO A CASTILIAN SONG
  BROADWAY
  A WINTER BLUEJAY
  IN A RESTAURANT
  JOY
  IN A RAILROAD STATION
  IN THE TRAIN
  TO ONE AWAY
  SONG
  DEEP IN THE NIGHT
  THE INDIA WHARF
  I SHALL NOT CARE
  DESERT POOLS
  LONGING
  PITY
  AFTER PARTING
  ENOUGH
  ALCHEMY
  FEBRUARY
  MORNING
  MAY NIGHT
  DUSK IN JUNE
  LOVE-FREE
  SUMMER NIGHT, RIVERSIDE
  IN A SUBWAY STATION
  AFTER LOVE
  DOORYARD ROSES
  A PRAYER


  PART II

  INDIAN SUMMER
  THE SEA WIND
  THE CLOUD
  THE POOR HOUSE
  NEW YEAR'S DAWN-BROADWAY
  THE STAR
  DOCTORS
  THE INN OF EARTH
  IN THE CARPENTER'S SHOP
  THE CARPENTER'S SON
  THE MOTHER OF A POET
  IN MEMORIAM F. O. S
  TWILIGHT
  SWALLOW FLIGHT
  THOUGHTS
  TO DICK, ON HIS SIXTH BIRTHDAY
  TO ROSE
  THE FOUNTAIN
  THE ROSE
  DREAMS
  "I AM NOT YOURS"
  PIERROT'S SONG
  NIGHT IN ARIZONA
  DUSK IN WAR TIME
  SPRING IN WAR TIME
  WHILE I MAY
  DEBT
  FROM THE NORTH
  THE LIGHTS OF NEW YORK
  SEA LONGING
  THE RIVER
  LEAVES
  THE ANSWER


  PART III

  OVER THE ROOFS
  A CRY
  CHANCE
  IMMORTAL
  AFTER DEATH
  TESTAMENT
  GIFTS


  PART IV

  FROM THE SEA
  VIGNETTES OVERSEAS


  PART V

  SAPPHO



  ----------------------------------

  I




  SPRING NIGHT

  THE park is filled with night and fog,
     The veils are drawn about the world,
  The drowsy lights along the paths
     Are dim and pearled.

  Gold and gleaming the empty streets,
     Gold and gleaming the misty lake,
  The mirrored lights like sunken swords,
     Glimmer and shake.

  Oh, is it not enough to be
  Here with this beauty over me?
  My throat should ache with praise, and I
  Should kneel in joy beneath the sky.
  Oh, beauty are you not enough?

  Why am I crying after love
  With youth, a singing voice and eyes
  To take earth's wonder with surprise?
  Why have I put off my pride,
  Why am I unsatisfied,
  I for whom the pensive night
  Binds her cloudy hair with light,
  I for whom all beauty burns
  Like incense in a million urns?
  Oh, beauty, are you not enough?
  Why am I crying after love?




  THE FLIGHT

  LOOK back with longing eyes and know that I will follow,
  Lift me up in your love as a light wind lifts a swallow,
  Let our flight be far in sun or windy rain--
  BUT WHAT IF I HEARD MY FIRST LOVE CALLING ME AGAIN?

  Hold me on your heart as the brave sea holds the foam,
  Take me far away to the hills that hide your home;
  Peace shall thatch the roof and love shall latch the door--

  BUT WHAT IF I HEARD MY FIRST LOVE CALLING ME ONCE MORE?




  NEW LOVE AND OLD

  IN my heart the old love
     Struggled with the new;
  It was ghostly waking
     All night thru.

  Dear things, kind things,
     That my old love said,
  Ranged themselves reproachfully
     Round my bed.

  But I could not heed them,
     For I seemed to see
  The eyes of my new love
     Fixed on me.

  Old love, old love,
     How can I be true?
  Shall I be faithless to myself
     Or to you?



  THE LOOK

  STREPHON kissed me in the spring,
     Robin in the fall,
  But Colin only looked at me
     And never kissed at all.

  Strephon's kiss was lost in jest,
     Robin's lost in play,
  But the kiss in Colin's eyes
     Haunts me night and day.




  SPRING

  IN Central Park the lovers sit,
     On every hilly path they stroll,
  Each thinks his love is infinite,
     And crowns his soul.

  But we are cynical and wise,
     We walk a careful foot apart,
  You make a little joke that tries
     To hide your heart.

  Give over, we have laughed enough;
     Oh dearest and most foolish friend,
  Why do you wage a war with love
     To lose your battle in the end?




  THE LIGHTED WINDOW

  HE SAID:
  "In the winter dusk
  When the pavements were gleaming with rain,
  I walked thru a dingy street
  Hurried, harassed,
  Thinking of all my problems that never are
        solved.
  Suddenly out of the mist, a flaring gas-jet
  Shone from a huddled shop.
  I saw thru the bleary window
  A mass of playthings:
  False-faces hung on strings,
  Valentines, paper and tinsel,
  Tops of scarlet and green,
  Candy, marbles, jacks--
  A confusion of color
  Pathetically gaudy and cheap.
  All of my boyhood
  Rushed back.
  Once more these things were treasures
  Wildly desired.
  With covetous eyes I looked again at the marbles,
  The precious agates, the pee-wees, the chinies--
  Then I passed on.

  In the winter dusk,
  The pavements were gleaming with rain;
  There in the lighted window
  I left my boyhood."




  THE KISS

  BEFORE YOU kissed me only winds of heaven
     Had kissed me, and the tenderness of rain--
  Now you have come, how can I care for kisses
        Like theirs again?

  I sought the sea, she sent her winds to meet me,
     They surged about me singing of the south--
  I turned my head away to keep still holy
        Your kiss upon my mouth.

  And swift sweet rains of shining April weather
     Found not my lips where living kisses are;
  I bowed my head lest they put out my glory
        As rain puts out a star.

  I am my love's and he is mine forever,
     Sealed with a seal and safe forevermore--
  Think you that I could let a beggar enter
        Where a king stood before?




  SWANS

  NIGHT is over the park, and a few brave stars
     Look on the lights that link it with chains of gold,
  The lake bears up their reflection in broken bars
     That seem too heavy for tremulous water to hold.

  We watch the swans that sleep in a shadowy place,
     And now and again one wakes and uplifts its head;
  How still you are--your gaze is on my face--
     We watch the swans and never a word is said.



  THE OLD MAID

  I SAW her in a Broadway car,
     The woman I might grow to be;
  I felt my lover look at her
     And then turn suddenly to me.

  Her hair was dull and drew no light
     And yet its color was as mine;
  Her eyes were strangely like my eyes
     Tho' love had never made them shine.

  Her body was a thing grown thin,
     Hungry for love that never came;
  Her soul was frozen in the dark
     Unwarmed forever by love's flame.

  I felt my lover look at her
     And then turn suddenly to me,--
  His eyes were magic to defy
     The woman I shall never be.



  FROM THE WOOLWORTH TOWER

  VIVID with love, eager for greater beauty
  Out of the night we come
  Into the corridor, brilliant and warm.
  A metal door slides open,
  And the lift receives us.
  Swiftly, with sharp unswerving flight
  The car shoots upward,
  And the air, swirling and angry,
  Howls like a hundred devils.
  Past the maze of trim bronze doors,
  Steadily we ascend.
  I cling to you
  Conscious of the chasm under us,
  And a terrible whirring deafens my ears.

  The flight is ended.

  We pass thru a door leading onto the ledge--
  Wind, night and space
  Oh terrible height
  Why have we sought you?
  Oh bitter wind with icy invisible wings
  Why do you beat us?
  Why would you bear us away?
  We look thru the miles of air,
  The cold blue miles between us and the city,
  Over the edge of eternity we look
  On all the lights,
  A thousand times more numerous than the stars;
  Oh lines and loops of light in unwound chains
  That mark for miles and miles
  The vast black mazy cobweb of the streets;
  Near us clusters and splashes of living gold
  That change far off to bluish steel
  Where the fragile lights on the Jersey shore
  Tremble like drops of wind-stirred dew.
  The strident noises of the city
  Floating up to us
  Are hallowed into whispers.
  Ferries cross thru the darkness
  Weaving a golden thread into the night,
  Their whistles weird shadows of sound.

  We feel the millions of humanity beneath us,--
  The warm millions, moving under the roofs,
  Consumed by their own desires;
  Preparing food,
  Sobbing alone in a garret,
  With burning eyes bending over a needle,
  Aimlessly reading the evening paper,
  Dancing in the naked light of the caf&eacute;,
  Laying out the dead,
  Bringing a child to birth--
  The sorrow, the torpor, the bitterness, the frail joy
  Come up to us
  Like a cold fog wrapping us round.
  Oh in a hundred years
  Not one of these blood-warm bodies
  But will be worthless as clay.
  The anguish, the torpor, the toil
  Will have passed to other millions
  Consumed by the same desires.
  Ages will come and go,
  Darkness will blot the lights
  And the tower will be laid on the earth.
  The sea will remain
  Black and unchanging,
  The stars will look down
  Brilliant and unconcerned.

  Beloved,
  Tho' sorrow, futility, defeat
  Surround us,
  They cannot bear us down.
  Here on the abyss of eternity
  Love has crowned us
  For a moment
  Victors.



  AT NIGHT

  WE are apart; the city grows quiet between us,
     She hushes herself, for midnight makes heavy her eyes,
  The tangle of traffic is ended, the cars are empty,
     Five streets divide us, and on them the moonlight lies.

  Oh are you asleep, or Iying awake, my lover?
     Open your dreams to my love and your heart to my words,
  I send you my thoughts-the air between us is laden,
     My thoughts fly in at your window, a flock of wild birds.




  THE YEARS

  TO-NIGHT I close my eyes and see
  A strange procession passing me--
  The years before I saw your face
  Go by me with a wistful grace;
  They pass, the sensitive shy years,
  As one who strives to dance, half blind with tears.

  The years went by and never knew
  That each one brought me nearer you;
  Their path was narrow and apart
  And yet it led me to your heart--
  Oh sensitive shy years, oh lonely years,
  That strove to sing with voices drowned in tears.




  PEACE

  PEACE flows into me
       AS the tide to the pool by the shore;
       It is mine forevermore,
  It ebbs not back like the sea.

  I am the pool of blue
       That worships the vivid sky;
       My hopes were heaven-high,
  They are all fulfilled in you.

  I am the pool of gold
       When sunset burns and dies,--
       You are my deepening skies,
  Give me your stars to hold.




  APRIL

  THE roofs are shining from the rain,
     The sparrows twitter as they fly,
  And with a windy April grace
     The little clouds go by.

  Yet the back-yards are bare and brown
     With only one unchanging tree--
  I could not be so sure of Spring
     Save that it sings in me.




  COME

  COME, when the pale moon like a petal
     Floats in the pearly dusk of spring,
  Come with arms outstretched to take me,
     Come with lips pursed up to cling.

  Come, for life is a frail moth flying
     Caught in the web of the years that pass,
  And soon we two, so warm and eager
     Will be as the gray stones in the grass.




  MOODS

  I AM the still rain falling,
     Too tired for singing mirth--
  Oh, be the green fields calling,
     Oh, be for me the earth!
  I am the brown bird pining
     To leave the nest and fly--
  Oh, be the fresh cloud shining,
     Oh, be for me the sky!



  APRIL SONG

  WILLOW in your April gown
     Delicate and gleaming,
  Do you mind in years gone by
     All my dreaming?

  Spring was like a call to me
     That I could not answer,
  I was chained to loneliness,
     I, the dancer.

  Willow, twinkling in the sun,
     Still your leaves and hear me,
  I can answer spring at last,
     Love is near me!




  MAY DAY

  THE shining line of motors,
     The swaying motor-bus,
  The prancing dancing horses
     Are passing by for us.

  The sunlight on the steeple,
     The toys we stop to see,
  The smiling passing people
     Are all for you and me.

  "I love you and I love you!"--
     "And oh, I love you, too!"--
  "All of the flower girl's lilies
     Were only grown for you!"

  Fifth Avenue and April
     And love and lack of care--
  The world is mad with music
     Too beautiful to bear.




  CROWNED

  I WEAR a crown invisible and clear,
     And go my lifted royal way apart
     Since you have crowned me softly in your heart
  With love that is half ardent, half austere;
  And as a queen disguised might pass anear
     The bitter crowd that barters in a mart,
     Veiling her pride while tears of pity start,
  I hide my glory thru a jealous fear.
  My crown shall stay a sweet and secret thing
     Kept pure with prayer at evensong and morn,
     And when you come to take it from my head,
     I shall not weep, nor will a word be said,
  But I shall kneel before you, oh my king,
     And bind my brow forever with a thorn.




  TO A CASTILIAN SONG

  WE held the book together timidly,
     Whose antique music in an alien tongue
     Once rose among the dew-drenched vines that hung
  Beneath a high Castilian balcony.
  I felt the lute strings' ancient ecstasy,
     And while he read, my love-filled heart was stung,
     And throbbed, as where an ardent bird has clung
  The branches tremble on a blossomed tree.
  Oh lady for whose sake the song was made,
  Laid long ago in some still cypress shade,
     Divided from the man who longed for thee,
        Here in a land whose name he never heard,
        His song brought love as April brings the bird,
     And not a breath divides my love from me!




  BROADWAY

  THIS is the quiet hour; the theaters
     Have gathered in their crowds, and steadily
     The million lights blaze on for few to see,
  Robbing the sky of stars that should be hers.
  A woman waits with bag and shabby furs,
     A somber man drifts by, and only we
     Pass up the street unwearied, warm and free,
  For over us the olden magic stirs.
  Beneath the liquid splendor of the lights
     We live a little ere the charm is spent;
  This night is ours, of all the golden nights,
        The pavement an enchanted palace floor,
     And Youth the player on the viol, who sent
        A strain of music thru an open door.




  A WINTER BLUEJAY

  CRISPLY the bright snow whispered,
  Crunching beneath our feet;
  Behind us as we walked along the parkway,
  Our shadows danced,
  Fantastic shapes in vivid blue.
  Across the lake the skaters
  Flew to and fro,
  With sharp turns weaving
  A frail invisible net.
  In ecstasy the earth
  Drank the silver sunlight;
  In ecstasy the skaters
  Drank the wine of speed;
  In ecstasy we laughed
  Drinking the wine of love.
  Had not the music of our joy
  Sounded its highest note?
  But no,
  For suddenly, with lifted eyes you said,
  "Oh look!"
  There, on the black bough of a snow flecked maple,
  Fearless and gay as our love,
  A bluejay cocked his crest!
  Oh who can tell the range of joy
  Or set the bounds of beauty?




  IN A RESTAURANT

  THE darkened street was muffled with the snow,
     The falling flakes had made your shoulders white,
     And when we found a shelter from the night
  Its glamor fell upon us like a blow.
  The clash of dishes and the viol and bow
     Mingled beneath the fever of the light.
     The heat was full of savors, and the bright
  Laughter of women lured the wine to flow.
  A little child ate nothing while she sat
     Watching a woman at a table there
  Lean to a kiss beneath a drooping hat.
        The hour went by, we rose and turned to go,
     The somber street received us from the glare,
        And once more on your shoulders fell the snow.




  JOY

  I AM wild, I will sing to the trees,
     I will sing to the stars in the sky,
  I love, I am loved, he is mine,
     Now at last I can die!

  I am sandaled with wind and with flame,
  I have heart-fire and singing to give,
  I can tread on the grass or the stars,
     Now at last I can live!




  IN A RAILROAD STATION

  WE stood in the shrill electric light,
     Dumb and sick in the whirling din
  We who had all of love to say
     And a single second to say it in.

  "Good-by!" "Good-by!"--you turned to go,
     I felt the train's slow heavy start,
  You thought to see me cry, but oh
     My tears were hidden in my heart.




  IN THE TRAIN

  FIELDS beneath a quilt of snow
     From which the rocks and stubble peep,
  And in the west a shy white star
     That shivers as it wakes from sleep.

  The restless rumble of the train,
     The drowsy people in the car,
  Steel blue twilight in the world,
     And in my heart a timid star.




  TO ONE AWAY

  I HEARD a cry in the night,
     A thousand miles it came,
  Sharp as a flash of light,
     My name, my name!

  It was your voice I heard,
     You waked and loved me so--
  I send you back this word,
     I know, I know!




  SONG

  Love me with your whole heart
     Or give no love to me,

  Half-love is a poor thing,
     Neither bond nor free.

  You must love me gladly
     Soul and body too,
  Or else find a new love,
     And good-by to you.




  DEEP IN THE NIGHT

  DEEP in the night the cry of a swallow,
     Under the stars he flew,
  Keen as pain was his call to follow
     Over the world to you.

  Love in my heart is a cry forever
     Lost as the swallow's flight,
  Seeking for you and never, never
     Stilled by the stars at night.




  THE INDIA WHARF

  HERE in the velvet stillness
  The wide sown fields fall to the faint horizon,
  Sleeping in starlight. . . .


  A year ago we walked in the jangling city
  Together . . . . forgetful.
  One by one we crossed the avenues,
  Rivers of light, roaring in tumult,
  And came to the narrow, knotted streets.
  Thru the tense crowd
  We went aloof, ecstatic, walking in wonder,
  Unconscious of our motion.
  Forever the foreign people with dark, deep-seeing eyes
  Passed us and passed.
  Lights and foreign words and foreign faces,
  I forgot them all;
  I only felt alive, defiant of all death and sorrow,
  Sure and elated.

  That was the gift you gave me. . . .

  The streets grew still more tangled,
  And led at last to water black and glossy,
  Flecked here and there with lights, faint and far off.
  There on a shabby building was a sign
  "The India Wharf " . . . and we turned back.

  I always felt we could have taken ship
  And crossed the bright green seas
  To dreaming cities set on sacred streams
  And palaces
  Of ivory and scarlet.




  I SHALL NOT CARE

  WHEN I am dead and over me bright April
     Shakes out her rain-drenched hair,
  Tho' you should lean above me broken-hearted,
     I shall not care.

  I shall have peace, as leafy trees are peaceful
     When rain bends down the bough,
  And I shall be more silent and cold-hearted
     Than you are now.




  DESERT POOLS

  I LOVE too much; I am a river
     Surging with spring that seeks the sea,
  I am too generous a giver,

     Love will not stoop to drink of me.

  His feet will turn to desert places
     Shadowless, reft of rain and dew,
  Where stars stare down with sharpened faces
     From heavens pitilessly blue.

  And there at midnight sick with faring,
     He will stoop down in his desire
  To slake the thirst grown past all bearing
     In stagnant water keen as fire.




  LONGING

  I AM not sorry for my soul
     That it must go unsatisfied,
  For it can live a thousand times,
     Eternity is deep and wide.

  I am not sorry for my soul,
     But oh, my body that must go
  Back to a little drift of dust
     Without the joy it longed to know.




  PITY

  THEY never saw my lover's face,
     They only know our love was brief,
  Wearing awhile a windy grace
     And passing like an autumn leaf.

  They wonder why I do not weep,
     They think it strange that I can sing,
  They say, "Her love was scarcely deep
     Since it has left so slight a sting."

  They never saw my love, nor knew
     That in my heart's most secret place
  I pity them as angels do

     Men who have never seen God's face.




  AFTER PARTING

  OH I have sown my love so wide
     That he will find it everywhere;
  It will awake him in the night,
     It will enfold him in the air.

  I set my shadow in his sight
     And I have winged it with desire,
  That it may be a cloud by day
     And in the night a shaft of fire.




  ENOUGH

  IT is enough for me by day
     To walk the same bright earth with him;
  Enough that over us by night
     The same great roof of stars is dim.

  I have no care to bind the wind
     Or set a fetter on the sea--
  It is enough to feel his love
     Blow by like music over me.




  ALCHEMY

  I LIFT my heart as spring lifts up
     A yellow daisy to the rain;
  My heart will be a lovely cup
     Altho' it holds but pain.

  For I shall learn from flower and leaf
     That color every drop they hold,
  To change the lifeless wine of grief
     To living gold.




  FEBRUARY

  THEY spoke of him I love
     With cruel words and gay;
  My lips kept silent guard
     On all I could not say.

  I heard, and down the street
     The lonely trees in the square
  Stood in the winter wind
     Patient and bare.

  I heard . . . oh voiceless trees
     Under the wind, I knew
  The eager terrible spring
     Hidden in you.




  MORNING

  I WENT out on an April morning
     All alone, for my heart was high,
  I was a child of the shining meadow,
     I was a sister of the sky.

  There in the windy flood of morning
     Longing lifted its weight from me,
  Lost as a sob in the midst of cheering,
     Swept as a sea-bird out to sea.




  MAY NIGHT

  THE spring is fresh and fearless
     And every leaf is new,
  The world is brimmed with moonlight,
     The lilac brimmed with dew.

  Here in the moving shadows
     I catch my breath and sing--
  My heart is fresh and fearless
     And over-brimmed with spring.




  DUSK IN JUNE

  EVENING, and all the birds
     In a chorus of shimmering sound
  Are easing their hearts of joy
     For miles around.

  The air is blue and sweet,
     The few first stars are white,--
  Oh let me like the birds
     Sing before night.




  LOVE-FREE

  I AM free of love as a bird flying south in the autumn,
  Swift and intent, asking no joy from another,
  Glad to forget all of the passion of April
       Ere it was love-free.

  I am free of love, and I listen to music lightly,
  But if he returned, if he should look at me deeply,
  I should awake, I should awake and remember
       I am my lover's.




  SUMMER NIGHT, RIVERSIDE

  IN the wild soft summer darkness
  How many and many a night we two together
  Sat in the park and watched the Hudson
  Wearing her lights like golden spangles
  Glinting on black satin.
  The rail along the curving pathway
  Was low in a happy place to let us cross,
  And down the hill a tree that dripped with bloom
  Sheltered us
  While your kisses and the flowers,
  Falling, falling,
  Tangled my hair. . . .

  The frail white stars moved slowly over the sky.

  And now, far off
  In the fragrant darkness
  The tree is tremulous again with bloom
  For June comes back.

  To-night what girl
  When she goes home,
  Dreamily before her mirror shakes from her hair
  This year's blossoms, clinging in its coils ?




  IN A SUBWAY STATION

  AFTER a year I came again to the place;
  The tireless lights and the reverberation,
  The angry thunder of trains that burrow the ground,
  The hunted, hurrying people were still the same--
  But oh, another man beside me and not you!
  Another voice and other eyes in mine!
  And suddenly I turned and saw again
  The gleaming curve of tracks, the bridge above--
  They were burned deep into my heart before,
  The night I watched them to avoid your eyes,
  When you were saying, "Oh, look up at me!"
  When you were saying, "Will you never love me?"
  And when I answered with a lie. Oh then
  You dropped your eyes. I felt your utter pain.
  I would have died to say the truth to you.
  After a year I came again to the place--
  The hunted hurrying people were still the same....




  AFTER LOVE

  THERE is no magic when we meet,
     We speak as other people do,
  You work no miracle for me
     Nor I for you.

  You were the wind and I the sea--
     There is no splendor any more,
  I have grown listless as the pool
     Beside the shore.

  But tho' the pool is safe from storm
     And from the tide has found surcease,
  It grows more bitter than the sea,
     For all its peace.




  DOORYARD ROSES

  I HAVE come the selfsame path
     To the selfsame door,
  Years have left the roses there
     Burning as before.

  While I watch them in the wind
     Quick the hot tears start--
  Strange so frail a flame outlasts
     Fire in the heart.




  A PRAYER

  UNTIL I lose my soul and lie
     Blind to the beauty of the earth,
  Deaf tho' a lyric wind goes by,
     Dumb in a storm of mirth;

  Until my heart is quenched at length
     And I have left the land of men,
  Oh let me love with all my strength
     Careless if I am loved again.






  II


  INDIAN SUMMER

  LYRIC night of the lingering Indian Summer,
  Shadowy fields that are scentless but full of singing,
  Never a bird, but the passionless chant of insects,
       Ceaseless, insistent.

  The grasshopper's horn, and far off, high in the maples
  The wheel of a locust leisurely grinding the silence,
  Under a moon waning and worn and broken,
       Tired with summer.

  Let me remember you, voices of little insects,
  Weeds in the moonlight, fields that are tangled with asters,
  Let me remember you, soon will the winter be on us,
       Snow-hushed and heartless.

  Over my soul murmur your mute benediction
  While I gaze, oh fields that rest after harvest,
  As those who part look long in the eyes they lean to,
       Lest they forget them.




  THE SEA WIND

  I AM a pool in a peaceful place,
  I greet the great sky face to face,
  I know the stars and the stately moon
  And the wind that runs with rippling shoon--
  But why does it always bring to me
  The far-off, beautiful sound of the sea?

  The marsh-grass weaves me a wall of green,
  But the wind comes whispering in between,
  In the dead of night when the sky is deep
  The wind comes waking me out of sleep--
  Why does it always bring to me
  The far-off, terrible call of the sea?




  THE CLOUD

  I AM a cloud in the heaven's height,
  The stars are lit for my delight,
  Tireless and changeful, swift and free,
  I cast my shadow on hill and sea--
  But why do the pines on the mountain's crest
  Call to me always, "Rest, rest"?

  I throw my mantle over the moon
  And I blind the sun on his throne at noon,
  Nothing can tame me, nothing can bind,
  I am a child of the heartless wind--
  But oh the pines on the mountain's crest
  Whispering always, "Rest, rest."




  THE POOR HOUSE

  HOPE went by and Peace went by
     And would not enter in;
  Youth went by and Health went by
     And Love that is their kin.

  Those within the house shed tears
     On their bitter bread;
  Some were old and some were mad,
     And some were sick a-bed.

  Gray Death saw the wretched house
     And even he passed by--
  "They have never lived," he said,
     "They can wait to die."




  NEW YEAR'S DAWN--BROADWAY

  WHEN the horns wear thin
  And the noise, like a garment outworn,
  Falls from the night,
  The tattered and shivering night,
  That thinks she is gay;
  When the patient silence comes back,
  And retires,
  And returns,
  Rebuffed by a ribald song,
  Wounded by vehement cries,
  Fleeing again to the stars--
  Ashamed of her sister the night;
  Oh, then they steal home,
  The blinded, the pitiful ones
  With their gew-gaws still in their hands,
  Reeling with odorous breath
  And thick, coarse words on their tongues.
  They get them to bed, somehow,
  And sleep the forgiving,
  Comes thru the scattering tumult
  And closes their eyes.
  The stars sink down ashamed
  And the dawn awakes,
  Like a youth who steals from a brothel,
  Dizzy and sick.




  THE STAR

  A WHITE star born in the evening glow
  Looked to the round green world below,
  And saw a pool in a wooded place
  That held like a jewel her mirrored face.
  She said to the pool: "Oh, wondrous deep,
  I love you, I give you my light to keep.
  Oh, more profound than the moving sea
  That never has shown myself to me!
  Oh, fathomless as the sky is far,
  Hold forever your tremulous star!"

  But out of the woods as night grew cool
  A brown pig came to the little pool;
  It grunted and splashed and waded in
  And the deepest place but reached its chin.
  The water gurgled with tender glee
  And the mud churned up in it turbidly.

  The star grew pale and hid her face
  In a bit of floating cloud like lace.




  DOCTORS

  EVERY night I lie awake
     And every day I lie abed
  And hear the doctors, Pain and Death,
     Conferring at my head.

  They speak in scientific tones,
     Professional and low--
  One argues for a speedy cure,
     The other, sure and slow.

  To one so humble as myself
     It should be matter for some pride
  To have such noted fellows here,
     Conferring at my side.



  .
  THE INN OF EARTH

  I CAME to the crowded Inn of Earth,
     And called for a cup of wine,
  But the Host went by with averted eye
     From a thirst as keen as mine.

  Then I sat down with weariness
     And asked a bit of bread,
  But the Host went by with averted eye
     And never a word he said.

  While always from the outer night
     The waiting souls came in
  With stifled cries of sharp surprise
     At all the light and din.

  "Then give me a bed to sleep," I said,
     "For midnight comes apace"--
  But the Host went by with averted eye
  And I never saw his face.

  "Since there is neither food nor rest,
     I go where I fared before"--
  But the Host went by with averted eye
     And barred the outer door.




  IN THE CARPENTER'S SHOP

  MARY sat in the corner dreaming,
     Dim was the room and low,
  While in the dusk, the saw went screaming
           To and fro.

  Jesus and Joseph toiled together,
     Mary was watching them,
  Thinking of kings in the wintry weather
           At Bethlehem.

  Mary sat in the corner thinking,
     Jesus had grown a man;
  One by one her hopes were sinking
           As the years ran.

  Jesus and Joseph toiled together,
     Mary's thoughts were far--
  Angels sang in the wintry weather
           Under a star.

  Mary sat in the corner weeping,
     Bitter and hot her tears--
  Little faith were the angels keeping
           All the years.




  THE CARPENTER'S SON

  THE summer dawn came over-soon,
  The earth was like hot iron at noon
           In Nazareth;
  There fell no rain to ease the heat,
  And dusk drew on with tired feet
           And stifled breath.

  The shop was low and hot and square,
  And fresh-cut wood made sharp the air,
           While all day long
  The saw went tearing thru the oak
  That moaned as tho' the tree's heart broke
           Beneath its wrong.

  The narrow street was full of cries,
  Of bickering and snarling lies
           In many keys--
  The tongues of Egypt and of Rome
  And lands beyond the shifting foam
           Of windy seas.

  Sometimes a ruler riding fast
  Scattered the dark crowds as he passed,
           And drove them close
  In doorways, drawing broken breath
  Lest they be trampled to their death
           Where the dust rose.

  There in the gathering night and noise
  A group of Galilean boys
           Crowding to see
  Gray Joseph toiling with his son,
  Saw Jesus, when the task was done,
           Turn wearily.

  He passed them by with hurried tread
  Silently, nor raised his head,
           He who looked up
  Drinking all beauty from his birth
  Out of the heaven and the earth
           As from a cup.

  And Mary, who was growing old,
  Knew that the pottage would be cold
           When he returned;
  He hungered only for the night,
  And westward, bending sharp and bright,
           The thin moon burned.

  He reached the open western gate
  Where whining halt and leper wait,
           And came at last
  To the blue desert, where the deep
  Great seas of twilight lay asleep,
           Windless and vast.

  With shining eyes the stars awoke,
  The dew lay heavy on his cloak,
           The world was dim;
  And in the stillness he could hear
  His secret thoughts draw very near
           And call to him.

  Faint voices lifted shrill with pain
  And multitudinous as rain;
           From all the lands
  And all the villages thereof
  Men crying for the gift of love
           With outstretched hands.

  Voices that called with ceaseless crying,
  The broken and the blind, the dying,
           And those grown dumb
  Beneath oppression, and he heard
  Upon their lips a single word,
           "Come!"

  Their cries engulfed him like the night,
  The moon put out her placid light
           And black and low
  Nearer the heavy thunder drew,
  Hushing the voices . . . yet he knew
           That he would go.

  A quick-spun thread of lightning burns,
  And for a flash the day returns--
           He only hears
  Joseph, an old man bent and white
  Toiling alone from morn till night
           Thru all the years.

  Swift clouds make all the heavens blind,
  A storm is running on the wind--
           He only sees
  How Mary will stretch out her hands
  Sobbing, who never understands
           Voices like these.




  THE MOTHER OF A POET

  SHE is too kind, I think, for mortal things,
  Too gentle for the gusty ways of earth;
  God gave to her a shy and silver mirth,
  And made her soul as clear
  And softly singing as an orchard spring's
  In sheltered hollows all the sunny year--
  A spring that thru the leaning grass looks up
  And holds all heaven in its clarid cup,
  Mirror to holy meadows high and blue
  With stars like drops of dew.

  I love to think that never tears at night
  Have made her eyes less bright;
  That all her girlhood thru
  Never a cry of love made over-tense
  Her voice's innocence;
  That in her hands have lain,
  Flowers beaten by the rain,
  And little birds before they learned to sing
  Drowned in the sudden ecstasy of spring.

  I love to think that with a wistful wonder
  She held her baby warm against her breast;
  That never any fear awoke whereunder
  She shuddered at her gift, or trembled lest
  Thru the great doors of birth
  Here to a windy earth
  She lured from heaven a half-unwilling guest.

  She caught and kept his first vague flickering smile,
  The faint upleaping of his spirit's fire;
  And for a long sweet while
  In her was all he asked of earth or heaven--
  But in the end how far,
  Past every shaken star,
  Should leap at last that arrow-like desire,
  His full-grown manhood's keen
  Ardor toward the unseen
  Dark mystery beyond the Pleiads seven.
  And in her heart she heard
  His first dim-spoken word--
  She only of them all could understand,
  Flushing to feel at last
  The silence over-past,
  Thrilling as tho' her hand had touched God's hand.
  But in the end how many words
  Winged on a flight she could not follow,
  Farther than skyward lark or swallow,
  His lips should free to lands she never knew;
  Braver than white sea-faring birds
  With a fearless melody,
  Flying over a shining sea,
  A star-white song between the blue and blue.

  Oh I have seen a lake as clear and fair
  As it were molten air,
  Lifting a lily upward to the sun.
  How should the water know the glowing heart
  That ever to the heaven lifts its fire,
  A golden and unchangeable desire?
  The water only knows
  The faint and rosy glows
  Of under-petals, opening apart.
  Yet in the soul of earth,
  Deep in the primal ground,
  Its searching roots are wound,
  And centuries have struggled toward its birth.
  So, in the man who sings,
  All of the voiceless horde
  From the cold dawn of things
  Have their reward;
  All in whose pulses ran
  Blood that is his at last,
  From the first stooping man
  Far in the winnowed past.
  Out of the tumult of their love and mating
  Each one created, seeing life was good--
  Dumb, till at last the song that they were waiting
  Breaks like brave April thru a wintry wood.




  RIVERS TO THE SEA

  But what of her whose heart is troubled by it,
  The mother who would soothe and set him free,
  Fearing the song's storm-shaken ecstasy--
  Oh, as the moon that has no power to quiet
  The strong wind-driven sea.



  .

  IN MEMORIAM F. O. S.

  You go a long and lovely journey,
     For all the stars, like burning dew,
  Are luminous and luring footprints
     Of souls adventurous as you.

  Oh, if you lived on earth elated,
     How is it now that you can run
  Free of the weight of flesh and faring
     Far past the birthplace of the sun?




  TWILIGHT

  THE stately tragedy of dusk
     Drew to its perfect close,
  The virginal white evening star
     Sank, and the red moon rose.




  SWALLOW FLIGHT

  I LOVE my hour of wind and light,
     I love men's faces and their eyes,
  I love my spirit's veering flight
     Like swallows under evening skies,




  THOUGHTS

  WHEN I can make my thoughts come forth
     To walk like ladies up and down,
  Each one puts on before the glass
     Her most becoming hat and gown.

  But oh, the shy and eager thoughts
     That hide and will not get them dressed,
  Why is it that they always seem
     So much more lovely than the rest?




  TO DICK, ON HIS SIXTH BIRTHDAY

  Tho' I am very old and wise,
     And you are neither wise nor old,
  When I look far into your eyes,
     I know things I was never told:
  I know how flame must strain and fret
  Prisoned in a mortal net;
  How joy with over-eager wings,
  Bruises the small heart where he sings;
  How too much life, like too much gold,
  Is sometimes very hard to hold. . . .
  All that is talking--I know
  This much is true, six years ago
  An angel living near the moon
  Walked thru the sky and sang a tune
  Plucking stars to make his crown--
  And suddenly two stars fell down,
  Two falling arrows made of light.
  Six years ago this very night
  I saw them fall and wondered why
  The angel dropped them from the sky--
  But when I saw your eyes I knew
  The angel sent the stars to you.




  TO ROSE

  ROSE, when I remember you,
  Little lady, scarcely two,
  I am suddenly aware
  Of the angels in the air.
  All your softly gracious ways
  Make an island in my days
  Where my thoughts fly back to be
  Sheltered from too strong a sea.
  All your luminous delight
  Shines before me in the night
  When I grope for sleep and find
  Only shadows in my mind.

  Rose, when I remember you,
  White and glowing, pink and new,
  With so swift a sense of fun
  Altho' life has just begun;
  With so sure a pride of place
  In your very infant face,
  I should like to make a prayer
  To the angels in the air:
  "If an angel ever brings
  Me a baby in her wings,
  Please be certain that it grows
  Very, very much like Rose."




  THE FOUNTAIN

  On in the deep blue night
     The fountain sang alone;
  It sang to the drowsy heart
     Of the satyr carved in stone.

  The fountain sang and sang
     But the satyr never stirred--
  Only the great white moon
     In the empty heaven heard.

  The fountain sang and sang
     And on the marble rim
  The milk-white peacocks slept,
     Their dreams were strange and dim.

  Bright dew was on the grass,
     And on the ilex dew,
  The dreamy milk-white birds
     Were all a-glisten too.

  The fountain sang and sang
     The things one cannot tell,
  The dreaming peacocks stirred
     And the gleaming dew-drops fell.




  THE ROSE

  BENEATH my chamber window
  Pierrot was singing, singing;
     I heard his lute the whole night thru
        Until the east was red.
  Alas, alas, Pierrot,
  I had no rose for flinging
     Save one that drank my tears for dew
        Before its leaves were dead.

  I found it in the darkness,
  I kissed it once and threw it,
     The petals scattered over him,
        His song was turned to joy;
  And he will never know--
  Alas, the one who knew it!--
     The rose was plucked when dusk was dim
        Beside a laughing boy.




  DREAMS

  I GAVE my life to another lover,
     I gave my love, and all, and all--
  But over a dream the past will hover,
     Out of a dream the past will call.

  I tear myself from sleep with a shiver
     But on my breast a kiss is hot,
  And by my bed the ghostly giver
     Is waiting tho' I see him not.




  "I AM NOT YOURS "

  I AM not yours, not lost in you,
     Not lost, altho' I long to be
  Lost as a candle lit at noon,
     Lost as a snow-flake in the sea.

  You love me, and I find you still
     A spirit beautiful and bright,
  Yet I am I, who long to be
     Lost as a light is lost in light.

  Oh plunge me deep in love--put out
     My senses, leave me deaf and blind,
  Swept by the tempest of your love,
     A taper in a rushing wind.




  PIERROT'S SONG

  (For a picture by Dugald Walker)

  LADY, light in the east hangs low,
     Draw your veils of dream apart,
  Under the casement stands Pierrot
     Making a song to ease his heart.
  (Yet do not break the song too soon--
     I love to sing in the paling moon.)



  The petals are falling, heavy with dew,
     The stars have fainted out of the sky,
  Come to me, come, or else I too,
     Faint with the weight of love will die.
  (She comes--alas, I hoped to make
     Another stanza for her sake!)




  NIGHT IN ARIZONA

  THE moon is a charring ember
     Dying into the dark;

  Off in the crouching mountains
        Coyotes bark.

  The stars are heavy in heaven,
     Too great for the sky to hold--
  What if they fell and shattered
        The earth with gold?

  No lights are over the mesa,
     The wind is hard and wild,
  I stand at the darkened window
        And cry like a child.




  DUSK IN WAR TIME

  A HALF-HOUR more and you will lean
     To gather me close in the old sweet way--
  But oh, to the woman over the sea
     Who will come at the close of day?

  A half-hour more and I will hear
     The key in the latch and the strong quick tread--
  But oh, the woman over the sea
     Waiting at dusk for one who is dead!




  SPRING IN WAR TIME

  I FEEL the Spring far off, far off,
     The faint far scent of bud and leaf--
  Oh how can Spring take heart to come
     To a world in grief,
        Deep grief?

  The sun turns north, the days grow long,
     Later the evening star grows bright--
  How can the daylight linger on
     For men to fight,
        Still fight?

  The grass is waking in the ground,
     Soon it will rise and blow in waves--
  How can it have the heart to sway
     Over the graves,
        New graves?

  Under the boughs where lovers walked
     The apple-blooms will shed their breath--
  But what of all the lovers now
     Parted by death,
        Gray Death?




  WHILE I MAY

  WIND and hail and veering rain,
     Driven mist that veils the day,
  Soul's distress and body's pain,
     I would bear you while I may.

  I would love you if I might,
     For so soon my life will be
  Buried in a lasting night,
     Even pain denied to me.




  DEBT

  WHAT do I owe to you
     Who loved me deep and long?
  You never gave my spirit wings
     Or gave my heart a song.

  But oh, to him I loved
     Who loved me not at all,
  I owe the little open gate

     That led thru heaven's wall.




  FROM THE NORTH

  THE northern woods are delicately sweet,
     The lake is folded softly by the shore,
     But I am restless for the subway's roar,
  The thunder and the hurrying of feet.
  I try to sleep, but still my eyelids beat
     Against the image of the tower that bore
     Me high aloft, as if thru heaven's door
  I watched the world from God's unshaken seat.
  I would go back and breathe with quickened sense
     The tunnel's strong hot breath of powdered steel;
  But at the ferries I should leave the tense
        Dark air behind, and I should mount and be
     One among many who are thrilled to feel
        The first keen sea-breath from the open sea.




  THE LIGHTS OF NEW YORK

  THE lightning spun your garment for the night
     Of silver filaments with fire shot thru,
     A broidery of lamps that lit for you
  The steadfast splendor of enduring light.
  The moon drifts dimly in the heaven's height,
     Watching with wonder how the earth she knew
     That lay so long wrapped deep in dark and dew,
  Should wear upon her breast a star so white.
  The festivals of Babylon were dark
     With flaring flambeaux that the wind blew down;
  The Saturnalia were a wild boy's lark
     With rain-quenched torches dripping thru the town--
  But you have found a god and filched from him
  A fire that neither wind nor rain can dim.




  SEA LONGING

  A THOUSAND miles beyond this sun-steeped wall
     Somewhere the waves creep cool along the sand,
     The ebbing tide forsakes the listless land
  With the old murmur, long and musical;
  The windy waves mount up and curve and fall,
     And round the rocks the foam blows up like snow,--
     Tho' I am inland far, I hear and know,
  For I was born the sea's eternal thrall.
  I would that I were there and over me
     The cold insistence of the tide would roll,
     Quenching this burning thing men call the soul,--
  Then with the ebbing I should drift and be
     Less than the smallest shell along the shoal,
  Less than the sea-gulls calling to the sea.




  THE RIVER

  I CAME from the sunny valleys
     And sought for the open sea,
  For I thought in its gray expanses
     My peace would come to me.

  I came at last to the ocean
     And found it wild and black,
  And I cried to the windless valleys,
     "Be kind and take me back!"

  But the thirsty tide ran inland,
     And the salt waves drank of me,
  And I who was fresh as the rainfall
     Am bitter as the sea.




  LEAVES

  ONE by one, like leaves from a tree,
  All my faiths have forsaken me;
  But the stars above my head
  Burn in white and delicate red,
  And beneath my feet the earth
  Brings the sturdy grass to birth.
  I who was content to be
  But a silken-singing tree,
  But a rustle of delight
  In the wistful heart of night--
  I have lost the leaves that knew
  Touch of rain and weight of dew.
  Blinded by a leafy crown
  I looked neither up nor down--
  But the little leaves that die
  Have left me room to see the sky;
  Now for the first time I know
  Stars above and earth below.




  THE ANSWER

  WHEN I go back to earth
  And all my joyous body
  Puts off the red and white
  That once had been so proud,
  If men should pass above
  With false and feeble pity,
  My dust will find a voice
  To answer them aloud:

  "Be still, I am content,
  Take back your poor compassion,
  Joy was a flame in me
  Too steady to destroy;
  Lithe as a bending reed
  Loving the storm that sways her--
  I found more joy in sorrow
  Than you could find in joy."







  III





  OVER THE ROOFS

  I

  OH chimes set high on the sunny tower
     Ring on, ring on unendingly,
  Make all the hours a single hour,
  For when the dusk begins to flower,
     The man I love will come to me! . . .

  But no, go slowly as you will,
     I should not bid you hasten so,
  For while I wait for love to come,
  Some other girl is standing dumb,
     Fearing her love will go.

  II

  Oh white steam over the roofs, blow high!
     Oh chimes in the tower ring clear and free !
  Oh sun awake in the covered sky,
     For the man I love, loves me I . . .

  Oh drifting steam disperse and die,
     Oh tower stand shrouded toward the south,--
  Fate heard afar my happy cry,
     And laid her finger on my mouth.

  III

  The dusk was blue with blowing mist,
     The lights were spangles in a veil,
  And from the clamor far below
     Floated faint music like a wail.

  It voiced what I shall never speak,
     My heart was breaking all night long,
  But when the dawn was hard and gray,
     My tears distilled into a song.

  IV

  I said, "I have shut my heart
     As one shuts an open door,
  That Love may starve therein
     And trouble me no more."

  But over the roofs there came
     The wet new wind of May,
  And a tune blew up from the curb
     Where the street-pianos play.

  My room was white with the sun
     And Love cried out in me,
  "I am strong, I will break your heart
     Unless you set me free."




  A CRY

  OH, there are eyes that he can see,
     And hands to make his hands rejoice,
  But to my lover I must be
           Only a voice.

  Oh, there are breasts to bear his head,
     And lips whereon his lips can lie,
  But I must be till I am dead
           Only a cry.




  CHANCE

  How many times we must have met
     Here on the street as strangers do,
  Children of chance we were, who passed

     The door of heaven and never knew.




  IMMORTAL

  So soon my body will have gone
     Beyond the sound and sight of men,
  And tho' it wakes and suffers now,
     Its sleep will be unbroken then;
  But oh, my frail immortal soul
     That will not sleep forevermore,
  A leaf borne onward by the blast,
     A wave that never finds the shore.




  AFTER DEATH

  Now while my lips are living
     Their words must stay unsaid,
  And will my soul remember
     To speak when I am dead?

  Yet if my soul remembered
     You would not heed it, dear,
  For now you must not listen,
     And then you could not hear.




  TESTAMENT

  I SAID, "I will take my life
     And throw it away;
  I who was fire and song
     Will turn to clay."

  "I will lie no more in the night
     With shaken breath,
  I will toss my heart in the air
     To be caught by Death."

  But out of the night I heard,
     Like the inland sound of the sea,
  The hushed and terrible sob
     Of all humanity.

  Then I said, "Oh who am I
     To scorn God to his face?
  I will bow my head and stay
     And suffer with my race."




  GIFTS

  I GAVE my first love laughter,
     I gave my second tears,
  I gave my third love silence
     Thru all the years.

  My first love gave me singing,
     My second eyes to see,
  But oh, it was my third love
     Who gave my soul to me.







  IV






  FROM THE SEA

  ALL beauty calls you to me, and you seem,
  Past twice a thousand miles of shifting sea,
  To reach me. You are as the wind I breathe
  Here on the ship's sun-smitten topmost deck,
  With only light between the heavens and me.
  I feel your spirit and I close my eyes,
  Knowing the bright hair blowing in the sun,
  The eager whisper and the searching eyes.

  Listen, I love you. Do not turn your face
  Nor touch me. Only stand and watch awhile
  The blue unbroken circle of the sea.
  Look far away and let me ease my heart
  Of words that beat in it with broken wing.
  Look far away, and if I say too much,
  Forget that I am speaking. Only watch,
  How like a gull that sparkling sinks to rest,
  The foam-crest drifts along a happy wave
  Toward the bright verge, the boundary of the world.

  I am so weak a thing, praise me for this,
  That in some strange way I was strong enough
  To keep my love unuttered and to stand
  Altho' I longed to kneel to you that night
  You looked at me with ever-calling eyes.
  Was I not calm?  And if you guessed my love
  You thought it something delicate and free,
  Soft as the sound of fir-trees in the wind,
  Fleeting as phosphorescent stars in foam.
  Yet in my heart there was a beating storm
  Bending my thoughts before it, and I strove
  To say too little lest I say too much,
  And from my eyes to drive love's happy shame.
  Yet when I heard your name the first far time
  It seemed like other names to me, and I
  Was all unconscious, as a dreaming river
  That nears at last its long predestined sea;
  And when you spoke to me, I did not know
  That to my life's high altar came its priest.
  But now I know between my God and me
  You stand forever, nearer God than I,
  And in your hands with faith and utter joy
  I would that I could lay my woman's soul.

  Oh, my love
  To whom I cannot come with any gift
  Of body or of soul, I pass and go.
  But sometimes when you hear blown back to you
  My wistful, far-off singing touched with tears,
  Know that I sang for you alone to hear,
  And that I wondered if the wind would bring
  To him who tuned my heart its distant song.
  So might a woman who in loneliness
  Had borne a child, dreaming of days to come,
  Wonder if it would please its father's eyes.
  But long before I ever heard your name,
  Always the undertone's unchanging note
  In all my singing had prefigured you,
  Foretold you as a spark foretells a flame.
  Yet I was free as an untethered cloud
  In the great space between the sky and sea,
  And might have blown before the wind of joy
  Like a bright banner woven by the sun.
  I did not know the longing in the night--
  You who have waked me cannot give me sleep.
  All things in all the world can rest, but I,
  Even the smooth brief respite of a wave
  When it gives up its broken crown of foam,
  Even that little rest I may not have.
  And yet all quiet loves of friends, all joy
  In all the piercing beauty of the world
  I would give up--go blind forevermore,
  Rather than have God blot from out my soul
  Remembrance of your voice that said my name.

  For us no starlight stilled the April fields,
  No birds awoke in darkling trees for us,
  Yet where we walked the city's street that night
  Felt in our feet the singing fire of spring,
  And in our path we left a trail of light
  Soft as the phosphorescence of the sea
  When night submerges in the vessel's wake
  A heaven of unborn evanescent stars.




  VIGNETTES OVERSEAS

  I

  Off Gibraltar

  BEYOND the sleepy hills of Spain,
     The sun goes down in yellow mist,
  The sky is fresh with dewy stars
     Above a sea of amethyst.

  Yet in the city of my love
     High noon burns all the heavens bare--
  For him the happiness of light,
     For me a delicate despair.


  II

  Off Algiers

  Oh give me neither love nor tears,
     Nor dreams that sear the night with fire,
  Go lightly on your pilgrimage
     Unburdened by desire.

  Forget me for a month, a year,
     But, oh, beloved, think of me
  When unexpected beauty burns
     Like sudden sunlight on the sea.


  III

  Naples

  Nisida and Prosida are laughing in the light,
  Capri is a dewy flower lifting into sight,
  Posilipo kneels and looks in the burnished sea,
  Naples crowds her million roofs close as close can be;
  Round about the mountain's crest a flag of smoke is hung--
  Oh when God made Italy he was gay and young!


  IV

  Capri

  When beauty grows too great to bear
     How shall I ease me of its ache,
  For beauty more than bitterness
     Makes the heart break.

  Now while I watch the dreaming sea
     With isles like flowers against her breast,
  Only one voice in all the world
     Could give me rest.


  V

  Night Song at Amalfi

  I asked the heaven of stars
     What I should give my love--
  It answered me with silence,
     Silence above.

  I asked the darkened sea
     Down where the fishers go--
  It answered me with silence,
     Silence below.

  Oh, I could give him weeping,
     Or I could give him song--
  But how can I give silence
  My whole life long?


  VI

  Ruins of Paestum

  On lowlands where the temples lie
     The marsh-grass mingles with the flowers,
  Only the little songs of birds
     Link the unbroken hours.

  So in the end, above my heart
     Once like the city wild and gay,
  The slow white stars will pass by night,
     The swift brown birds by day.


  VII

  Rome

  Oh for the rising moon
     Over the roofs of Rome,
  And swallows in the dusk
     Circling a darkened dome!

  Oh for the measured dawns
     That pass with folded wings--
  How can I let them go
     With unremembered things?


  VIII

  Florence

  The bells ring over the Anno,
     Midnight, the long, long chime;
  Here in the quivering darkness
     I am afraid of time.

  Oh, gray bells cease your tolling,
     Time takes too much from me,
  And yet to rock and river
     He gives eternity.


  IX

  Villa Serbelloni, Bellaggio

  The fountain shivers lightly in the rain,
     The laurels drip, the fading roses fall,
  The marble satyr plays a mournful strain
     That leaves the rainy fragrance musical.

  Oh dripping laurel, Phoebus sacred tree,
     Would that swift Daphne's lot might come to me,
  Then would I still my soul and for an hour
     Change to a laurel in the glancing shower.


  X

  Stresa

  The moon grows out of the hills
     A yellow flower,
  The lake is a dreamy bride
     Who waits her hour.

  Beauty has filled my heart,
     It can hold no more,
  It is full, as the lake is full,
     From shore to shore.


  XI

  Hamburg

  The day that I come home,
     What will you find to say,--
  Words as light as foam
     With laughter light as spray?

  Yet say what words you will
     The day that I come home;
  I shall hear the whole deep ocean
     Beating under the foam.





  V

  SAPPHO



  SAPPHO

  I

  MIDNIGHT, and in the darkness not a sound,
  So, with hushed breathing, sleeps the autumn night;
  Only the white immortal stars shall know,
  Here in the house with the low-lintelled door,
  How, for the last time, I have lit the lamp.
  I think you are not wholly careless now,
  Walls that have sheltered me so many an hour,
  Bed that has brought me ecstasy and sleep,
  Floors that have borne me when a gale of joy
  Lifted my soul and made me half a god.
  Farewell!  Across the threshold many feet
  Shall pass, but never Sappho's feet again.
  Girls shall come in whom love has made aware
  Of all their swaying beauty--they shall sing,
  But never Sappho's voice, like golden fire,
  Shall seek for heaven thru your echoing rafters.
  There shall be swallows bringing back the spring
  Over the long blue meadows of the sea,
  And south-wind playing on the reeds of rain,
  But never Sappho's whisper in the night,
  Never her love-cry when the lover comes.
  Farewell!   I close the door and make it fast.

  The little street lies meek beneath the moon,
  Running, as rivers run, to meet the sea.
  I too go seaward and shall not return.
  Oh garlands on the doorposts that I pass,
  Woven of asters and of autumn leaves,
  I make a prayer for you: Cypris be kind,
  That every lover may be given love.
  I shall not hasten lest the paving stones
  Should echo with my sandals and awake
  Those who are warm beneath the cloak of sleep,
  Lest they should rise and see me and should say,
  "Whither goes Sappho lonely in the night?"
  Whither goes Sappho?  Whither all men go,
  But they go driven, straining back with fear,
  And Sappho goes as lightly as a leaf
  Blown from brown autumn forests to the sea.

  Here on the rock Zeus lifted from the waves,
  I shall await the waking of the dawn,
  Lying beneath the weight of dark as one
  Lies breathless, till the lover shall awake.
  And with the sun the sea shall cover me--
  I shall be less than the dissolving foam
  Murmuring and melting on the ebbing tide;
  I shall be less than spindrift, less than shells;
  And yet I shall be greater than the gods,
  For destiny no more can bow my soul
  As rain bows down the watch-fires on the hills.
  Yes, if my soul escape it shall aspire
  To the white heaven as flame that has its will.
  I go not bitterly, not dumb with pain,
  Not broken by the ache of love--I go
  As one grown tired lies down and hopes to sleep.
  Yet they shall say: "It was for Cercolas;
  She died because she could not bear her love."
  They shall remember how we used to walk
  Here on the cliff beneath the oleanders
  In the long limpid twilight of the spring,
  Looking toward Lemnos, where the amber sky
  Was pierced with the faint arrow of a star.
  How should they know the wind of a new beauty
  Sweeping my soul had winnowed it with song?
  I have been glad tho' love should come or go,
  Happy as trees that find a wind to sway them,
  Happy again when it has left them rest.
  Others shall say, "Grave Dica wrought her death.
  She would not lift her lips to take a kiss,
  Or ever lift her eyes to take a smile.
  She was a pool the winter paves with ice
  That the wild hunter in the hills must leave
  With thirst unslaked in the brief southward sun."
  Ah Dica, it is not for thee I go;
  And not for Phaon, tho' his ship lifts sail
  Here in the windless harbor for the south.
  Oh, darkling deities that guard the Nile,
  Watch over one whose gods are far away.
  Egypt, be kind to him, his eyes are deep--
  Yet they are wrong who say it was for him.
  How should they know that Sappho lived and died
  Faithful to love, not faithful to the lover,
  Never transfused and lost in what she loved,
  Never so wholly loving nor at peace.
  I asked for something greater than I found,
  And every time that love has made me weep,
  I have rejoiced that love could be so strong;
  For I have stood apart and watched my soul
  Caught in the gust of passion, as a bird
  With baffled wings against the dusty whirlwind
  Struggles and frees itself to find the sky.
  It is not for a single god I go;
  I have grown weary of the winds of heaven.
  I will not be a reed to hold the sound
  Of whatsoever breath the gods may blow,
  Turning my torment into music for them.
  They gave me life; the gift was bountiful,
  I lived with the swift singing strength of fire,
  Seeking for beauty as a flame for fuel--
  Beauty in all things and in every hour.
  The gods have given life--I gave them song;
  The debt is paid and now I turn to go.

  The breath of dawn blows the stars out like lamps,
  There is a rim of silver on the sea,
  As one grown tired who hopes to sleep, I go.


  II

  Oh Litis, little slave, why will you sleep?
  These long Egyptian noons bend down your head
  Bowed like the yarrow with a yellow bee.
  There, lift your eyes no man has ever kindled,
  Dark eyes that wait like faggots for the fire.
  See how the temple's solid square of shade
  Points north to Lesbos, and the splendid sea
  That you have never seen, oh evening-eyed.
  Yet have you never wondered what the Nile
  Is seeking always, restless and wild with spring
  And no less in the winter, seeking still?
  How shall I tell you? Can you think of fields
  Greater than Gods could till, more blue than night
  Sown over with the stars; and delicate
  With filmy nets of foam that come and go?
  It is more cruel and more compassionate
  Than harried earth. It takes with unconcern
  And quick forgetting, rapture of the rain
  And agony of thunder, the moon's white
  Soft-garmented virginity, and then
  The insatiable ardor of the sun.
  And me it took. But there is one more strong,
  Love, that came laughing from the elder seas,
  The Cyprian, the mother of the world;
  She gave me love who only asked for death--
  I who had seen much sorrow in men's eyes
  And in my own too sorrowful a fire.
  I was a sister of the stars, and yet
  Shaken with pain; sister of birds and yet
  The wings that bore my soul were very tired.
  I watched the careless spring too many times
  Light her green torches in a hungry wind;
  Too many times I watched them flare, and then
  Fall to forsaken embers in the autumn.
  And I was sick of all things--even song.
  In the dull autumn dawn I turned to death,
  Buried my living body in the sea,
  The strong cold sea that takes and does not give--
  But there is one more strong, the Cyprian.
  Litis, to wake from sleep and find your eyes
  Met in their first fresh upward gaze by love,
  Filled with love's happy shame from other eyes,
  Dazzled with tenderness and drowned in light
  As tho' you looked unthinking at the sun,
  Oh Litis, that is joy!  But if you came
  Not from the sunny shallow pool of sleep,
  But from the sea of death, the strangling sea
  Of night and nothingness, and waked to find
  Love looking down upon you, glad and still,
  Strange and yet known forever, that is peace.
  So did he lean above me. Not a word
  He spoke; I only heard the morning sea
  Singing against his happy ship, the keen
  And straining joy of wind-awakened sails
  And songs of mariners, and in myself
  The precious pain of arms that held me fast.
  They warmed the cold sea out of all my blood;
  I slept, feeling his eyes above my sleep.
  There on the ship with wines and olives laden,
  Led by the stars to far invisible ports,
  Egypt and islands of the inner seas,
  Love came to me, and Cercolas was love.

  III &sup1;         &sup1; From " Helen of Troy and Other Poems."

  The twilight's inner flame grows blue and deep,
  And in my Lesbos, over leagues of sea,
  The temples glimmer moon-wise in the trees.
  Twilight has veiled the little flower-face
  Here on my heart, but still the night is kind
  And leaves her warm sweet weight against my breast.
  Am I that Sappho who would run at dusk
  Along the surges creeping up the shore
  When tides came in to ease the hungry beach,
  And running, running till the night was black,
  Would fall forespent upon the chilly sand
  And quiver with the winds from off the sea?
  Ah quietly the shingle waits the tides
  Whose waves are stinging kisses, but to me
  Love brought no peace, nor darkness any rest.
  I crept and touched the foam with fevered hands
  And cried to Love, from whom the sea is sweet,
  From whom the sea is bitterer than death.
  Ah, Aphrodite, if I sing no more
  To thee, God's daughter, powerful as God,
  It is that thou hast made my life too sweet
  To hold the added sweetness of a song.
  There is a quiet at the heart of love,
  And I have pierced the pain and come to peace
  I hold my peace, my Cle&iuml;s, on my heart;
  And softer than a little wild bird's wing
  Are kisses that she pours upon my mouth.
  Ah never any more when spring like fire
  Will flicker in the newly opened leaves,
  Shall I steal forth to seek for solitude
  Beyond the lure of light Alcaeus' lyre,
  Beyond the sob that stilled Erinna's voice.
  Ah, never with a throat that aches with song,
  Beneath the white uncaring sky of spring,
  Shall I go forth to hide awhile from Love
  The quiver and the crying of my heart.
  Still I remember how I strove to flee
  The love-note of the birds, and bowed my head
  To hurry faster, but upon the ground
  I saw two wing&egrave;d shadows side by side,
  And all the world's spring passion stifled me.
  Ah, Love there is no fleeing from thy might,
  No lonely place where thou hast never trod,
  No desert thou hast left uncarpeted
  With flowers that spring beneath thy perfect feet.
  In many guises didst thou come to me;
  I saw thee by the maidens while they danced,
  Phaon allured me with a look of thine,
  In Anactoria I knew thy grace,
  I looked at Cercolas and saw thine eyes;
  But never wholly, soul and body mine,
  Didst thou bid any love me as I loved.
  Now have I found the peace that fled from me;
  Close, close against my heart I hold my world.
  Ah, Love that made my life a Iyric cry,
  Ah, Love that tuned my lips to Iyres of thine,
  I taught the world thy music, now alone
  I sing for one who falls asleep to hear.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rivers to the Sea, by Sara Teasdale

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIVERS TO THE SEA ***

***** This file should be named 596.txt or 596.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/596/

Produced by Judith Boss

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
