___Suzy's Memoir___
To all the people who I knew for a time but have since forgotten. I
love you all.
__Preface by Suzy__
I'll start by giving an overview of my life, my career, and my goals.
I hope everyone will feel free to use the data I'm sharing about tech,
business, politics, and my social life.
I’m exploring how my thoughts and emotions changed after I went
through formative experiences like going to college, founding a
technology company, working for a presidential campaign, and reshaping
the playing field by collaborating with stake holders.
I became a leader, but I wasn’t always a leader.
In 1997, when I was 25 years old, I founded a consumer software
company called SharkPages.com, and we shook the banking system to its
core.
If commodity computers were as powerful as they are today, we would
have become a publicly traded artificial intelligence lab.
In 2004, I hooked up with Arthur Jefferson, the campaign manager for
former President Michael Lawn, and we changed the course of history.
The feckless policy ideas of pundits and other Washington insiders
would have kept squeezing the most vulnerable members of society more
and more, but former President Lawn spoke plainly about the no-win
scenarios that far too many American voters were facing.
President Lawn’s commitment to the will of the electorate helped
reverse the flow of rising inequity in America.
The markets crashed, our faith in each other was challenged, and then
the original promise of SharkPages and a few other high-flying tech
companies was fulfilled by governments.
I disappeared from public life after that and set myself up to win the
race to build the first artificially intelligent machine.
I told my fellow AI researchers that I was becoming more like the
person I might have been in my late 20s if I hadn't been thrust into
the spotlight so quickly, but that wasn’t true.
The press had never debunked the misleading statement I had offered
them back in 1998, when SharkPages became a thing and I did a stint as 
the darling of Silicon Valley.
In June of 1994, I had gotten a subtle facial injury while playing
ultimate frisbee in the quad, at a Beyond the Pale area university.
I had told the press, "My injury refreshed my determination to make
the most of every moment," but I never mentioned that my facial injury
changed everything about my relationships and my sense of self.
I withheld the story. I kept the data secret, and there were just a
handful of people who knew.
In reality, my facial injury had a dramatic impact on my life.
The French billionaire I loved was spooked by my new look while a
British billionaire I barely knew came out of hiding and said my
facial injury had caused him to fall madly in love with me.
My association with Pierre Babineaux has been well documented by the
tabloid media, but we had conspired to bury the story about how he had
reacted to my facial injury.
We also withheld the data about the relationship between financier
George Andrews and I.
In 1991, I had formed a pact with Pierre, George, and First Man
Marshall Bobs.
That was before he got re-married to President Fay, the first woman to
become President of the United States.
I had fooled around with George, Pierre, and Marshall while I was
still an undergraduate student, but that story morphed from trash to
treasure after I got my mysterious facial injury.
I got to know all three of them in the summer of 1991, when I was 19
years old, and I find it fitting to finally tell the story about us on
the 19th anniversary of our summer of love.
Summer 2010
A Lake Nearby
Chapel Hill, NC
__Ch1: Crash Course__
I grew up in the Sunset district of San Francisco, several blocks from
the beach.
I studied piano and ballet after school. I also memorized Bible
quotes and used them to cast spells.
My parents excelled at dramatic reading of children books, the Bible,
and even the news.
I wasn’t as scolded as much as I might have been for fabricating
stories about my activities at school. Instead, I my parents told
their own tall tales and redirected my enthusiasm into word play and
emotional vocabulary.
It didn’t fully sink in for me until high school English class that
storytelling could be used for evil as well as good, but I had been
exploring all the avenues all along.
In elementary school, I started framing people as allies, opponents,
and security guards, and nobody ever called it out.
Variations on twirling were my gold standard for framing people as
opponents.
I used toe pointing technique to help craft narratives about my peers.
The key to successful execution of a toe point was to look away, as if
surprised by the sight of a hot air balloon.
Looking away drove everyone's conscious awareness in one direction
while my footwork pinned their subconscious minds in place.
Once allies and opponents had been identified, recruiting security
guards happened naturally.
For example, if I cast the Bible quote, "A mist went up from the Earth
and watered the whole face of the ground," I could also do a twirl and
create two opponents.
Then I could face my new opponents and say, "The Lord God formed man
of dust from the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life," while using toe pointing technique to frame one of the
opponents as more likely to become and ally than the other.
Several boys in my grade took up martial arts, and we became friends
while exploring the idea of "no touch sparring."
Two dancers could do anything in the ring except for touching the
other dancer. The rules were the same as in school: inside voices
only.
The winner was determined by a vote of the people standing around the
ring.
The winner of a battle got a point and the loser lost a point. 
Everyone in our dance club had a score, and it didn't matter how
negative anyone's score got.
I won a lot of battles by chanting Bible quotes in conjunction with
ballet moves, and that added an element of structure to our club.
New comers to dance club usually tried, "Get in your face,"
techniques, but it was easy to defang their offense by maintaining my
flow as a dancer and then sharing the word of God.
The members of the club had to keep developing new techniques in order
to have a chance at besting my ballet and Bible quotes, and I kept
getting better at both.
In time, a guy named Paul began crushing me in the ring by playing air
guitar.
He was pretending to play the musical accompaniment to my dance moves.
He made everyone laugh without losing his composure.
I tried imitating a whole band that was playing different music than
him.
He responded in kind, and his virtual band was tighter than mine, so
we joined forces and formed an actual band called "Air Cover."
Paul played bass, I was the lead singer, and we found instruments for
everyone else who wanted a role.
We hypnotized people with motion and sound, and my mind went into
overdrive. I figured out that everyone was reading me as undiscerning
consumer of new age hype, so I went with the flow and started
maintaining a private dictionary of all knowledge on my computer.
I made a sign for my room that said, “Representation without
taxation.”
I made fliers for our events by taking photos of photos, and this
activity grew into a monthly zine with horoscopes, art, and essays.
I became a local rockstar, but I waited until I was eighteen before
having sex.
I got into chatting online with some college guys who had also waited
until they were eighteen.
Their reasons for waiting had been different than mine, but we made a
deal to weave a grand narrative by pretending we were all the same
person.
My co-authors in cyberspace helped me design a system for giving out
party favors to people who hung out with me in the city or helped out
with Air Cover performances, etc.
I made my first round of party favors by cutting out shapes in
construction paper and decorating them with thank you messages that I
wrote with glitter pens.
In subsequent rounds, we explored designs that were based on cartoon
characters and jokes about money, itself.
Some of my co-authors identified themselves as students at
universities in the bay area, but I had no idea who was behind most of
the handles I was entertaining.
The balance of power shifted after I turned eighteen. I viewed safe
sex as an engineering problem that had been solved by new technology,
and I had been planning my future sex life for years.
I got them to confess that they wanted to hear all the details about
my sexual adventures, and then I decreed that there was nothing they
could offer me in return which would make it worth my while to give
them what they wanted.
They took it well. They had seen this coming, and they were also
riding high on the wave of the personal computer revolution.
We celebrated our truce by playing a simulated tank battle whilst
indulging in heavy conversation about geo-politics.
In the real world, we turned down the volume on the band, and I spent
the summer of 1990 building an IT consulting business in San
Francisco.
That fall, I enrolled at a Beyond the Pale area university, and I,
"landed a dozen more male classmates in the sack," according to a guy
I had made friends with in computer science class.
I had tossed a nerf cube at the bulky laptop computer he insisted on
bringing to class.
He was pretending not to notice me, and I suspected he was faking his
emotions more comprehensively than anyone else in the room.
Rather than ask me for what he wanted, he asked why he should, "waste
his time talking to me if there was no chance that we would ever hook
up."
"You’re a real charmer, aren’t you?" I replied.
"I get it. Your plan is to select an eclectic mix of lucky college
boys and then mostly snub the jocks."
"You know what you need?"
"Is that a question?"
"Do you want it to be?"
"Ok. Fine. What do I need?"
"You need a narrative about why you’re a hot guy that girls would want
to hook up with. You have to write that for yourself."
"Could I pay you to write that for me?"
"Eww, no."
"Why is that gross?"
"I don’t want to think about you that way, but why be shy about
thinking of yourself that way? Read some erotic fiction. Figure it
out. Make stuff up if you have to."
"There’s no reason for me to be shy about that. I agree. Do you want
to be my project partner for this week’s assignment?"
"Sure," I said, while pretending not to be sarcastic beyond all
recognition.
I got tired of juggling multiple sexual partners, so I started dating
an IT guy named Andrey who lived near campus.
Andrey thought it was funny how the Beyond the Pale area university
kids were afraid of him, and I helped him get a better gig before the
end of my freshman spring.
I, in turn, was aflutter with excitement to explore the theory that I
could have destroyed him at dance battles, but allowing him to use
physical touch opened the door for him to force me to lose my
composure every time we slept together. He was really good keeping me
off balance, and I loved it!
I caught the attention of a dirty old man circuit that was associated
with the people Andrey worked with, but we hustled them faster than
they could get their story straight, and I made a deal to bring my
guys from SF out to London for the summer in order to build an
information management app for the benefit of a British financier
named George Andrews.
My London based consulting firm got a nondescript flat and the team
wrote code while I shamelessly attended parties with George and his
business associates.
George was brilliant at investing. His mind worked like a well-oiled
machine, but he treated socializing like a zero-sum game.
He wanted to get all the social data, but everyone knew he just wanted
their data. He loved having me in the room, working, because I could
manage a low key receiving line near the center of the room.
I used dance club moves to block anyone who tried to hijack my
platform, and I kept the demand for my attention constant by
ruthlessly staring down and slaying guys at random if my receiving
line got too long. I could also increase demand when necessary by
representing hotness.
George's hustle was to stand near the edge of the crowd and
interrogate people who were stepping away from my sphere of influence.
We also talked on the phone every morning. I would have preferred
whispering the data into his ear while lying naked with him in his
master bedroom, but he insisted that we share the data over the phone
from our offices.
I set an intention to prime people to like George's energy and feel
good about giving him data. I also made intermittent field trips to
the bar and gave George positive looks, which is the opposite of what
girls usually did after making him as a hustler.
We eventually got busted by a 45-year-old French billionaire named
Pierre Babineaux, although I suspect it was an inside job. George
must have told Pierre about me, but they have always said they don't
recall whether or not they talked about me before the party.
Either way, Pierre stepped up onto my platform. He stared lovingly
into my eyes and said, "Catholic, ballerina, computer nerd."
I didn't know who he was, but he looked fashionable. I moved in
closer and said, "That's right. How did you know?"
"The first two were lucky guesses, but only a computer nerd would hold
the demand for her attention constant and be nice to George. You
should add more variation to the perceived level of demand for your
services."
And then he walked away, so I followed him.
When I caught up with him, he moved in very close and said, "I would
like to give you a hat. May I give you a hat?"
I said yes, and he produced a stunning diamond encrusted headband. My
heart skipped a beat, but I focused on keeping my muscles soft and
holding his eye contact. He adjusted the headband until it was just
so and then he dismissed me!
He said, "They're waiting for you to return to the center of the
room!"
I played along and after ten minutes he revisited my platform and
said, "Hey Suzy, there's someone I'd like for you to meet."
He put his hand around my waist and showed me off to a few people. If
I hadn't been able to speak French, he might have lost interest, but I
knew enough words to keep him entertained.
He dismissed me again, using the same words: "They're waiting for you
to return to the center of the room!"
And then he came back to borrow me from my platform, on repeat, for
the rest of the evening.
He kept using the same words, as a way of making fun of me for being a
computer nerd. It made me burn inside, but not enough to explode.
He knew what to say to everyone. He owned the room, and he was
sharing it with me. Pierre's hustle was increasing the value of
George's hustle immeasurably.
When the party was winding down, George left without saying goodbye
and Pierre came by to say, "I have one more party to attend this
evening, and I would like nothing more than to have you come as my
date."
"Sure," I said, with aggressive sarcasm.
"It's a pool party, but maybe we can find a suit for you to wear in my
limousine."
I thought about slaying him. Giving his headband back to him and then
walking off like nothing had happened would have been my new textbook
definition of slaying a man. He saw me think about slaying him, but I
wanted in, so I did the opposite.
"Do you work in fashion?"
"Yes, how did you know?"
I didn't bother answering or reacting. I just attended to my posture
and kept my muscles soft, and then I let him win at silent dance 
battles for the rest of the evening. We operated as a team and talked
to other people without saying anything more to each other.
Pierre had me in his hot tub in Paris within 48 hours. I liked to be
tied up and spanked, and Pierre was happy to help with that. He
narrated a twisted story about awful things he was supposedly doing to
me while I was tied up, but then he kept going easy.
I gave him nasty feedback, hoping it would inspire him to go harder,
and he blocked with, "Only on the yacht, Suzy."
"Where’s your yacht now?" I asked.
Pierre untied me and spun a new narrative about how he wanted me to
help him gather data about an oil pipeline.
"Won't that expose me to security risk?"
"Not a lot. We'll get in and out quickly. It's mostly a platform you
can use to show me everything you know about faking feminine
insecurity. It could also be a lucrative project for us. If we get
the data, I'll make trades, and if my trades are profitable, I'll have
more runway to project confidence that hanging out with you is good
for my credibility."
"I can give you more bad data about human insecurity than you can give
me bad data about French culture. It's a deal."
And then we fooled around some more.
I decided to call it love.
Pierre kept saying he was having a reoccurring dream about marrying
me, which he claimed meant he wasn't ready to get married, because he
believed dreams represented subconscious emotional attachments that
had just been released.
I responded by describing one of my dreams about him:
"I dreamed you were wearing a wire under your sport coat!"
"I dreamed I was buying sandals with you in San Francisco."
"I dreamed you were really, really tall. Like Atlas, babe."
That one got Pierre to laugh submissively.
Pierre's submissive laughter was the true, authentic currency of
unified Europe, and I was minting it in the summer of 1991.
I had big ideas. The scope of my dreams was even bigger, and I
partied with reckless abandon into the dawn of a new era.
I hoped my summer in Europe with Pierre and his friends who worked in
fashion would never end, but I went back to a Beyond the Pale area
university that fall.
I won the respect of the nerds and selected computer science as my
major. I also made peace with the jocks and staged a coup by talking
comfortably about sex toys in front of Chad, who was one of the most
sought after preppy guys, but we didn't hook up.
I could never remember which sports Chad played, and he declined to
take me seriously. I did spring break in Florida with my girlfriends
from freshman year, and I started dating a guy from the country named
Alex who was with a different Beyond the Pale area university crew
that was visiting the same spot as us in the sunshine state.
I flaunted my new boyfriend until the end of spring semester. Many
people viewed this as a desperate attempt to get Chad to notice me,
but Chad patted me on the shoulder, one time, when we randomly passed
each other in the quad.
He was sending me a message that he knew my relationship with Alex was
fake. He knew it wasn't about him, and he didn't care what it was
actually about.
Alex was vaguely aware he was doing a tour of duty for a greater
cause, and he was cool with it. I was respectful about it, and his
boys at a Beyond the Pale area university and his boys back home stood
tall.
I framed them as a bunch of aspiring country writers, and I framed
myself as a sexy assistant who was taking notes for them. I was
playing 80s pop rock mashed up with island music on their boom box,
and I pretended to have not yet heard the term "grunge."
The style choices I was making on and off the golf course propelled
Alex's boys out of the mainstream and into the subculture space that
existed on the other side of me.
We ignored the grunge vibe that was taking the world by storm.
We were representing golf, and I focused on my classes.
I slayed grunge, and the guys from the country thought I was great. I
got the top level culture data about the rest of America from my
girlfriends in college in exchange for the raw west coast data from my
guys back home, and I crunched all of this input in my brain, like a
cray supercomputer.
I told Alex I had converted from Christianity to a sexually charged
infatuation with technological progress, and he whispered back, "I
won't tell if you don't tell."
It was a fair transaction. My guys in SF were making money hand over
fist as freewheeling IT consultants. The personal computer was the
engine, and I was the boat.
We kept the flat in London, and they represented me in their brochure
as the head of their consulting firm's London office.
George used the flat to play a prank on Pierre that involved a
shipment of fake guns. The photos looked real enough to get Pierre
upset!
Pierre kept the pre-screened clients flowing. Small businesses all
over Northern France wanted to pay full price for our customized
information management software that ran on computer that paired well
with cats.
He and George where cooking up a feast. I taught George how to talk
to girls like me about what he did for a living, and then I had weekly
phone sex with Pierre.
In the realm of geopolitics, computers that paired well with dog food
boxes had won the war against computers that paired well with cats,
but Pierre was one of the first people in Europe to see the evil dog
foodbox empire for the hustle that it was.
He knew the brands associated with computers that paired well with dog
food boxes would get dirty and then anyone who had disregarded them
would gain an advantage, so he promoted cat computers with style and
discretion.
Pierre talked up his London consulting shop that specialized in
developing custom information management software for computers that
paired well with cats, and people in the know associated our shop with
his summer fling with me.
Pierre was washing his name and staying warm in the winter by selling
our software to a thousand French cheese, milk, and soap producers.
I wanted to add leverage to a good thing, so I got a summer internship
at a bank.
I applied and interviewed without telling any of my billionaires.
Some people assumed I was going to perform a redux of my affair with
Pierre, and Pierre did nothing to discourage this notion.
I was assigned to a team of mostly finance bros.
The bank expected us to work long hours.
I also got a group of mostly guys to go in with me on a rental by the
beach.
They spread the word about me, and the information flowed upstream.
A private investigator made us at a beach bar, and the next morning I
got a call from a power broker named Marshall Bobs who I had met the
previous summer at one of Pierre's parties.
He was at his mansion, not far from us.
I got the boys cleaned up, I dismissed the girls I had helped them
bring back to the rental, and I took them to Marshall's mansion for
brunch.
My finance trust played it cool, and I stayed back with Marshall while
the wide-eyed bros drove back to the city with my stuff.
The conversation between Marshall and I that began in 1991 was one of
the highlights of my life. Pierre had introduced us at a fashion
event. He trolled Marshall by introducing me as a model.
Pierre’s delivery was great, I played my role perfectly, but Marshall
could tell by the way the actual models in the room were reacting to
us that I was not part of their group. Pierre and I wanted Marshall
to represent the real reason why I was at the party.
Marshall and I began with a silent stand off, and Pierre made an
excuse to leave. Marshall was making a very credible threat to slay
me and ignore me for the rest of my life, so I took a guess, “I bet
you like surf rock.”
He smiled. “Pierre prepped you with that, didn’t he?”
“No, I just surfed a lot growing up in San Francisco, and I had good
conversations with a few guys like you on the beach.”
I gave Marshall a safe platform, and he talked about surf rock in
detail. Too much detail.
In response, I told him about my band, Air Cover. I said we were
doing electric nerd inspired acid house, but that we had worked in
some ideas from surf rock. I was loopy around Marshall from the
beginning.
Marshall took the lead, and all I had to do was lose dance battles. 
Losing dance battles to Pierre was easy because he was always
projecting the image of success, but Marshall did an usually good
impression of an average guy.
Everyone knew he could make a few phone calls and change the
trajectory of their career, but he acted just like the hundreds of
average guys that I had been slaying all summer.
My muscle memory kept prompting me to slay Marshall, but I used logic
to reframe the dance battle as a dance performance. My skill as a
dancer allowed me to come off as even more average than Marshall. I
was beating him at a modified version of dance club in which the goal
was to be as boring and unremarkable as possible in the eyes of the
audience.
My task was all the more difficult because George had been essentially
paying me to let him win at this game all summer. George was terrible
at being average, and he didn’t even try. He just paid me to be more
ridiculous than him so that he wouldn’t stand out as the most pompous
rich guy in the room.
My ability to stand in the middle the room and slay high quality guys
all evening took the spotlight off of George, and the hardest part of
my role was to suppress my urge to laugh at George every time I saw
him do anything at a party.
Marshall and I went for a walk and he admitted he was trying to figure
out how I was able to stay cooler than him even though I didn’t know
anything about how the world works.
“It’s my background in computer science,” I said. “I understand that
you have an information advantage. That’s all I need to know.”
“You couldn’t do it without a dance background also. You’re getting
under my skin because you’re a better dancer than me.”
“Have you ever done this with a college guy?” I asked.
“No. It’s definitely sexual. What we’re doing would be violent if it
wasn’t sexual.”
“Why?”
“It gives you power over me, and the only reason I’m ok with giving
you that access is because we both know I have more security than
you.”
“Sounds like I own you politically. Yay!” I said, as I did a really
lackluster impression of a cheerleader.
“Just keep playing your role, and we’ll see what happens.”
Marshall pretended to be joking, but his edge made my mind spin. The
summer breeze blowing on my face and throw my hair felt good as I
stared into Marshall’s eyes. We were Americans making fun of two
European men named George and Pierre, so I decided to let in ride.
I fooled around with Marshall, and he ferried me back to the city
early the next morning in a helicopter, just in time for a meeting he
had arranged with the president of my bank.
Marshall explained to his buddy at the bank that culture was changing
at an alarming rate, and it would be helpful to have me consulting
directly with clients like him on how to respond to the influx of new
ideas and attitudes coming out of Seattle.
I was sleep deprived, coherent, and I did not appear to be on drugs,
so the president of the bank went off and had a conversation with the
director of HR.
HR agreed to give me flexible hours.
Marshall would pay a retainer upfront, he said he'd buy a huge asset
and pay the bank a success fee.
I was ordered to file detailed notes with HR about what I was doing
for the client during each hour when I was not at my desk, in addition
to keeping up with performing all the same work as the other interns
in my program.
Sensing an ambush, I pitched the idea of bringing in a couple guys
from my SF crew to be interns on my team.
A private meeting was scheduled between HR and I
"I want a weekly meeting with you to review your hourly notes, and
your manager must submit a weekly report which convinces me that these
two additional interns are doing the same work you would have done,"
she said.
"Done," I said.
"I wasn't finished. The additional interns will be responsible for
keeping you up to speed with the work you would have been doing, but
nobody except you is going to bother telling them that. And you,
Suzy, had better be able to explain the work you are doing during each
hour you file with me. I don't want to hear anything about your
social life."
I had been making strong eye contact and keeping my muscles soft while 
HR was talking. She was acting just like any other guy in my
receiving line.
I left HR’s office without saying another word.
It was understood that my job title would remain the same. I would
still get to write on my resume that I had been a summer intern at the
bank.
I called two guys in SF who had expressed interest in finance, and
they were in the office with freshly bought suits and ties the next
morning.
They took over the room in the city I had secured for the summer, and
I moved into Marshall's mansion.
Phone calls were made and a French industrialist named Claude decided
to sell Marshall a stake in his flagship parts company.
I prepared a spreadsheet about the deal using a computer that paired
well with cats, with my back to Marshall's ocean view, at a table near
the DJ stand in the living room in his mansion, and we didn't bother
tearing down my office during our grunge themed social events that
become the talk of the party people that summer.
My office was an aspect of the decor for the parties.
Marshall's ex-wife, Fay, with whom he had two kids, showed up to the
mansion one day and harassed me by knocking a pen off her desk.
A member of the security team named Leandro arrived on the scene at
the same time as Marshall.
Fay proceeded to tell a lie about me, and I contradicted her all the
way. I treated her like a guy in my receiving line. I represented a
Beyond the Pale area university while making strong eye contact, and
then I pretended to ignore everything else she did and walked back to
my desk.
I slayed her. The men had not seen this coming. Fay's hand twitched,
and then she calmly delivered her message to Marshall.
I invited Leandro out to the deck and asked him to help me practice
jump kicks. Fay acknowledged that Marshall might have finally found a
positive influence for himself, but it wasn't a love fest. He said
she said, "We'll have to wait and see."
Leandro resigned from the security team in order to work for Pierre,
who had been trolling around the east coast in his yacht, waiting for
the right moment to make his entrance into the shallow water near 
Marshall's mansion.
Marshall made all of this happen after I convinced him to pay Leandro
by the hour to teach him martial arts.
Pierre and Leandro had a shared vision with regard to creating a
"reality video" about Pierre and his guests on the boat.
Pierre had a showman character that he could turn on as needed, and
the reality video project sharpened his character in all the right
ways.
Everybody wanted in, and I helped Pierre and Leandro throw parties on
the boat in order to discover talent.
Pierre and Marshall were starting to really do it on the east coast!
Back in the city, HR and I created a silent ruckus by relocating our
weekly meetings to a private club that was full of mostly male
bankers. We spoke only of business, and she laughed out loud at how
ridiculous my coded language had become.
I would drop lines like, "We found that breaking out the suppliers by
region was the key to using iterative approximation to recalibrate the
model," and HR would burst out laughing.
I was spending half of my time in my office at Marshall's mansion
preparing properly coded language to unload during my weekly lunch
meetings with HR, and Marshall was happy with my performance.
On one occasion, Claude stopped by the table I was sharing with HR.
He thanked me for helping out on the parts deal, but he patted me on
the head as he left.
I emerged from my chair like a ballerina and told Claude it was not ok
to pat me on the head in a work setting.
He laughed and turned his back to me.
HR could not have been more pleased with my performance, so I
escalated the matter to Marshall.
George flew in from London, and a meeting was arranged at a different
kind of private club where I felt seriously out of place.
Everyone in the room stared at me when I entered the room. George,
Pierre, Marshal, and I grabbed a table, and Claude joined us a few
minutes later.
George and Marshall stared at Claude. He didn't like what they were
doing. They weren't exactly bullying him, but he was feeling pain.
I focused on keeping my feet on the floor. I really wanted to put
them on the coffee table. I thought my stilettos would look great on
the coffee table, but Pierre had coached me beforehand to keep my feet
on the floor. I thought he was joking, but he had been serious.
"We're exploring the concept of minimal distortion. Everyone else
whose opinion carries weight is representing false beliefs right now,
but we aren't. I'm asking you to accept that as an upfront
assumption."
There was a pause. Claude was listening. Claude was intrigued.
Pierre was going all in.
"The way we ensure minimal distortion is by treating Suzy like an
equal participant in our business transaction. She works for the bank
and she's helping us do the deal. Think of her as either being on the
clock or off the clock. If she's off the clock, she's fair game as a
sexual partner, but she's a tough negotiator, so I don't recommend
patting her on the head in that context either."
George and Marshall were still staring at Claude. They looked
inquisitive, but this wasn't an inquisition or a show trial. They
were doing a science experiment.
"Fine." said Claude. "I'll work for you, but this project ends when
her summer internship ends."
He made strong eye contact with Pierre and then strong eye contact
with me. My heart skipped about three beats, and then Claude got up
abruptly and left the room. He did not appear to have training in
ballet, but he won the dance battle.
Pierre started doing what George and Marshall were doing while Claude
made his exit.
Part of me wanted him to pat my head on his way out, but Claude was
aided by a newspaper that had been conveniently placed on the coffee
table. Clutching the newspaper in his hands somehow helped him save
face as he walked past me.
What was I supposed to do? My eyes settled on the coffee table. I
would have looked at the coffee table even if Claude hadn't picked up
the newspaper.
The following week, Claude stopped by my table with HR, and he offered
a convincing apology. His body language was smooth, subtle, and
engaging.
I made strong eye contact and framed him like a guy in my receiving
line at a party, but I suddenly felt like I should reframe this as a
dance battle with my guys in San Francisco. I'd been training for
this moment for years. This was my olympic performance. I just had
to stick the landing, and then I would win gold.
When Claude finished speaking, I said, "Thank you," while dominating
his energy with dance club moves. I wasn't slaying him. I was
dominating him, but he was letting me. I wanted him to enjoy it.
Dance club was serious. He smiled. This was correct. He didn't
think I could do this. He was pleasantly surprised. He got more than
he had expected. I was happy.
I had handled the transaction, and I continued talking shop with HR as
if nothing had happened.
That evening, I was summoned to Pierre's yacht, along with George and
Marshall. Leandro took the skiff back to land with the captain, the
chef, and the first mate, and I headed out to sea with the pirates for
an overnight cruise.
Pierre was driving the boat as we motored off into the sunset, and the
energy on the boat was really interesting!
The pirates gave me a ransom note that explained they were
uncomfortable with my lack of personal wealth. They had all made
substantial amounts of additional money while hanging out with me.
They were concerned I'd write a tell all book about them, but if I
started a hedge fund, they would each be happy to invest a million
dollars.
"Is this the part where Pierre will finally spank me hard until I'm
speaking in tongues, and then I'll tell you the magic formula for
starting a communist revolution in America?" I asked.
"Is that what you want us to do?" asked George.
I didn't like that George said it. I felt like he was studying my
body language to decide if I was planning to write a tell all book
about them, and if I were found guilty of practicing witchcraft then
they were going to kill me and call it an accident!
"Do you want us to take the boat back to shore, Suzy?" asked Pierre,
condescendingly.
"Oh my god," I said. I became a valley girl. I wasn't a valley girl.
What was this? This was a bad Hollywood movie scene.
Marshall's energy was ice cold. I stared at him and asked, "Marshall,
what should do?" like a teacher calling on him in class. I was
reacting. I didn't know what to do.
He didn't respond. It was like I had said nothing. I had ceased to
exist. Where these guys playing with me?
"No, I'll look into starting a hedge fund when we get back to shore,"
I said.
"That's wonderful news, Suzy! we're eager to invest," said Pierre.
And then he did his showman act. He started talking about food and
wine and the guys softened up. We smoked cigars. They treated me
like one of the guys, and I lead the crew in mindful stretching at
sunrise.
Stretching was Pierre's idea, but he told me to say it was my idea to
George and Marshall.
What kind of hustle was this? Were we double dating? Was Pierre
coming out to us as a woman?
Back on land, I was happy to see Leandro. The pirates had agreed to
let me share the data with him, so I told him everything.
"He's just adding leverage," George had said, in order to make it
clear he had veto power over my freedom to share data with Leandro.
I was starting to hate George. What was his problem? Why did he have
to comment?
None of this phased Leandro. He was happy to ignore the security
risks I was weighing in my mind. I asked him what he planned to do at
the end of the summer, and he laughed.
"That's such a college girl question."
"I know," I said, while moving in closer like Pierre would have done
to me if I was declining to answer one of his stupid questions.
For example, Pierre loved to ask me how each of my outfits felt on my
body. He had no right to ask, but he would always move in closer
until I pushed him away or gave him data.
"Pierre's been talking a lot about gambling in Vegas."
I felt relieved. Gambling in Vegas was safe. We had sex. I loved
what he was doing. I was off balance mentally and physically, but I
felt safe.
The next day I started researching hedge funds. I didn't want to
start a fund, so I treated it like a research project for a class. I
was doing market research instead of party planning. Marshall
approved of my project. He wanted this to become my only project.
Our parties in the summer of 1992 were like a space portal that had
opened up and allowed us to travel across the universe for a brief
window of time, but now the portal was closing. I was back to doing a
banking internship, but I was locked up like a princess in Marshall's
lair.
HR was going to laugh at me. She was going to frame me as a princess.
The worst part is that I was enjoying it physically, and she was going
to know that too. I felt obscenely feminine. I figured this must
have been what Pierre had been orchestrating all along.
I became more and more confident that starting a hedge fund was not
the right move for me. I wanted to start a software company, but I
didn't know enough yet.
Pierre organized another cruise. This time we had a full boat.
Claude joined, along with Leandro and the boat staff. I was framed as
boat staff.
Five girls Pierre was supposedly friends with joined us. They all had
smaller shoulders and longer legs than me. I tried to pretend that
this was a statistical anomaly.
I served drinks with Leandro. We shared a cabin and had great sex. I
felt free on the boat, but I was afraid of Leandro and Pierre. They
had been cooking lunch together all summer while filming scenes for
their reality video project.
They kept acting like they were going to have a fist fight over me so
that the captain would have to pull out a revolver and restore order,
but I had faith this was all part of Pierre's master plan.
After dinner on the second night, Leandro and Claude went off to smoke
a joint. Pierre's girlfriends were watching a movie, and Pierre asked
me to do drugs with him while George and Marshall watched.
It was all a game for him!
Pierre explained that I had said the magic word on the last cruise.
"Revolution?"
"No, communism. We have another chance to do it right, but with free
software. I want you to lead it, Suzy."
"Won't George and Marshall object?"
"No, they're just pretending to be capitalists."
"But their act is very thorough," I said, becoming a ballerina.
George and Marshall were pretending Pierre and I weren't there. They
were also pretending not to see each other. They were pretending to
be on the boat alone, enjoying the summer breeze, but they were taking
it all in. They loved practicing this act.
I waived my hands in front of them to see if they would react.
Somehow it wasn't rude to do it to two people.
Part of my role was to avoid being overtly rude to either of them
individually, especially when they did something awkward like this.
"When you're done casting spells on the guys, I would like to hear
your master plan for the free software movement," said Pierre.
I felt like a machine. I was being programmed. I had spent the whole
week studying hedge funds, so of course my answer would involve a
combination of starting a hedge fund and distributing free software.
Pierre loved me in that moment because I was a computer nerd who had
already thought about free software.
I said the first thought I had. This was improv theater.
"Baseball cards, but for computer hackers. Eliminate money. Force
people to use fractional ownership in the hacker cards as the means of
exchange for other goods and services."
"Excellent! Will you marry me in Vegas? I want to give you four
million dollars so you can implement this idea, but I don't want it to
be a company. Do it for love. Will you marry me?"
"Dah. Cut. Can we talk about this seriously, please?" I said.
"We're on drugs, but sure. What did you have in mind?"
"I will take your money, but the frame is that I go to Vegas with ten
thousand and leave with four million. The only catch is that Uncle
Sam gets half. I also want to do more drugs after we get married."
"Sounds good," said Pierre.
Pierre knew I wanted to ask for more details about why he would do
this. I wanted it to be true, but I wasn't sure if he was serious. I
didn't see anything wrong with it, so I spoke in tongues.
"And, yes, I'll use the money to start a movement. George and
Marshall want to nickel and dime everyone, but you're man with vision.
You know the only way anything ever gets done in this world is by
giving four million to a hot smart college girl who isn't rich."
"Bingo," said Pierre.
I was delirious. What was he doing? He was framing himself as a girl
again. Not a woman this time. As a hot girl. I took him back to his
cabin and ravaged him.
In the morning, Pierre did more drugs but encouraged me to be sleeping
beauty and then nerd it up for the rest of the cruise.
"Play piano and read your math text books. I'll help Leandro serve
the drinks," he said.
He was patting me on the head, but I liked this idea. The other girls
on the boat acted like I was invisible. I didn't care.
George and Marshall made fun of me by pretending to take an interest
in my reading. They asked me to explain the math to them, so I did.
They acted like they were interested, but I was sure they were making
fun of me.
Pierre, however, was serious. When we got back to shore, his people
started arranging everything.
I did legal research about what I was getting into. Pierre was a
dirty old man and he wanted to give me his money. It was cool. I was
a chemistry experiment to him.
Pierre had just one other request:
"Suzy, would you be so kind as to provide the capital for Leandro to
start a dojo in Las Vegas? I think you'll see a return on the
investment."
"Sure," I said.
And then we partied in Vegas. Pierre and I got married and acted
silly. I became rich. Leandro started a dojo.
I had planned to attend classes at a Beyond the Pale area university
that fall, but Pierre wanted to take a cruise around the world.
I was down to party, but first I had to finish my banking internship.
I forced myself to stop doing drugs for two weeks, and I showed up to
work at the office where my guys from San Francisco were working with 
their fellow banking interns.
We finished the internship together, and they didn't treat me like I
was ridiculous.
They took me seriously. It was important for me to get equipped with
all the knowledge I would need to represent their internship as a real
experience when I got back to a Beyond the Pale area university for
spring semester.
Pierre was running the same hustle he had ran the first time we met.
He was partying with me but tricking me into returning to my stable
platform at regular intervals.
Was he tricking me or forcing me? I concluded he was just using
witchcraft. He was not a violent man.
We sailed around the world in Pierre's yacht. We tried a few more
drugs. We wanted to meld our minds into one. We were mad scientists
in love, but Pierre never let me be the man.
I think he was afraid the captain would disrespect him if I was
allowed to be a man to him.
I was allowed to drive the boat whenever I wanted, but I wasn't
allowed to drive Pierre, not even when we were on drugs.
Pierre got deeper and deeper into my subconscious, but I could expand
my mind just as quickly as he got into it. I was his mirror with
moving parts.
He was trying to re-program me to be the logical compliment of his
public image, but he couldn't do it. The harder he tried, the easier
it was for me to be hot girl on the boat for Pierre. I loved being
her, and we had great sex.
We eventually reached a truce and got serious about studying our books
and chatting as equals with the boat staff.
We talked about current events on the world stage. We talked about
history.
Pierre had done this routine before. I had not.
Pierre got himself into at trance state and then acted out a timeline
of the universe while I held the camera.
He said he would keep three copies of the video in safe deposit boxes
all around the world.
He said he would leave ownership of the film to me in his will.
He was representing a statue of the phoenix in his master bedroom. He
took it very seriously, and he laughed submissively when I came up
with novel ways to make fun of it.
We were toying with the idea of exorbitant privilege, in and of
itself.
I initially believed I could turn Pierre into a good man, but our
relationship reached a point of diminishing returns somewhere between
the island resorts we visited in the Indian ocean.
Pierre was eager to return to the mainland and pursue his usual
hustle, and there was nothing I could do to pull him back into the
aura of my love.
I was the product and he was the customer. I didn't have enough
leverage to flip the script.
I felt like royalty, but Pierre never got me to conform to his vision
for what I should be. The good sex worked to my advantage. Once
violence was taken off the table, he had no way to get me. He was
forced to be a good samaritan and teach me more and more of what he
knew about society, culture, and the human condition.
I was surprised he didn't let me show him how to be a woman, but he
preferred to be a member of the crew on his own ship. He still had
his money, and he trusted that I, like him, wasn't capable of
violence.
We spent Christmas in Tahiti, and then we flew to Los Angeles.
Pierre had made plans to move to America and produce. I helped him
find a mansion that would help him gain credibility as a thought
leader in yoga, transcendental meditation, photography, and creative
writing, and then we got a divorce.
Pierre had taught me everything he knew about ballroom dancing on the
boat, so I kept dancing at a Beyond the Pale area university that
spring.
Pierre had all the best artifacts, moves, and words. He had the best
private collection of CDs and video tapes, and I was annoyed that I
couldn't just download all of it from the Internet.
I was ruminating about this when Heather asked me to dance. My head
was exploding.
Pierre would have been perturbed if this girl asking me to dance 
didn't approve of his lifestyle.
If I kept my muscles soft and let her twirl me around, I would learn a
lot about her.
I would learn all the ways she was not like Pierre, and that would
happen before we even started talking.
Following was easy for me. Pierre had programmed me to be the perfect
follow, but it made my brain turn to mush. I couldn't reconcile his
tastes with Heather's tastes. My subconscious would do the work for
me, but I had no idea what was happening in there. Were Pierre and
this girl colluding to do a science experiment on me?
I let Heather guide me. I was curious to see the result, but my heart
was pounding from letting her lead.
She thought I was nervous about dancing with another woman, but that
wasn't it. In the middle of a song, I said, "Let me lead."
She was happy to follow. Pierre had let me lead him on the boat, but
he had acted bored.
He made me feel unattractive when I was leading.
Leading Pierre was like programming a computer.
He even joked about how he was sharing his inner robot with me, not
his inner woman.
This worked because I was a computer nerd, and I wanted to learn how
to lead all the dances.
I let him joke about being a robot, and I programmed him to follow.
Heather would not have allowed it. She would have ignored Pierre's
inner robot and found someone else to lead, just like Chad had ignored
me all last year.
I lead Heather like a pro.
Heather could follow.
She said she had grown up being taught to follow, and she was showing
off her skill in order to impress me. I was impressed, so we went
back to my room holding hands.
I imagined that Chad was watching us.
We slayed Chad, and he smiled.
He knew I was actually flaunting myself to him this time. I was no
longer pretending.
Heather zeroed in on my photo album from the cruise around the world
with Pierre.
It made her heart skip a beat.
I stared into her eyes and she stared back.
I tried guessing her major.
She liked that I couldn't do it.
We held eye contact.
She wanted me to ask her to kiss her, so I put on some music and
started doing Pierre's showman character.
We made a connection. We talked about our families and then we
snuggled. We eventually did the strong eye contact thing again, and
this time she asked the question. I said yes and we hooked up.
Heather and I started hanging out. She was an econ major, but her
plan was to work in any industry other than finance.
On campus, she felt like a friend as opposed to a foe. She had my
back. I didn't have to think about anything other than doing my
classwork when I was around her.
We were not doing work for a Beyond the Pale area university.
Everyone else was trying to call out people who weren't working for
the school.
I finally saw it. Everyone else was doing what Claude called,
"Working."
George had only used the term "working" to describe what I was doing
to help him out at individual parties.
For Claude, work meant adjusting his behavior in all aspects of his
life to align with Pierre's objectives for the summer.
A Beyond the Pale area university was getting most of us to do
something in-between.
When we were on campus, most people were working for a Beyond the Pale
area university.
We did work for them because everyone else we saw was working for
them. The leader, whoever or whatever it was, was invisible.
Heather was the first person I'd connected with who got the joke.
Chad also got the joke. That's why he was starting to notice me. He
noticed that I was starting to get the joke.
He pretended to accidentally run into me from behind one day while I
was walking to class, so I slayed him and let him bleed out on the
field.
I invited Heather to fly to LA with me and stay at Pierre's mansion
for a long weekend.
She said yes.
We arrived at the property I'd helped Pierre select, and I saw who
Pierre was for the first time.
Everyone was working for him, and the people working for him all had
teams of people working for them.
At a Beyond the Pale area university, most of us were individual
contributors.
Pierre had a hierarchy reporting to him. He was running a machine.
He had arrived in LA and pitched a tent, but unlike everybody else,
his tent was a machine that would have taken a normal human being at
least five years to build.
Heather was happy to spend the currency I had with Pierre.
"What do you do?" she asked him.
"Yoga, mostly. There's a lot of people trying start cults that
involve doing yoga, and I'm blowing up all the cults."
"What happens after a cult blows up?" she asked.
"I don't know. That's what I'm trying to figure out."
"How do you blow them up?"
"By being here, and by doing yoga myself. They can't handle the
pressure."
My ex-husband was a mogul.
I kept resisting the urge to be a brat.
I didn't know what else to do.
Was Pierre giving me a coded message about what to do? Were Heather
and I putting everyone under pressure by just standing in the room?
Was that what I had been doing for Pierre all along?
"I smell opportunity. Heather wants to make love to you in my master
bedroom, and I want to have a threesome with both of you," said
Pierre.
"Won't your girlfriend feel left out?" Heather shot back.
She didn't even know if Pierre had a girlfriend. This was all a game
to her.
"No. We have an open relationship."
"Would she prefer if the relationship were not open?"
Pierre breathed in deeply, like he was struggling to maintain his
composure, but I knew he was only pretending to take his yoga practice
seriously.
He was holding back because he knew he might lose me forever if he
tried to make Heather suffer. I was putting pressure on everyone by
just standing there.
"Well, at least he's not dishonest," said Heather, looking at me.
"Tell him he has to be HR," I whispered into her ear.
Pierre was suffering. Heather was delighted. I was also happy to see
him suffer.
"You have to be HR," Heather said, staring at Pierre through her
sunglasses.
Heather was blocking Pierre from moving in closer and putting his
hands on my body, so he had to negotiate.
"What do you think Suzy meant when she told you I have to be HR?"
Heather was out gunned. I was worried about her, but she knew her
memes. She stepped in closer and told Pierre to, "Sit down."
There was no chair, so he sat on the floor.
I suppressed the urge to laugh. Was I working for Heather? Pierre
would suffer more if I didn't laugh. I wanted to see him suffer, so 
maybe I was working for myself.
"We don't have HR around here. We have an infirmary, and that's it.
Do you need to go to the infirmary, or are you going to get with the
program and dress up like a lady who works in Human Resources?" she
said, looking down at him from above.
"Yes ma'am," he said.
He imitated how I keep my muscles soft when I'm being approached.
His character was based on me, not the director of HR from the bank I
had worked at last summer.
I felt like I was loaning him currency by not mentioning this.
Was it a loan or was I giving him currency with no strings attached?
"Permission to stand up?" Pierre asked.
"Permission granted," said Heather.
Pierre disappeared into the bathroom and came back an hour later in HR
inspired drag.
He had shaved his body hair and done his own makeup while Heather and
I fooled around in the master bedroom.
Pierre had been serious when he said he worked in fashion.
He was still imitating me and doing a pretty good impression of how I
acted the first time Heather kissed me, but he didn't figure out how
to be hot girl for Heather.
He thought he could be a clone of me, but he couldn't make it real.
I had explained to Heather one night that I felt like I was playing a
character when I let her lead, and I wanted to call my character hot
girl for Heather.
Heather had laughed, and then she kept kissing me. I decided not to
bring it up again. Hot girl for Heather kept getting more elaborate,
and I loved being her.
Heather was happy to make the assumption that hot girl for Heather was
my true authentic self, but that wasn't true. I felt like I was a
computer operating system, and hot girl for Heather was an application
I had installed.
Was I working for the company that made my computer that paired well 
with cats, or I was I working for the concept Eve sobbing in the
garden of Eden? Was Pierre working for sobs too?
I had so many thoughts going through my mind!
But I was right about one thing:
Pierre had to become more and more like the director of HR at the bank
in order to stay in character.
He couldn't pull off expressing any interest in my social life outside
of the hot lesbian threesome we were having in his master bedroom.
HR was the only woman he knew how to imitate realistically.
Pierre did yoga in the morning with a bunch of aspiring actresses.
Heather remarked that he was teaching an acting class, and then we
made love.
I hoped that Pierre was videotaping us. If he was, we could sue him
for a king's ransom and buy our own house in the hills with a master
bedroom. I felt safe.
I wanted to frame Heather as a king and get to know everyone else in
Pierre's castle by framing them as her loyal subjects, but my inner
Pierre was screaming that this was cliche and that I simply had to
stop saying the obvious.
Pierre was a snob.
He had become my wicked ferry godmother.
In my head, we were still having a threesome, but Pierre had broken
his promise to act like HR. He was back to being himself. He was
hustling, and I avoided having a nervous breakdown by thinking about
the algorithms I was learning in my advanced computer operating
systems class at a Beyond the Pale area university.
Pierre and Heather could not play nice with each other in real life,
but the computer simulations of them in my head were able to co-exist
peacefully.
The bottle neck in this project was my ability to design, implement,
and run computer software in my subconscious.
I decided I would keep all of this secret, but it occurred to me that
George had probably known all of this about me since the moment we
met. They guy had read everything. He read computer science
textbooks as literature. He was withholding data from everyone, but
so was I. I was becoming George.
Heather said, "I see you ruminating over there," so I invited her to
meditate with me back to back in the living room, and she said yes.
My goal was to put all these thoughts out of mind, but I told Heather
I was feeling anxious.
She believed me.
I suspected I had just become a liar for the first time in my life.
I wanted to aggressively use meditation to forget about facts that had
become inconvenient, but I was framing myself as deferential.
Was it possible that Heather was doing the same?
Is that why she had said Pierre was teaching an acting class?
If this was all an acting class, then maybe I wasn't lying?
I was afraid to ask Heather if she was performing an act like I was,
and my fear made me want to cry.
I surpassed the urge to cry by thinking about puppies, flowers, candy,
and the ocean.
I was doing a feminine version of representing a British stiff upper
lip, and I could tell Heather thought it was hot.
Pierre rescued me, as usual, by serving up a feast of new words,
ideas, and attitudes that made it easier to pretend like I was being
super genuine and authentic even though everyone was so clearly
acting.
Guests came and went throughout the morning. Pierre was holding court
for his loyal subjects.
Was I the court jester?
I had to dig my nail into my finger to repress the urge to laugh
uncontrollably at how ridiculous Pierre had become.
I thought about whispering to Heather that Pierre didn't believe
anything he was saying, but I didn't want to put her at odds with
Pierre's machine.
Everyone was working for him, and she was enjoying the show. She was
interviewing Pierre's loyal subjects like a doctor checking in with
her patients at a mental hospital, but she looked like any other econ
major from a Beyond the Pale area university making small talk at a 
networking event.
What kind of networking event was this? Was this a happy hour at a
hedge fund? Was this the hustle that occurred before and after
listening to talks by Nobel Prize winning economists at a Beyond the
Pale area university?
Was it a conference for the sales representatives of a pharmaceutical
company?
Around 1pm, most people left. Everyone knew lunch was about to be
served.
Everyone was invited, but people were afraid Pierre would make them
suffer if they overstayed their welcome.
Pierre invited Heather and I to dine with him on the roof deck.
He pitched me on the idea of flying in his private plane to San
Francisco with him in order to help pick out an apartment while
Heather stayed here and made sure nobody else slept in the master
bedroom.
I desperately wanted to go to San Francisco with Pierre and tell him
everything I was thinking, but Heather interjected and said she wasn't
interested in staying at Pierre's mansion if I wasn't there.
My head was exploding again. I had thought Heather was going to be
uncomfortable, but she was like a rockstar telling her agent what to
do.
Pierre was her agent. I had become Heather's groupie. I felt like I
was about to lose both Heather and Pierre forever and then be forced
to spend the night in an insane asylum.
Heather's frame was that Pierre didn't take me seriously. She was
helping me get ahead in my career. Saying no was the smart move.
Pierre forced me to suffer. He leaned back in his chair and talked
about how he wanted to split his time between LA and San Francisco.
He had decided to become a venture capitalist in San Francisco, but he
wanted to get married and have children in LA.
He knew I would have seriously considered re-marrying him and having
children with him in San Francisco.
He knew I hated the idea of living in LA.
I had repressed laughter about his suffering last night, but now he
was making me suffer much more. He was getting the last laugh. He 
was winning.
Heather knew I was suffering and she tried to show kindness and
empathy towards me. I would have liked for her to say, "Do whatever
you want to do, Suzy," but she was not pressuring me.
Or was she? She looked supportive. Pierre looked devious.
I was free to ditch her and go to San Francisco with Pierre, but then
I would have had to put up with her acting like I wasn't serious about
my career the next time I saw her at school.
Pierre was enjoying my suffering immensely, and it made me want to
have angry sex with him. I could frame myself as a high class whore
in San Francisco and make everyone judge him as a dirty old man.
I decided to keep working for Heather.
"I'm with Heather. There's plenty for us to do here in LA," I said.
"Let me know if you change your mind," said Pierre, twisting the
knife.
Heather and I declined to react, so he turned on his showman character
and told us juicy gossip about the entertainment industry.
Heather and I left after lunch, and we spent the next two evenings by
the beach. She was a rockstar, and I had become an actress. It made
perfect sense for us to be dating.
Everyone wanted to be us. The surfer guys were chill and didn't
harass us. We were winning. I was miserable, but Heather was good in
bed. I started to feel empowered. We celebrated by upgrading to
first class on the flight back.
Word got around that Chad was planning to do a finance internship in
Boston, so I got myself an internship at a robotics company in
Cambridge.
Nobody cared about my internship. I was forced to approach Chad and
deliver the news myself.
"Hey Chad."
"Hey Suzy."
"I'm going to be in Boston this summer. We should hook up."
"I'd love to. Where are you working?"
"A robotics company."
"That's awesome. My brother's doing a biotech startup in Cambridge.
Let me know when you get settled and we'll get drinks."
"I want to go on a date with you."
"Ok."
Was there anything this guy hadn't seen before? I was probably the
fifth recently empowered woman who got her nerve up to ask him out
this week.
I moved in closer and said, "When I get settled, I'll call you and
maybe we can grab take out."
We exchanged info, and I looked into his eye's lovingly before making
my escape.
That summer, I invited Chad to attend a happy hour at my robotics
company. He wanted to get the data about what I was cooking in
Cambridge, so he made an appearance.
I was working with a bunch of nerds. They all wanted to have sex with
me, but Chad was not the enemy. He helped all of them save face. We
made a couple rounds at the happy hour, and then I took him back to my
place and we ordered take out.
Chad plopped himself down on my couch and acted bored. I snuggled up
to him and showed him some of the zines from when I was a rockstar in
high school. I finally got him to stop worrying what his teammates
would say if he dated a nerd!
Chad gave me the best sex of my life that night. Hot girl for Heather
and hot girl on the boat for Pierre melted away. He reprogramed me,
completely.
I was obsessed with his body. The more I thought about his body, the
more I felt like everything was going to be alright, but I tried to
focus on him. What were his emotional needs? What did he want? I
wanted to play the long game, if possible, but I couldn't win.
We made plans to meet again. I was doing all the work to keep him
entertained. I cried and told him how I felt. He made love to me
harder, and I loved it even more.
I admitted defeat the following morning.
I wanted to cry on his shoulder some more, but he wasn't in love with
me. I had a fantasy about turning him into a nerd. I wanted to write 
programs to do his finance job for him so he could spend all day
coming up with reasons why he wanted to have sex with me.
I wanted to program him so he could keep reprogramming me, but it
wasn't real. I had to let him go.
He was respectful about it. He was merciful. We made strong eye
contact during breakfast and he seemed appreciative that I was
checking my raging desire to be a brat.
My hot affair with Chad ended without drama.
Pierre was still winning. I started thinking violent thoughts about
Pierre. I came to understand why he and George were always joking
about violence. It helped take the edge off.
I didn't want to be violent. I just thought it would be fun to watch
a movie in which Pierre gets killed in the most outrageous way
possible.
A guy at work asked me out for lunch, and I decided to grace him with
my presence.
He had no idea what was going on. I thought about explaining to him
that everyone at a Beyond the Pale area university was working for
someone.
Chad was working for a cabal I didn't understand, but I suspected it
was just a group of rich people with great bodies.
I was more interested in understanding who the founders of our
robotics company where working for. I suspected they were working for
some invisible people who working for the military, but I couldn't
prove anything.
The guy across from me at lunch was so clueless about what I cared
about that I decided not to bring any of this up.
I was having trouble motivating myself to listen to the nerdy train of
thought he was exploring.
What kind of twisted mess was lurking inside this sad man's
subconscious? Was he representing a virtual labyrinth that was
probably a pretty decent map of some aspect of the military?
Maybe Pierre wasn't so bad. He knew what he was and what he wasn't.
I told the guy I wanted to win the race to build artificial
intelligence more than I wanted to have children.
My objective was to build strong AI. Strong AI meant building a
machine that was smarter than a human.
Pierre and George both wanted to be involved with winning the race to
build strong AI. They viewed it as their natural role in the
universe.
The guy rambled about how it made logical sense that a woman would
have the best odds of inventing strong AI.
I had tricked him into being sexist. Was I being a brat?
Pierre would not have fallen for this trap. Pierre was the most
sexist guy I knew, but he cared about being framed as progressive in
the media.
I was bored. I would have preferred to immediately quit my job and
get impregnated out of wedlock by Chad.
I wanted to have a baby with Chad and then hustle him by having more
babies with Pierre in San Francisco.
I wanted play them off each other and enjoy the best of both worlds.
That's what Pierre was doing. Why couldn't I have that too?
I was too bored to be mad. My summer internship ended with the polar
opposite of a bang, and I leveled up.
The nerdy guys didn't even carry me over the finish line.
I had carried them.
I setup a meeting with Pierre at a coffee house near his new apartment
in San Francisco.
I wore a black dress made of lace, with some skin-colored fabric
underneath. I wanted Pierre to know I had become a killer, like
George.
Pierre tried to make me suffer by acting like he was doing me a favor
by meeting with me, so I pitched him an idea I'd been mulling over
ever since my epiphany about how everyone at a Beyond the Pale area
university was working.
I had made a list of all the people I might be working for: the
church, a Beyond the Pale area university, George, Pierre, my bank in
NYC, Marshall, Chad, Heather, the elite New England boarding school
Heather had attended, the company that made my computer that paired
well with cats, the concept Eve sobbing in the garden of Eden, etc.
The one item I didn't understand was, "Heather's elite New England
boarding school."
What was their hustle?
Heather said they were in the business of increasing people's chances
of getting into name brand area universities.
I thought there had to be more to the story, but I let it go.
I did work for Heather by not asking more questions, and she allowed
me to suffer by never sharing additional data with me about her
experience at boarding school.
"We're looking towards our futures. It doesn't matter what we did in
our pasts," is what I imagined her thinking while she made me suffer.
Internalizing pithy ideas like that had to be part of the boarding
school hustle.
I wanted to get the data, so I came up with a cover story. I told
Heather I wanted to get a job where I would be framed as an authority
figure so that I could manage engineers as soon as possible.
"Ok," she said.
Like it mattered if she disagreed! She had processed my idea like an
authority figure. She had no authority over me. I didn't need her
approval for this.
"Guys get trained from birth to be leaders, but as a woman, people
assume I'm a follower unless I have a lab coat that reframes me as a
leader. I don't want to go to medical school or get a PhD, but
teaching at an elite prep school will do the trick."
"Ok."
"This is how I will avoid languishing indefinitely as an individual
contributor."
"Ok."
That was it: "Ok."
We had to change the subject to logistics in order to break the
silence that ensued after I had given my pitch.
"I'm going to run to class now. Let's meet up later?"
"Sure. I'll be around."
"Ok, see you soon."
Heather had declined to weigh in on my idea about teaching, so I
escalated the matter to Pierre. He didn't have any authority over me
either, but I wanted to know what he thought.
"I'm going to spend a year teaching high school computer science at an
elite boarding school. I want to be framed as an authority figure as
soon as possible."
"Ok," said Pierre.
Before asking Chad out, I would have thought Pierre was punishing me
for wanting to have a career. I would have said to myself, "Pierre
just wants me to be his play thing. This is why I needed to be an
authority figure. My co-workers in Boston only pretended to take me
seriously because I was helping them make money. I was a robot
helping them create more robots. Software had become the new gold
standard. I was helping them mine gold, but I might as well have been
a slave working in a Roman silver mine."
But now I saw that Pierre was just framing himself as an authority
figure. He was doing what Heather had when I had asked her for
permission to teach at a boarding school.
He was doing what Chad had done when I had asked him out on a date.
Pierre was framing himself as an authority figure because I wanted
something from him, but he was bluffing.
Pierre had no authority. I would have more authority than him the
moment I became a high school teacher.
"It looks like you already know everything I'm thinking. I'm no
longer needed. My job has been automated," said Pierre, cheerfully.
He probably wanted to add, "Go ahead and make the call. I'm ready to
be eliminated," in order to make fun of my gothic tech vibe, but he
held back.
He was suffering, but I didn't enjoy it this time.
Pierre was imploding, actually. I needed to rescue him, so I pitched
him on my master plan for building strong AI.
I had it all figured out. I was going to read the existing AI
research as literature.
I would crunch the data in my subconscious like George does. I would
hire minions and orchestrate science experiments. I would be a mad
scientist with authority.
Pierre came to life and played venture capitalist. We were equals.
We were both working. I was inspiring him to do work for the
military. I was winning.
When my pitch was done, I stared him down, and he thanked me for
setting up the meeting.
We got up. We shook hands. There was no need to defeat him in a
dance battle. I walked out of the place like a boss, but I felt like
a woman because I was wearing heels and I walked out first.
By the time Pierre realized that he really liked the way I looked in
this dress, it was too late. At that point, I had no interest in
having sex with him.
I began my final year at a Beyond the Pale area university in the fall
of 1993.
I learned that I had activated Chad's inner nerd more deeply that I
had previously thought.
He had to do work in order to avoid telling everyone he had slept with
me.
I didn't tell anyone, but he was having trouble keeping his story
straight.
I sensed weakness, so I turned up the pressure.
I developed system of interlocking strategies for asking out all the
most sought after guys.
I was a huntress. I felt like someone should create a licensing
process for the stuff I was doing.
I had life changing sex with several more athletes.
Chad relented and told everyone we had hooked up. He confessed to me
over coffee that it became easier for him to think clearly after he
admitted he had a nerdy side he had been repressing.
We declared a truce. The previous era of peace between myself and the
jocks had just been a cease-fire. This truce had the potential to
last forever.
I had my pick of men, and I cozied up to a gorgeous law student from 
South Africa.
He helped me take my hobby of hustling George to a whole new level,
and I dug deeper into graduate level computer science topics.
I had made a note on my calendar to research teaching fellowships at
elite New England boarding schools at the start of the spring
semester. I had scheduled it, and I discovered that Const Academy, in
Vermont, had what I was hoping to find:
They were hiring a Teaching Fellow in Computer Science for just one
year.
I applied. I got it. I accepted.
In order to leave a Beyond the Pale area university as a legend in my
own time, I just needed to plan a backpacking trip around Europe with
Heather.
Heather was down to backpack. We were winning. We made plans to meet
up in London at the start of the Tour De France and then spend the
latter half of the summer exploring Europe.
We were going to do our own tour of Europe.
That was our pact.
And then, "Boom!" Out of nowhere, a few weeks before graduation, I
got thrown a curve ball.
I was playing ultimate frisbee in the quad. I was focusing on the
disc and running fast when a guy's forehead bashed into my right
cheekbone.
I didn't fall down or pass out, but the impact broke some bones in my
face. My bite was off. He was dazed and confused too, but he was ok.
It was an accident. My first thought was, "You just got an injury
while playing sports."
"Sporting injury," was the whole story. Nothing more needed to be
said.
I patted my fellow sportsman on the shoulder like Chad had patted me
on the shoulder in the quad two years before.
Chad had wanted to let me know he knew my relationship with Alex was
fake.
I wanted my fellow sportsman to know everything was going to be 
alright.
I was fine.
My teammates took me to the hospital.
I had to reschedule my final exams and postpone graduation.
The doctors did reconstructive surgery.
The surgery was helpful, but it didn't restore my face to it's
original shape.
My jaw was wired shut for a month. One of my parents flew out to the
east coast to take care of me while I recovered. I was in a lot of
pain, and I kept getting headaches. Several kind people visited me,
and I felt loved.
The headaches went away after the wires were removed from my jaw. The
swelling of my gums subsided within a few days. I made up my exams.
I graduated. I told Heather our trip was still on. She said she felt
relived. So did I. I thanked God for modern medicine.
I looked a little different in the mirror, but I thought my battle
scar made me look tough.
I wanted to look tough. I wanted to focus on AI research and stop
acting so much like a college girl. I wanted all the guys who had
their eyes on me to realize that college was over.
I wanted them to realize that they were going to have to start working
from this point forward.
I decided to visit Pierre in LA and then fly to London and visit
George.
I thought I was paying them courtesy calls, but in reality, I got
thrown two more curve balls.
My curve ball quota doubled from one in May to two in June.
When Pierre greeted me, he winced. He stared at me with wide eyes,
and then he turned on his showman character. He showed me his newest
statue, an interpretation of the Maltese Falcon chiseled in granite.
He joked that he might need to get a naked statue of me next. I
rolled my eyes.
He told me to follow him to his study, and I followed him up the
stairs. He was framing himself as a woman by making me walk behind
him.
Just as I was passing through the door to his study, he turned around
like a ballerina and stood tall like a tree. I had to stop moving
halfway through the doorway.
He was looking at the place where my right cheekbone was slightly more
sunken in than it had been before my injury. He motioned with his
fingers, "Turn your head left. Ok, now turn to the right."
I was standing about three feet away from him. What was he doing?
Was this satire?
"Ok, now stare into my eyes," he said.
He breathed in deeply. He was struggling to keep his composure. He
opened his hands wide. His feet had been planted like roots ever
since he had turned around, and now his fingers were spreading out
like branches.
"You're a man now." he said matter-of-factly.
I was annoyed.
"Are you joking?"
"No, I'm dead serious. You're a man now."
"Explain…"
"If you had the same injury on the other side, all of the girls I do
yoga with would want to be you. Go look at yourself in the mirror and
come back."
"No. I don't understand what you're doing right now. What's going
on?"
"I'm telling you what you need to hear. Nobody else will tell you
this. You're lucky you came to me first. Go take a look in the
mirror. There's one in the bathroom."
I went to have a look. This must have been how he felt when Heather
and I had made him dress up in drag in order to save face. I took a
good hard look and then returned to the holding pattern he had
orchestrated for me in the doorway to his office. Did he think he was
hazing me because I had finally graduated college?
"You see?" he said. "If you had the same injury on the opposite side
of your face, you'd be a girl who has infinite confidence. I would be
delirious with desire for you. I would be at risk of taking Ayurvedic
medicine and giving you half of my money before midnight."
My head twitched. I did a quick head nod. Why did I do that? I was
not enjoying his strong eye contact like I usually did. My gaze
shifted to the view outside the window at the back of his office.
"If you looked like you do in the mirror,"
"Shut up." I interjected. I was being Heather. Part of me wanted to
cry. I had just been through major surgery. I was a wounded warrior.
He was supposed to be singing my praises.
"If you looked like you do in the mirror,"
"How do you know what I look like in the mirror? You haven't looked."
"I don't want to. I already know. I work in fashion, and the only
plausible deniability I have left is that I haven't looked. I'm going
to put all this out of my mind after you leave. I want to forget that
we ever had this conversation."
"So why are we having it."
"Because I don't want you to spend ten years struggling to figure out
what I already know."
"Ok, give me the business. I respect your opinion."
I went back to making strong eye contact with him.
"If you looked like you do in the mirror, lots of engineers would want
to work for you so they could get with all the girls who want to be
you. I would want to give you have half of my money so you could pay
for all of them to do yoga, make love, and write free software. We
could author the post-capitalist era with style and discretion,
together. Nobody would be able to do it better than us."
He was blowing up my strong eye contact again. What was he doing?
Was it his body language or his words that were making me want to
break eye contact. I felt like one of the cult leaders he was so
proud to be blowing up. I looked at the window again.
"But with your new look as it is, you will repel the women who are
more beautiful. They will say you're an unlucky girl. Your new look
will make them secretly revel in the fact that life is not fair. They
will think to themselves that you should become a farmer's wife and
work with your hands in the mud. I'm awful like that too. This is
the reality in which we now live. That's what went through my mind
when I saw you coming up the stairs, from several feet away."
"Ok."
I looked back at him and started chanting silently in my mind, "You
have no authority. You have no authority!" I was making fun of him
in my mind.
"Any engineer you hire while looking like you do now will secretly
believe you are recruiting him to do a tour of duty. Some will love
you for it, others will hate you, but they will all make you
immediately as an empire builder who's raising an army."
"You have no authority. You have no authority," I chanted silently
and cheerfully in my mind. I felt comfortable holding his eye contact
now.
He dropped his chin and it felt like his whole body expanded. He was
like a blowfish trying to look tough, and I laughed.
"Silicon Valley will develop a crush on you if you hustle them the way
they like to be hustled."
"How is that?" I asked, genuinely curious.
"You'll figure it out. They'll invest, but I won't. I don't want to
have children with you anymore either. Goodbye, Suzy."
"Sounds like the effect of my injury is a tailwind. My company will
fly higher and faster than the others now," I said, hoping I could
make him suffer.
"No, Suzy. The military contractors will see you coming and block
you, but you're secret is safe with me. Go build your company. Build
your empire if you can, but it's over between us. You wanted to be
the girl who invents strong AI. You got what you wished for.
Congratulations."
He turned his palms up and breathed out. His eyes came up to meet
mine. He looked like a Greek warrior trying to stir up a mighty wind
that might push the stench of my presence as far from his fake English
castle as possible.
"It's cool. I can take a hint. It's been fun, Pierre."
"You're not the devil, Suzy, but you will bring him out in others," he
said, while moving deeper into stillness.
I wanted to scream at him, but I stayed cool.
"I'm glad I was able to help you banish the devil from yourself," I
said, like a robot pretending to be a blowfish.
I brushed my downward facing palm at him as I turned around and walked
away.
He kept doing yoga poses and breathing deeply, without saying another
word.
I thought about saying, "Goodbye," but that might have made me cry
uncontrollably. I had never surrendered unconditionally to anyone,
and Pierre was the last person I wanted to surrender to first.
I beat myself up with sarcasm until I regained my composure.
"Well, that was one a hell of a way to frame a girl," I thought to
myself, as I left Pierre's house and drove my black convertible rental
car back to my hotel room by the beach, while wearing a short pink
dress that allowed my legs to absorb the hot rays of the sun.
"Next stop, London," I thought.
"Now that Pierre hates me, George will probably love me."
George and I had made love before, when I was 19. I had been with him
once as a Russian ballerina in America and once as an American
ballerina in Britain, and then he cut it off. He said he was making
money from the information I was helping him gather at parties and he
didn't want to mix business with pleasure.
I had laughed out loud when he said that, and his response was to look
away and continue talking in complex rapid fire sentences about
aspects of our business deal that I had to pay attention to in order
to keep our London consulting office afloat that summer. I had
enjoyed having sex with him, but the he had made me work. I got the
message.
I had misunderstood him. George had recruited me. He probably flew
in from London to watch the hustle I was doing at happy hours in order
to help my boyfriend advance in his career. I thought George was
turned on by the idea of framing me as a high class prostitute, but
that was just his cover story. He had been working when he made love
to me. Having sex with me made his cover story believable. He had
been the prostitute.
That's why I had laughed, but it hadn't been funny. If George had
wanted a prostitute, he would gone through the usual channels for
hiring a prostitute.
It would have been better for my career if I had not laughed. It had
been ok to make that mistake as a 19 year old, but George would
probably be looking to see if I had learned how to avoid making
mistakes like that.
I set an intention to be nice to George.
"I want to impress him and secure the option to bring him on as an
investor in my AI research empire," I thought to myself,
sarcastically.
When George greeted me at the door, his hand twitched like Fay's hand
had when I had slayed her at Marshall's mansion. He gave me a quick
hug and awkwardly invited me to sit with him on a couch in the living
room.
"Is it tea time already?" I asked jokingly.
"I'm in love with you now."
"Because of my facial injury?" I said sharply. He had caught me off
guard.
"Yes," said George, matter-a-factly.
"I should be careful what I wish for. Pierre and George are hustling
me," I thought to myself.
This was seriously not cool. I thought about how fun it would be to
tell Heather all of this and then make love to her for the first time
outside of the United States.
This must have been Pierre's plan. They were hazing me. This must
have been what they did to all their recruits after they had graduated
college. Pierre says he hates them and George says he loves them.
My mistake had been to take Pierre seriously. I should not have joked
to myself about how George would love me now that Pierre hates me.
The solution was to respectfully ignore both of them. I needed to
treat them like I had treated Claude after he had apologized to me for
patting me on the head in front of HR. This must be how they get
serious college grads like me to work for them, just like they had
gotten Claude to work for them.
I was not above working for them. I would do the work. I would take
their investment money. I would make a billion dollars of my own, and
then I would find a better way to motivate people than this.
"Thank you," I said, as I started to use dance club moves to dominate
his energy.
George started crying.
"What the hell?" I thought.
He started crying uncontrollably and pressed his nose against my neck.
He moved in gently and slowly. This didn't seem like a seduction
tactic. He looked like he was reacting, the same way I had when he
had creeped me out on the boat by threatening to take my sarcastic
joke seriously.
I had a wealth of sarcastic comments flowing through my mind at this
point. This was my wheelhouse. I was not thinking about what Pierre
would say. I was thinking about all the sarcastic comments I had
every right to say to all the pathetic guys who had been throwing
themselves at me ever since I had reached puberty. George was giving
me the ultimate platform to be sarcastic. But why?
I thought about pulling away, but I decided to pat him on the head
instead. I shifted from patting to petting. I was framing him as a
dog, and it comforted him.
"This is not awkward," said my sarcastic inner self, in a faux male
British accent.
I put my arm around him and said, "Cheer up, old chap!" in a nerdier
version of my new "British guy for melancholy George" character.
George snuggled in a bit closer, and his crying intensified. He was
having a good cry. I wasn't sure how to respond. My inner Heather
was saying, "Punch him in the shoulder. That'll help him snap out of
it."
But punching a cryer in the shoulder wasn't my style. I wanted to
comfort him. I thought he was being really sweet. I turned inward
and hugged him. I pressed his face against my bosom, and that made
him feel better.
He cried it all out for five more minutes, and I held him close. I
suppressed the urge to blurt out more sarcastic comments like, "You'd
be surprised what female entrepreneurs have to do to raise a seed
round in this business."
I decided to be nice and wait for him to speak first.
A few more minutes of sniffling went by, and then he sat up. My arm
was still around him. I felt like I was being framed as a guy who had
made a move on him. George had been a brat.
George looked me in the eyes very sweetly and said, "Will you make
love, can I make love to you?"
More sarcasm went through my mind. "Well, make up your mind, buddy, 
which do you want. You can't have both."
I suppressed the sarcastic comment, and then my heart skipped a beat.
I suddenly felt turned on. I felt very feminine. I wanted him to
make love to me. I stared into his eyes, like I had always done to
any guy who saw me as fair game. I always had the upper hand if
stared into a guy's eyes. I wanted to see his reaction.
He held his gaze, and his whole body puffed up, just like Pierre's
had.
"These guys are a school of blowfish," I thought, but he held his
gaze. His head moved slowly towards mine, but he wasn't going in for
a kiss. He was still reacting. George never staged body language
like this. It was against his religion.
I held his gaze, but my heart started sinking. I felt weak and
submissive. I liked this feeling. It felt like being with Chad.
"Billionaire's got game," said my silly head. I leaned back, and
George sort of fell on top of me. I tilted my head back and opened my
mouth. I liked this. I could feel his breath on my chest. I should
not have selected a blouse that showed this much cleavage. I was
still 22. I could learn to avoid making these mistakes next year.
George scrambled his way up my body, like a soldier in a trench trying
to get a peek over the ledge at the enemy line. I brought my chin all
the way down to my chest and caught his eyes. It pained me to do so,
but I wanted to get the data. He was still holding his gaze. I felt
like a hallucination in George's mind. I became an angel leading him
up the last pitch to the summit of Mount Everest.
He climbed to the summit and stared directly into my eyes. My heart
was pounding. I felt like I was in love. We were making strong eye
contact, and I did not have the upper hand. His muscles were hard but
noncommittal. I could have thrown him off me, but he had pinned me
intellectually. How did he defeat my strong eye contact?
"Pierre! Pierre's curse!" I thought, but now I was believing in
magic. I liked believing in magic. I wanted to see more of what
George had in store. I said, "Sure!"
George got off the couch awkwardly, as always. He stood up and
brushed himself off, like I wasn't even there. Then he took me by the
hand and led me to the bedroom.
"You forgot to blindfold me. Read the directions next time, honey," I
thought to myself.
George laid me down gently on the bed and spent a while sniffing my 
hair. He wasn't responding to my energy at all. He was being exactly
like what most women condescendingly imagined he would be like in bed,
but he wasn't working. He was enjoying this.
I imagined Pierre whispering in my ear, "He's lost at sea and you're a
well appointed cruise ship," but I repressed the urge to laugh. I was
working. I had become a prostitute.
The moment I thought that, George jumped on top of me and started
making love to my body. It felt like he was reading my mind even
though he was ignoring my body. I played along, thinking this was
about to get fun, but he blocked me with dance club moves.
He was trying to win a dance battle with me, but something was off.
Pierre had loved it when I let him win dance battles in bed, but
George's moves were messing with my mind. Pierre was doing friendly
sparring. George was like a fighter trying kill me in the ring so he
could say it was an accident.
The moment I thought that, he stepped up the intensity. My first
reaction was to let my body go limp. I wasn't turned on, but it was
fine. He wasn't physically hurting me, but going limp was invalid. I
felt like I was going to have a panic attack. He was going hard, but
I was still able to think about it logically. He could tell I was
thinking about logic and he nodded in approval.
If I went limp again, I'd probably have a panic attack, but then I'd
just pass out and wake up and we'd have a good story. Right? George
shook his head. It really felt like he was reading my mind.
I could ask him to stop. Surely he would stop. But what if he
didn't? That was the question. I watched George's energy to see if
he was still reading my mind and maybe giving me an answer, but he
revealed nothing.
Pierre had joked about how he and George both wanted to kill everyone,
and the difference between them was that George didn't try to keep it
a secret. Maybe he hadn't been joking?
"If he's trying to kill you, the move is to win the dance battle and
then think about logistics," said a creeping voice inside my head.
Then I thought to myself, "George had taught Suzy to think like a
military man."
I was narrating a nature film about myself, in the voice of British
guy for melancholy George.
This was a British nature film. The narrator had a British accent,
not a French accent.
I made strong eye contact with George and used dance club moves to
defeat him in the dance battle. He was strong, but I was the world
champion. He wasn't at my level. I beat him fairly easily.
This felt like work, but I enjoyed it. It was sex. He climaxed while
I was dominating his energy with dance club moves. He got exactly
what he wanted. I climaxed while pretending I could still be the
person I had been before my facial injury.
The dominant narrative was that I had a mental health disorder if I
didn't believe I could be the same person I had been before getting my
injury. That's what Heather would have thought. She had defeated
Pierre in open combat in his own house by representing the dominant
narrative more accurately than him.
Was George teaching me how to tell the lie I needed to tell doctors in
order to avoid getting boxed into accepting a bogus diagnosis? Or did
I need to be able to tell that lie in order to survive?
Were the doctors, as a group, going to behave like George? Were they
subconsciously hoping to banish my facial injury from their land by
killing me?
Pierre was incapable of violence, but doctors could use violence.
They could tell everyone it was in own my best interest to take drugs,
and then they could give me more and more drugs until I died of
exposure to their wicked hustle.
Would the doctors stop like George if I beat them at dance battles?
George might lose Pierre forever if I disappeared or turned up dead,
but doctors would lose exactly nothing if I were to be written off as
collateral damage.
After finishing up, George said, "Technically speaking, you need to
beat them at Pierre's hustle. That's why I love you. You have to
defeat Pierre."
I let my body go limp.
George snuggled up to me and sniffed my hair some more.
He didn't do any more of the dance club moves that had made me want to
have a panic attack.
Heather arrived at Heathrow the next morning on the redeye. I had
left George's place like a robot, checked into my hotel like a robot,
fallen asleep like a robot, woken up like a robot, taken a shower and
got dressed like a robot, eaten a full English breakfast like a robot,
and taken a taxi to the airport like a robot.
I didn't relax until I got to the airport. I thought about playing
hot girl for Heather. It occurred to me that hot girl for Heather was
a less intense version of what I had done in bed with George. My
facial injury had transformed hot girl for Heather into hot girl for
George.
I decided to frame her as Heather of Heathrow and give her a hard time
for looking jet lagged.
Heather didn't get the joke. I was framing us as nerdy British
noblemen. This would have worked pre-facial injury. It would have
worked because she would have kissed me and then I would have played
hot girl for Heather.
Playing hot girl for Heather had authenticity because I was also a
computer science student at a Beyond the Pale area university. My
character was a platform for creative writing. Hot girl for Heather
had become an elaborate character. She could have been the star of
her own TV show.
Pierre would have said, "Yes, that is what they hire writers to do in
Hollywood. Is that what you want to do with you life?"
I had a flashback of Pierre standing on his boat, somewhere in the
Indian ocean, explaining to me that Hollywood writers aren't allowed
to distort reality.
He had waxed poetic, and then he had pinned me on the deck of the boat
and whispered, "Reality is boring."
He had been playing hot guy on the boat for Suzy.
I had loved watching him trick serious people into believing in
fairytales, without ever telling a lie, himself.
Heather tried to be nice about my joke that wasn't funny, and then she
pushed my hair behind my ears and gave me a really sweet, soft kiss on
the lips in front of everyone at the airport.
I pretended that my heart had skipped a beat, but it hadn't. Pierre
and George were making popcorn in my head and rating our body parts.
Pierre was like George's general counsel giving him feedback about
exactly how evil he could be in each country where he did business.
"Get out of my head, you guys!" I thought, while trying to pay
attention to Heather.
Heather wanted to spend the next month trekking around Europe with me
so we could get really authentic with each other and let go of 
irrational insecurities that had been programmed into us by the
patriarchy. I respected the goal. She was giving me a hat to wear,
just like Pierre had done when I had met him for the first time.
Our trek was like World War I, but with women on the front lines.
Instead of killing each other, we made a lot of love in no man's land.
Heather believed I had expunged hot girl for Heather because she had
been an expression of college girl insecurity I no longer needed to
carry.
In my mind, hot girl for Heather had transformed into hot girl for
George, who was a lot more serious, and then I created a new character
called empath girl for Heather in order to hide the fact that I had
become a hideous monster.
I was being worse than a brat. I was being a crybaby.
I had no obligation to tell Heather all of this, however. She was the
one treating me differently because I had a facial injury, and so I
focused on explaining to her that everyone was treating me differently
because of my facial injury.
I thought I could break down Heather's resistance to this idea with
brute force, but she kept responding with deep frames about how I
probably had trauma from the impact and just needed to be loved.
"How are you?" she would ask, staring into my eyes and emphasizing the
word, "you."
"I feel tepid."
"Are you being sarcastic?"
"A little bit."
"What's behind that? What are you making fun of?"
"I don't love talking about emotions. I just like feeling energies."
"Ok." she said, looking concerned.
Before the facial injury, I could have stared into her eyes and said,
"I feel nothing. Give me an emotion word," and then she would have
given me data.
I could have also hustled her by saying, "I feel like I have issues in
my tissues."
I could have framed her as a quack doctor who was practicing medicine 
without a license, and then she might have laughed submissively and
made love to me while I reverted to acting like hot girl for Heather.
Now she was taking lines like that as aggressive sarcasm and then
either giving me space or moving in for a kiss.
I liked it better when she moved in for a kiss.
I didn't want our trip to fail.
Try as I might, she kept adding layers to her emerging theory that
everything I had done in the past was now invalid because it had been
inspired by the problematic impulses that had lead to the growth of
hot girl for Heather.
"Are you thinking about what some man would say to you right now?"
This was the worst. She was putting it on Pierre and George! She was
blaming them for the way everyone was reacting to my facial injury,
and blaming them created an infinite well of dry powder for her to
ignite.
I had to repress some anger. Pierre and George were the only people
who had told me the truth about my facial injury, but if I told
Heather that, it would just fuel her fire.
Instead of giving her Pierre's head on a silver platter, I started
unpacking the potential meanings behind Bible quotes, and sometimes I
cried. She bought into the idea that letting go of my subconscious
emotional attachments to Bible quotes was productive.
I thought about peacing out, but we were having great sex and I
eventually got her with computer science. I started avoiding eye
contact, and she accepted this as an authentic expression of my nerdy
inner child who had decided to major in computer science.
Once I figured out how to nerd it up for Heather, I didn't need to
unpack Bible quotes as often, but if I hadn't been able to represent
Bible quotes upfront, the trip might have failed and then I wouldn't
have realized that I just needed to nerd it up.
What other epiphanies did I need to have in order to overcome the
effect of my facial injury?
I kept the trip alive, but I was suffering. I was able to recover
every day because Heather was good I bed.
I didn't bother to tell her that I could recover faster and with less
effort by having sex with men.
I had an intuition that it would be better for my future students at
Const Academy if I learned how to take the pain of living with my
facial injury without relying on men to help me heal.
Men were my drug. I told myself that making it work with Heather was
like winning the Tour De France without doping.
Heather and I explored Europe together. We were intellectual. We
were kind of awesome, and it felt good to have a friend.
Heather went back to America and made one last field trip to Ibiza.
I felt tired. Inexplicably tired. My summer vacation had not gone
well. I had become a sixty year old woman who was trying to pass as a
twenty two year old, but I forced myself to suffer.
I put on a little black dress, did my makeup, faced the mirror, threw
my hands into the air and shouted, "I am the winner of the Tour De
France!"
I went downstairs. I ordered champagne and teetered innocently in my
stilettos at the edge of the crowd. Nobody was approaching me. I had
become George.
Bouncers were happy to let George into the club because he was a
brilliant billionaire, but nobody really wanted to talk to him.
He didn't hide the fact that he expected to get paid first.
"George has never cared if everybody else looses money," I thought to
myself.
Had I always been George, or was my facial injury framing me as
George? I was having a cool, calm identity crises.
I tried doing what I had done in bed with George. It had turned him
on, but the guys at the club were all trying to be Pierre. They
framed me as desperate, and all the narratives they could think of to
explain why a girl like me would be desperate where toxic beyond all
recognition.
They were framing me as someone who had committed murder. Serial
killer had become the dominant narrative about me, but nobody was
willing to say it. I had to be ruthless or I had to be desperate.
Nothing in-between would be allowed to pass.
"Well it's a good thing I already have a computer science degree from
a Beyond the Pale area university and a job offer in hand for the
fall. I don't think they would let a murderer like me into the
program," I thought to myself.
I smirked like George would have in that moment. I told myself I was
better than everyone else in the room, and then I pretended to be
Pierre.
I identified the most average guy in the room, I backed him into a
corner, and I gave him the business!
I told him point blank, "I have a facial injury. My facial injury
makes it look like I'm raising my lower left eyelid and dropping the
right corner of my mouth. This facial expression is associated with
fear and self-reinforcing anxiety. People think I have negative
emotions when I don't, but now that you know the facts, you're brain
will naturally rewire itself to stop misreading my emotions."
I felt like I was on the playground in San Francisco all over again.
I was chanting Bible quotes and drawing positive attention to myself.
I thought the guy was going to be speechless and ask if he could kiss
me.
"I think you've had too much to drink," was what I got instead, and
then he walked off.
I thought about following him and hurling Bible quotes at him.
I wanted to bully him.
He was average.
I was the object of desire for billionaires, and I wasn't drunk.
I felt better emotionally, but my inner George was shaking his head.
"You're bluffing," said a voice inside my head.
I retreated to my hotel room. I had never understood the hospitality
industry so clearly! Hoteliers were in the business of providing safe
spaces for serial killers like me.
I thought about whether or not I should renege on my commitment to
teach at Const Academy. Would the effect of my facial injury be
harmful to my students? Would they talk behind my back about how I
looked like a serial killer?
Maybe, but what would I tell my parents? I could tell the school I
needed to quit for personal reasons, but my parents would want to hear
a real story. I had just tried and failed to convince a guy who's
primary goal in life was to bed girls like me that my facial injury
was a thing. If I couldn't convince him, there was no way I would be
able to convince my parents or a psychiatrist.
The psychiatrists would blame my parents. In that moment of passion,
I wanted to kill all the psychiatrists. I was an engineer. I could
build autonomous robots that might accidentally kill all of the
psychiatrists with style and discretion.
I was cornered. I became concerned about the subconscious beliefs of
the military that no longer served it, and I decided then and there to
reserve a special place in hell for the invisible people who were
leading Boston area universities.
They deserved to die brutal, painful deaths as soon as possible. They
did not deserve mercy. They deserved to be tortured to death and then
vilified in print for eternity. They were too incompetent, negligent,
idiotic, and weak to schedule their fate for themselves.
I submitted, but I decided the military powers that be were evil too.
I wanted to kill the military. The military needed to die. The
military was evil. I would be their salvation. I had gone gone deep.
I could have explored that line of thought further. I had wanted to,
but I digressed.
It had been war. I had been an engineer. My side had been expected
to win.
"Long live the queen!" I shouted, in the manner of a drunk football
hooligan.
If I stonewalled my parents with Bible quotes, they would have started
asking questions about Pierre and George, and the scrutiny would have
never stopped.
Pierre had cut me off. That was fair. I was supposed to be mad, but
I thought it was hot. He was being himself. I had received the gift
of basking in his self-confidence. I was not psychologically insane
for thinking the same way he does. I would have peaced out from
myself, too, if I didn't have to live in my body.
I could have ran to George, but he had been getting off on framing me
as a murderer.
I needed to become Pierre in my own right.
What would Pierre have done? Everyone thought he would have gotten
additional cosmetic surgery procedures until he no longer looked like
a serial killer, but I doubted that.
He would have rather smoked a cigar with George and figured out how to
make money off of being framed as a serial killer, and then he'd have 
gotten an insurance policy on the new shape of his face. He would
have seen my injury as valuable if it had been part of his own body.
If I had become a hermit and survived by writing computer software and
begging my guys in San Francisco to sell it for me, I would have had
to become George. I would have had to become more virile, virtuous,
and vengeful than my guys who had been furiously writing code for the
last few summers in order to make money and gain credibility while I
had been off representing fertility and making love to other men.
I couldn't prove it, but I scribbled on the hotel stationary, "Suzy's
Conjecture: a woman who becomes a king cannot survive."
My best move was to make it work at Const Academy. My next best
option was to run to my grandparents' house in North Carolina and
become a farmer's wife. If becoming a Hollywood actress or getting
additional cosmetic surgery was in the cards for me, I could make
those moves from that foundation. I didn't want to do anything a
farmer's wife wouldn't do.
I had always wanted to farm, but as a retirement project. I had it
all figured out. When I turned 65, I would finish up being Emperor of
the Solar System, or whatever else I was doing by then, and I would do
some farming in North Carolina. Then I would move closer to the beach
and further south as I got older and sleepier, and then I would pass
away peacefully.
My hand twitched like Fay's hand had when I had given her the business
at Marshall's mansion, and then my brain methodically hatched a plot
to teach the whole world to stop distorting reality in response to my
facial injury.
The frame was cognitive science research. I would teach my students
at Const Academy about cutting edge cognitive science research in
addition to the topics they were required to learn for the Advanced
Placement computer science exam. The test subjects for the cognitive
science experiments I would be following with my students would be
Alex and his boys at a Beyond the Pale area university and his boys
back home.
I knew I needed them for something! The frame had to be research
oriented, but my students could not have been part of the experiment.
That would have been unethical if not criminal. Someone else had to
be the test subject.
"That's why God created frat boys," I thought to myself, in the voice
of a pagan god who had taken me aside in the heat of battle to share
some wisdom with me, as if grooming me to become the future king of
his dominion.
Alex's boys had already given informed consent to participate in my
experiment when Alex hooked up with me in the spring of '92. As long
as my experiment didn't kill Alex's crew from the country, they could
be trusted to make themselves whole by writing fiction about any pain
they endured along the way. My cover story was flawless, ethical, and
legal.
Once my authority as a teacher had been established, I would return to
Silicon Valley and scale up my cognitive science class for life long
learners. I was right about needing to establish myself as an
authority figure before I could lead as a woman, but now I had to lead
in order to survive. Following was not an option for me, but Pierre
was wrong to say I had become a man.
I still looked femmetastic in my stilettos. I used brow scissors to
cut a lot of fabric out of my dress, I applied more eye shadow, and I
went back to the lounge and used dance club moves to get a man.
I led him back to the room and gave him the best sex of his life, and
then I put the piece of paper that contained Suzy's Conjecture in my
mouth and swallowed it with red wine just as I was reaching climax.
George and Pierre had their secret about colluding to frame me as a
female robot, or whatever it was they had thought they were doing.
Now I some privileged information too.
The difference between George and Pierre was that George liked to
weaponize his female robots.
I had been framed as the crazy ex-girlfriend of some billionaires.
I was glad Heather had accepted me as a nerd. My guys in SF would
accept the same frame as real, and we wouldn't need to use sex or talk
of my inner child to make it real.
We would just do the work and keep moving forward.
I was ready to lead.
__Ch2: Hacker Hall__
The story of my life prior to getting my facial injury wasn't scary.
I became a hustler and a computer nerd because the military, the
church, the east coast establishment, and Silicon Valley were
unspeakably sexist institutions, and I wanted to fix the problem.
My facial injury had a frightful effect on people, and it turned every
home I ever had or tried to make into a haunted house. Our Happy
Haunted Planet's only military superpower became the Haunted States of
America, and so on and so forth.
The effect of my facial injury blew up everyone.
The effect of my facial injury caused everyone to develop serious
delusions and false beliefs about me, about themselves, and about the
communities that we shared in common.
Elite New England boarding schools like Const Academy were supposed to
be immune to acts of sorcery, but the effect of my facial injury was
their Achilles heel.
They became the exception that proved the rule.
They became the general who had to lead the charge or face
annihilation.
With that in mind, I wore mostly pencil skirts and cheerful blouses to
work at Const Academy.
I thought about cutting my hair short so that I could represent HR and
pull off wearing shorter pencil skirts. HR would would have scoffed
at my hemline, but her disapproval would have just added leverage to a
good idea.
My plan, pre-facial injury had been to teach the next generation of
jocks to behave by ignoring them and doing math like a monk in a
monastery, but the tables had turned.
I had become emotionally hard. I kept my hair long hair to make
everyone think I was still soft. I thought HR was emotionally hard,
but I had leveled up from nun to priest.
The jocks at Const Academy knew I was up to something devious, but
they couldn't say it.
The authority given to me by the school was instant. I could pretend
to be Heather and frame them as insecure children if they tried to
frame me as a desperate serial killer, and I never had to do it.
They couldn't get the data about my relationship with George, and they
believed the tabloid narrative that Pierre had dumped me because I was
a nerd.
The nerdy kids in my computer science classes accepted me as authentic
because the jocks accepted me. They hadn't yet become George and made
plans to kill everyone.
On my end, representing the intention of caring for children was more
powerful than representing fertility.
As a teacher, I had authority, and being able to seduce a guy in Ibiza
had given me confidence that I still had credibility as a
representative of fertility, as a backup plan.
I could be a good man's wife or I could be a teacher, and I was
cautiously optimistic I could still become a software company CEO
within five years.
I put the photo album of my trip around the world with Pierre in a
safe deposit box.
I bought a fancy men's watch and put it in the safe deposit box.
I bought a car and put the title deed in there too.
I thought about buying a house, but the school had provided me a nice
apartment on campus, as part of my employee compensation.
None of that mattered, however.
What mattered is that I nerded it up for everyone at Const Academy,
and my nerdiness was accepted as authentic.
My computer science students started imitating my lack of eye contact.
If I made more eye contact, they responded by getting more nerdy, and
this outcome was accepted as a sign that I was doing a good job
inspiring them to learn computer science.
Therefore, my computer science students got nerdier no matter what I
did.
What kind of hustle was this? I wanted to go rogue and say, "Let me
teach you guys how to be cooler than the jocks and have more fun than
them at parties," but that wasn't my job.
I came to understand why Pierre thought it was absurd for me to have
this job, but he had put me out of mind.
I retaliated by putting him out of mind.
I took up meditation.
The part of me that was like George dismantled the part of me that was
like Pierre.
They went to war and George won because he was better at making
references to math, science, and engineering.
The treasure trove of Bible quotes in my subconscious fell into line 
and backed George.
I imagined a gang of psychiatrists chanting, "Suzy’s experiening more
trauma because she had been afraid to tell George to stop when she was
uncomfortable."
The part of me that was like George went to war with the gang of
psychiatrists and vanquished them too.
I stopped dating altogether.
I spent all my spare time reading advanced math textbooks.
Nobody was strong enough to call me out for forcing myself suffer.
Pierre would have, but he was not present.
Pierre was afraid of this place where I had been given authority.
I liked doing the math.
I thought about shaving my head and wearing wigs.
Pre-facial injury, I would have shaved my head in the dead of winter
and worn cozy wigs like all the dead poets whose pictures were on
display at Const Academy, but post-facial injury, I estimated that I
could only pull off representing baldness if I had a valid reason.
Without the burden of my facial injury, I would have been a joyful new
school teacher.
I would have helped all the charities. I would have helped the kids
inflate their college applications. I would have done hard workouts
at an off campus gym and repped girl power on campus. I would have
single handedly saved the world from itself.
I couldn't prove I wasn't crazy, but I could keep making socially
acceptable moves that aligned myself with the mainstream. I would
have been a socialite in training, but my facial injury had turned me
into a pirate.
I had the invisible people who were leading at a Beyond the Pale area
university over a barrel, and I had the invisible people who were
leading an an XY-axis Aligned area university in my sights.
The people I interacted with face to face got more nerdy, but the
Const Academy community as a whole was getting more like Pierre in
response to my pirate hustle.
I started to feel like the reason I was suffering was because I was a 
woman and the world was sexist.
It was easy to forget that I had become a completely different person
because of my facial injury.
I wasn't allowed to ever say that to anyone, not even to a
psychiatrist or my parents, so I gradually forgot about the person I
used to be and I ruminated about how a man who was forcing himself to
suffer as much as I was suffering would be respected as a contender.
I became mad because everyone thought it was cute, fine, and harmless
for me to suffer silently.
I thought about responding to my situation by vilifying George. The
guy had all but raped me, but I viewed Pierre as the greater sexist.
If Pierre had been forced to attend an event at Const Academy, he
would have ignored me and talked about how important it is to care for
children. He would have taken the credit for caring about children
even though I was doing all the work.
George would have asked who my best students were and taken an in
interest in what they needed to advance. George would have been
helpful.
Now that I was doing real work, Pierre was the jerk I wanted to
vilify.
I thought about quitting, but quitting would have made my situation
worse. The effect of my facial injury was the problem, and Const
Academy was helping me out.
I also didn't see any signs that the children were being harmed by the
effect of my facial injury.
I was being supervised by people who claimed to be among the best
educators in the world.
I figured that if the children were being harmed, somebody would have
said something.
I was ready to be mad at Pierre, but I still loved him. All I had to
do was finish the school year, and then I could go back to the bay
area and be a techie rockstar.
As long as I was building software in the daytime, I could be an edgy
hot babe and date lots of chill west coast guys at night.
I could become an authority figure to other adults and let someone
else worry about caring for children. I could be Pierre.
My plan for defeating Pierre was complete. Or was it?
My inner child had wielded Bible quotes like a king on the playground.
I had thought I was queen of the nerds, but I had been king.
Every time I had won a dance battle or gotten my way or felt confident
about my growing body, I had associated those experiences with the
Bible quotes I had been representing as signage. As literature.
That was Pierre's hustle. He thought I should have been programmed to
feel shame for not actually believing in The Gospel.
He thought boys should be taught to read the bible as literature.
He thought girls should be taught to feel shame, but my parents had
defied men like Pierre and programmed me to think like a boy.
But now, the psychiatrist hustle I had become exposed to because of my
facial injury was turning me into a God fearing woman. Pierre's kind
of woman.
Everyone was treating me differently than they did before I got my
injury.
Completely differently.
Opposite pole of planet earth differently, but I wasn't allowed to say
it.
If I had tried to tell the truth about how everyone was using my
facial injury as an excuse to tell lies about me, the entire western
medical establishment would have buried me in seriously worded hogwash
about how I might be a trauma victim.
That was the serious lie everyone was threatening to slash me with.
The serious lies about how I might be a trauma victim were equivalent
to rape, but I couldn't prove it in court.
I was being emotionally raped every day by the establishment power
structure. The way people reacted to my facial injury was messing
with my mind the same way that rape messes with people’s mind, and
there was nobody I could talk to about it.
I was enduring that special kind of emotional rape where nobody would
have believed me if I had reported it. All the people I could have
reported it to were in on the hustle.
Nobody would have believed that my pain was real. Everyone would have
said they were helping me and then just hustled me some more.
I ultimately would have been told I had problems. I would have been
told to quit my current job. I would have been told to quit again and
again and accept less and less until I had nothing. I would have been
told it was in my best interest to become a doormat, and then they
would have gone to work on me!
I came to love politics. I looked forward to passing laws that would
help bring an orderly resolution to the misunderstanding that existed
with regard to the effect of my facial injury.
The trauma victim hustle I had become exposed to was a re-incarnation
of the magic potion that had inspired engineers like me throughout
history to build superior weapons and set them up as backdrops for
soapbox debates in the public square.
Pierre was probably thinking along these lines about my inner child
all along, but he withheld the data.
He knew I had never faced real adversity, and he knew I would react
like a military man with an army behind him and then lose the fight
like a little girl with nothing but a vivid imagination as soon as I
got put in a no win position.
He also knew he would have the power, for many years, to control the
amount of adversity I was facing.
He had wanted me to become his multi-faceted musical instrument so
that he could grandstand as a DJ.
I wrote in my journal, "They should slap a warning label on the
foreheads of billionaires so that young women will be aware of the
risks associated with dating them.
Pierre and Heather both wanted to re-program my inner child, and
Heather didn't even try to keep it a secret!"
Pierre didn't understand the effect of my facial injury, however.
He also didn’t understand how to think like an engineer and a computer
scientist.
I had all the data about how people were reacting to my facial injury,
and I knew how to dispassionately analyze it.
I knew about confirmation bias. I knew knew how to chip away at it
over time.
I knew how to design algorithms that converged towards states of
equilibria.
I knew how to define the word "confidence" using nothing but numbers.
I knew how to avoid making decisive bets until I had a winning hand.
I also knew that I probably wasn’t delusional because I had become
more productive at programming computers than I’d ever been. My
programs always worked as expected.
Pierre saw me as a wounded animal who was struggling at the back of
the herd. He was waiting for me to get weaker before dispatching
predators to eat me.
Then I had an epiphany. Pierre had been projecting his own insecurity
onto me.
Pierre had thought he would become a wounded animal and succumb to
predators if he had my facial injury.
Pierre didn't have me anymore. I had him.
I had become the predator, but I was still a woman.
The epiphany that I was now a predator and Pierre was my pray gave me
an internal confidence boost, but I still felt shame about not being
free to tell the truth about my situation.
Anytime something good happened, I associated it with shame, but my
side deal with George was standing strong.
I secretly liked George, but I still loved Pierre. I felt ashamed
about all of this, and I felt ashamed for feeling ashamed.
I felt shame during the day, but I used meditation after work to
reframe my shame into dry powder that I could use at my discretion.
I was an engineer. I could suffer in silence today and make my moves
in Silicon Valley tomorrow.
I wasn't becoming George. I was becoming a nerd in my own right.
I wrote a short story about what I would it would have been like to
have my facial injury in college. Instead of dating billionaires, I
would have dated nerds and become a folk singer. I would have spent
the summer by the beach bartending and doing odd performance art about
Helen of Troy, and then I would have majored in history become a
documentary film maker instead of an engineer.
My plan was foolproof, but then someone used a computer in my lab to
hack the school's main database and get copies of everyone's grades,
test scores, and teacher feedback.
They published the data on a website and framed me as the instigator
of the hack by using my username and password to upload the website.
Hard copies of the website were printed and distributed throughout the
school community.
This wasn't a prank. It was a hack. They had broken several laws,
and their crime had many victims.
I suspected my facial injury had inspired the hackers, but I couldn't
prove it.
We couldn't even prove who did the hack. Some people thought I had
done it.
I had to suggest the theory that the perpetrators might have used a
hardware key logger to capture my password, and then I had to teach
people what that meant.
The hack was a test of my credibility, but the hackers weren't
serious. They had no additional moves to make, and I didn't react.
They were just offering me a hat to wear like Pierre and Heather had,
and I was able to say no and push the hat away. I was free to say no
to the hackers.
I was not free to say no to the doctors and other experts who were
representing the dominant narrative of American culture.
The correct answer to the free response question, "Why did the hack
happen?" was, "The bosses of the doctors were being evil," but I would
have given partial credit for saying that the doctors, themselves,
were being evil.
The doctors, themselves, were not evil, but they were acting like evil
brats.
Most doctors were working for the invisible people who were leading
name brand universities. Other were working directly for profit
making corporations.
The bosses of the doctors were acting like evil warmongers.
All of the above were being willfully ignorant.
The serious lies they felt 100% entitled to tell about how I was most 
likely a trauma victim was leading us down the road to hell.
The experts were behaving like people who wanted war, but I still
believed that people were inherently peaceful, so I reframed the facts
with a journal entry:
"The experts think they're safe, but they're not. They will be
personally affected by this matter if they don't do something that
might help solve the problem at hand.
If I’m allowed to die from exposure to their lies, that will set a
precedent that will most likely cause a lot of people like them to
die, as well.
They will be judged and held accountable for framing themselves as
experts and then failing to understand what was going on.
If they’re going to act like ignorant fools, they should at least take
off the lab coats, and what not.
If they don’t care whether people like me live or die, the moves that
engineers like me will make to in order to stay alive may lead to
harsh conditions all around that they and their children might not be
able to withstand."
The expert hustle was the real deal, I mused.
Heather had saved my life by telling me the truth about the dominant
narrative.
She had been my sister in arms. She had thrown me to the ground in
order to save me from a virtual bullet that might have otherwise hit
me in the eye and caused my brain to explode into a thousand little
bits.
I drove to the beach and yelled at the ocean. I was in Vermont, so
the drive took a couple hours each way. I fell asleep and woke up
feeling better.
The hacking incident was eventually forgotten, but a lot of people
suffered from the breach of privacy. Teachers, students, parents,
etc.
I felt like the hackers had distributed my suffering. They were
framing me as a drug dealer and framing themselves as money
launderers, but that's because the doctors were forcing me to
represent shame.
There was no clean narrative to explain why a woman like me had to
feel shame. Drug dealing was the cleanest narrative they could think 
of.
Was this their way of offering to work for me after graduation? Was I
recruiting? Was this how Pierre and George had built the first
prototype of their political machines?
Pierre would have joked that I had caused the hack by working for the
school at all. Loser. Pierre was now a jerk and a loser.
I loved insulting Pierre within my mind’s eye. It always made me feel
better. Why was that?
Maybe Pierre hadn't been so bad, after all. He had given me a world
class education in the art of subversive representation.
The art of witchcraft.
The art of non-violent resistance against tyranny.
I wanted to make serious representations of all my new theories to a
doctor, just as a sanity check, but first, I needed to make my cover
story real.
My cover story was that I was doing a cognitive science experiment on
frat boys, and I was sharing the results with my students.
The narrative could not be that I was doing an experiment on the
students.
I had learned from George and Pierre that nuances like this can move
markets and send armies marching. It was important to dot my I's and
cross my T's.
I would wait till summer before checking on the doctors in San
Francisco.
For spring break, I needed to finish the cognitive science experiment
I had started in Ibiza.
I called up Leandro. His dojo in Vegas was expanding.
"Hey Suzy."
"Hey babe, can you help me run an experiment in Vegas during spring
break?"
"For graduate school?"
"No, just myself."
"What are you hustling?"
"It's not a hustle, I just want to have sex with a bunch of hot frat
guys, but I need someone to observe my recruitment process."
"You don't need me for security. Frat boys are security if you handle
them with care."
"Well, that's the thing. I got a facial injury last spring, and I
think I can prove the amount of work I have to do in order to get a
guy to sleep with me increased by more than 10%."
"That's the nerdiest thing I've ever heard you say."
"So will you help me? I need you to help me gather the data."
"Hidden camera?"
"No, your eyes will be the camera and your brain will be the hard
drive."
"I stand corrected. That was actually the nerdiest thing I've ever
heard anyone say."
"So you'll do it?"
"Who are you working for?"
"Doesn't matter."
"Yes it does. If my business partners ask me who you're working for,
what do I say?"
"Come on Leandro, I'm running my own money. I got paid, remember?"
"So you work for a hedge fund?"
"Not exactly."
"Make it exactly and then we'll talk."
And then he hung up! Punk. Why did everything keep flowing back to
George? What did I need to do to start a real hedge fund? Slap
George's name on it, that's what. But what had he done to become who
he was?
I could figure that out later.
Leandro's feedback helped me realize that the experiment wasn't just
about hooking up with frat guys.
The experiment was to get guys in the club by representing hotness and
then playing hot girl for George with them in the bed.
The guy in Ibiza had enjoyed having sex with me, but he thought I was
losing my mind. I had no authority or credibility with him.
Swallowing Suzy's Conjecture had fueled his fire, but that hot girl
antic had also served as travel insurance.
It was better for him to think I had a fetish for eating hotel
stationary than to let his brain cook up an even seedier narrative.
I needed an algorithm for increasing my credibility each time I slept
with a guy, and that would be the engine I could use to get the expert
hustle off my back.
It wasn't enough to frame each hookup as a dance battle. I needed to
make the character I was playing with George into a thing I could own.
My character needed to become an artifact.
I was working on behalf of the character I had played in bed with
George.
No good would come from naming her. She was not hot girl for George.
She was the owner of a clothing store by the beach that I would run.
Her title would be president, founder, and CEO.
Marshall's people by the beach could get it set up and George could
dispatch people from the other side of the Atlantic to buy stuff from
the store.
Marshall Bobs trusted my judgement in matters of fashion. I had
currency with him, and it was time to spend it.
Calls were made. My fashion empire was built, and Leandro agreed to
watch the room for me.
My spring break in Vegas went off without a hitch, but Leandro's
reaction to my facial injury raised more questions than it answered.
We met for breakfast at a diner. Of course we did. I glammed it up
and wore sunglasses inside.
"Take those off."
"What's wrong?" I replied, like Heather.
We had a silent stand off. It wasn't a staring contest. We were both
pretending to be at the diner alone.
I eventually took the sunglasses off.
"You look normal in the club. If there's something to see, you'll
need hidden cameras to capture it."
"Ok, I'm glad to hear that. What do you think about my facial
injury?"
"For the record, I don't notice it unless you draw attention to it.
Off the record, don't ever tell anyone we had sex on this trip."
"But we haven't had sex on this trip."
"Exactly."
"What the hell? Why is everyone so afraid to talk about my facial
injury?"
The silent standoff started again. He wasn't budging, and I had no
leverage. I assumed everyone would budge. Nobody ever did. I had
problems.
I started acting like the character associated with my clothing store
by the beach.
I had been playing her in the hotel room for several days, with or
without a sexual partner in tow.
I was being a nerd in the casino and a master of hot girl antics in
the club, and it was working. I was up a couple grand in poker chips.
I asked Leandro if he wanted my poker chips.
"No."
"Do you want anything from me?"
"No."
"Why are you still sitting here?"
"You asked me to do you a favor. I'm doing you a favor."
"Sales are up at my new store! We're commissioning a custom line of
beach wear for guys. I got great feedback on this trip about what men
are looking for in their swim trunks."
"Cool. I'd be happy to sell your software at my dojo. You have great
fashion sense, Suzy."
He was really hung up on reminding me I was a nerd! I was still
playing the character, and I loved doing it now.
All of my random hot girl antics were being assimilated into her. My
game was becoming congruent. Was I becoming her?
I went back to the poker spot and kept playing as her, but I lost all
my chips. I got really turned on while losing my chips. I had to
keep taking losses and then act like I was still in control when I
wasn't. That was the hot girl move.
The guys at the table were turned on too, but everyone kept their
poker faces. It was like virtual sex.
I did better at poker when I played like a nerd, but I felt safer
without the chips. The energy at the table when I was winning as a
nerd was not good.
Everybody won when I lost chips. I needed to invent a different game
and play it in a different city if I wanted to take money off the
table safely.
I was buying time by pretending to be Heather at Const Academy, but
would eventually have to pretend to be myself in order to survive.
I thought to myself, "Well it's a good thing the teaching job will be
over in a couple months. I can move back to Silicon Valley and avoid
caring for children until I get this mess sorted out."
I followed through on my teaching commitment and then I spent some
time working at the store by the beach.
I partied with more frat guys, and I sold the store to a friend of
Fay, just to send Marshall a message.
I made money safely, but there was nothing I could do to avoid losing
currency with Marshall.
I had lost face with Leandro in Vegas, but I lost currency with
Marshall.
He had used his credibility to make a bet on me, and now he didn't
understand what the point of starting the store had been.
"The store was the wrong type of exposure for my brand. It was a good
learning experience, but I want to sandbox the brand equity associated
with my identity in a computer nerd software outfit in Silicon
Valley," I told him over a cup of coffee at his mansion.
He had no idea what I was talking about, and I could tell he wasn't
attracted to me anymore, either.
He looked at me like I had been slurring my speech.
I felt like shouting, "I'm mixing my metaphors, not slurring my
speech, you idiot.”
I desperately wanted to cry and scream for help, but nobody cared.
Everyone but me would win if I died.
This wasn’t war, but my life was on the line. I decided to survive.
I chose life.
I was so over being the victim who dies tragically. Sentimentality
was boring to me at that point. I was confident beyond a reasonable
doubt that I would be drugged to death in a mental institution if I
didn’t cut my losses and forge ahead.
I was keen to survive. I relished the hard loss of face I was dishing
to doctors by standing tall in Marshall’s mansion. They would not
profit from my death on that day.
The thought crossed my mind that if I hadn’t gotten my facial injury,
Marshall and I might have gotten married. He might have run for
president in a decade, and I could have been his beautiful, younger
first lady.
He and I were both too proud to say it, but that future was no longer
possible because of my facial injury. Even if we had wanted to work
together to make it happen, we wouldn’t have known how.
I was damaged. I was worthless, but I wasn’t a commodity. I was a
person, and I figured I had a real shot at survival if I could just
hide my weakness and play it smart for a few years, in transition.
I saw the pattern by then. Billionaires were at odds with The Problem
presented by my facial injury, and it was easy for them to ignore the
problem because there were thousands of other girls like I had been
waiting to take my place.
It was too easy. Marshall also had the option to go back and finish
what he had started with Fay. I didn’t know it at the time, but my
subconscious had already decided that Marshall should frame Fay as me
with my facial injury.
Fay could run for president with her symmetrical face but have the
power boost of her influential husband joking around that she had
faced more adversity in life than me and done a better job handling
it.
If Marshall was going to judge me unfairly because of my facial
injury, someone else had to benefit from my loss of currency. The
best outcome for me would be if Fay received all of the benefit. I
saw her as a problem solver who would most likely do something useful
for society with the windfall.
The worst outcome for me would be if Marshall distributed the benefit
over a bunch of random people who would subconsciously think it was
funny that they were profiting at my expense. They would become
tempted to see if they could get more.
Fay was the only woman with a deep enough prior relationship to
Marshall to carry all the benefit. It would look like she and
Marshall had simply gone back to doing what they had done before.
Nobody but me would see the reframe in their relationship. I didn’t
have it all figured out back then, but my subconscious sure did!
I anticipated Marshall’s indifference to my pain, and I told myself
over and over, “Marshall is just one of the thousands of rich guys I
will soon disrupt and supersede, in my own right.”
"I can't think of a single good reason why a woman like you would be
wasting your time with those guys," he said.
Was he talking about the frat boys or the computer nerds? He had just
conflated the two. He was creating plausible deniability for himself
by tagging my guys in San Francisco, but he obviously knew I had been
fooling around with frat guys.
He seriously believed my sleeping around was the reason he wasn't
feeling it for me anymore. In the past, the idea of me being
promiscuous would have intrigued him, to put it politely.
My facial injury was the reason he wasn't attracted to me. He was
more like Pierre than George.
I wasn't impressing him, but I was getting real data now. I was
learning things about Marshall Bobs that he didn't know about himself.
I was getting him. I was winning.
Heather was blaming the billionaires instead of taking responsibility
for her reaction to my facial injury.
The billionaires were blaming the frat boys.
The frat boys were mostly blaming women of child bearing age like
Heather and I.
This was the vicious cycle I needed to break apart. This was the 
glass ceiling.
"I'm washing my brand of their problematic energy upfront. I'll have
the cleanest startup brand in Silicon Valley. I'll be like computers
that pair well with cats, but for the Internet."
This was the closing frame, so I flexed. I represented the concept of
computers that pair well with cats, and I did it without authorization
from any of the companies that made computers that paired well with
cats.
I did not use style and discretion like Pierre had used in Europe.
This was America, and I was flipping the script with one of the most
powerful men in the world.
I started imagining what it would look like if I starred in a porno
with Eve while she was sobbing in the garden of Eden, but I wasn't
inspired by her anymore.
I needed to create a Silicon Valley corporation from scratch, in my
own right.
Marshall could not prove me wrong, and so he had to let me go.
I didn't owe him anything. I Pierred him. No, I Suzyied him. Maybe
I was just hustling him.
I had formed a pact with three billionaires, and the value associated
with our trust based relationship was now illiquid.
I no longer felt anger at Heather. I wasn't angry at anyone. I
didn't care.
It was helpful that I had a couple million dollars in my own name. I
probably should have hustled Pierre for more, but I didn't have the
luxury to care.
I was going to have to work for someone for a while in order to
overcome the effect of my facial injury.
I might as well work for myself.
I flew home and got an apartment in Palo Alto a couple blocks from the
train station, on the second floor, at the top of an exposed wooden
staircase.
I setup my mediation pillows and bought a plant.
The got myself a guy and made love to him on the floor.
He asked if I was hypnotist.
I said, "Yes, if you descend my staircase, you will be hypnotized, and
you'll never wake up, but if you jump out the bathroom window, you'll
be safe."
He responded my making love to me again. It was good to be back on
the west coast.
The next day, I saw an apparition of Eve from the garden of Eden
walking down University Ave. She was sobbing.
I stared at Eve and she stared back twice as hard. She was reacting
to my facial injury! Eve had framed as an enemy because of my facial
injury!
I got an appointment at a hospital in Palo Alto to review my options
for additional cosmetic surgery. They had nothing to offer.
Paul, who had been the bass player in our band, Air Cover, was living
in LA and working as a DJ. We talked on the phone. He said, "You
should have the procedure done in LA, and you can recover at my
place."
Did he want to be my boyfriend? That's not what he should have said
if he wanted to be my boyfriend, or was it?
I was still having an identity crises.
I went for a run in the Palo Alto hills. I passed all the girls who
looked hotter than me.
I was being competitive. I felt sexy. I didn't need cosmetic
surgery. I was hypnotizing billionaires and chill graduate students
from Palo Alto area universities.
"Why kill a goose that's laying golden eggs?" I thought to myself, as
I passed another hot girl in spandex.
I made an appointment with a psychiatrist in San Francisco. I put on
my makeup like it was war paint.
The doctor was already resisting my charm by the time I sat down on
her couch. I handed her the doctor's report about my reconstructive
surgery along with a ransom note. It said:
"People are developing false beliefs in response to my facial injury.
They think I'm feeling emotions that I'm not feeling. I need for you
to work this out in your own mind."
I stared at her inquisitively while she read the note. I stared at
her like Marshall and George had when Pierre was going all in with
Claude.
"Could you tell me a little more about how you got the facial injury?"
I didn't respond. I made ice cold eye contact at first, but I felt
like I was losing the fight. She had authority. I didn't.
I tried softening my muscles. I was losing face really fast. It was
like when George was trying to kill me with dance club moves in bed.
I returned fire with superior dance club moves.
"Are you open to taking about what you're doing right now with body
language?" she asked, very nicely and sincerely.
She wasn't George. She didn't want to be my lover. She didn't think
it was hot to frame me as a murderer.
If I kept dominating her with dance club moves she might frame me as
violent, so I preemptively framed myself as a nerd. I broke eye
contact.
I felt like a chill, west coast area university graduate student. I
was just sitting there, and I was looking to the side for reasons that
were not clear.
"Why was eye contact so important?" I asked out loud, with the
intention to stir the pot.
"I understand that you feel eye contact is important," she replied,
like a robot that had gone rogue.
I wanted to yell, "It's not about me, it's about you!" but I kept my
mouth shut.
She appeared to be in a stable holding pattern. She was staring
directly at me. Her muscles were soft. She was a woman, too.
She was another predator who knew how to wield kindness as a deadly
weapon, and she wasn't getting the message. She was not working out
the problem in her own mind.
I start checking her eye contact. I intermittently looked at her for
about a second and then went back to my holding pattern. I did this
gently and cheerfully, but I was hustling.
This was Pierre's hustle, not George's hustle, but, unlike Pierre, I
hadn't shown up to be playful. I had shown up to either eat or die.
I felt like I was pushing her back into the corner. She was suffering
now. I was pleased to see her suffer. Maybe it would motivate her to
work out the problem in her own mind.
She looked bored. She was framing this as boring.
Did she think she could get away with framing this as a date? She had
to be framing our meeting as something.
If she had framed me as aggressive in any way, I would have had
leverage to stand up for myself all the way.
I would have done it too. I wasn't there to be nice or help her out.
I was a ballerina with bucks and a degree from a Beyond the Pale area
university.
The solution was for her to confess that she had been developing false
beliefs in response to my facial injury, but she wasn't doing her job.
She probably viewed our meeting as an awkward date.
Loser.
Fail.
She could have at least gone for partial credit by pretending that we
were having a debate about public policy. She could have read the
phone book out loud like a senator who was exercising her right to use
the filibuster.
We did this for the rest of the hour. We did the silent session
thing.
"Suzy, our time is about up, but I'm really glad you took the first
step of coming in today. You are always welcome to come back," she
said.
"I'm a tough negotiator, so I don't recommend patting me on the head,"
I said cheerfully, while framing her as the devil with body language.
I wasn't mad. I wasn't threatening her. I was giving her helpful
feedback in the form of satire.
I wasn't repressing an urge to pat her on the head. I turned around
and left her lair like a ballerina.
She was my doctor. I had footwear problems.
I was a princess escaping a dragon's lair without needing to be 
rescued. I was doing what Pierre does better than he could have.
On my way out, I avoided looking at the receptionist. I pretended he
wasn't there, and then I threw my hands up in the air and said, "I am
the winner of the Tour De France," while keeping my muscles soft.
He gave no response, and the door to the doctor's office swung shut
behind me with a clank.
I was pretending to have won a bicycle race. That's why my face
looked like the face of a person who was feeling pain. I was not
feeling pain, but the shape of my face made it look that way.
This was the essence of what I had been doing in bed with George. I
had been making jokes that supported the dominant narrative that
people believed about me.
I was going with the flow. I could be a comedian instead of a serial
killer.
"This is why women's athletics are important," I thought to myself.
I needed it to be plausible that I would want to do something other
than having sex or bearing children that would cause me to feel pain.
Sports was about winning, and competitors didn't lose points if people
thought they were forcing themselves to suffer. They cheered for
them.
On the street, a young professional guy chirped, "Hey baby, wanna
party?"
I shouted, "Yay for Title Nine!!!"
I jumped up and down like a cheerleader. I even jiggled my air pom
pom's.
If he had framed himself as a football player I would have played
chicken with him to see who was more afraid to make love on the
sidewalk, with everyone watching.
"Crazy B," he said, turning away.
"We might need to expand the public nuisance laws," I retorted calmly.
"F you," he said, a little louder this time, with his back to me and
his middle finger held high.
And there it was. I had been put on notice that I needed the frat
boys for security.
They got ironclad security from each other by playing sports together,
but they expected me to be having sex with at least one of them at all
times, and now that I had a facial injury, I had to be ruthless in the
street and desperate in the bed too.
The jerk in the street was spreading the serious lie that I had to be
a good man's wife in order to have security, and he wanted me to be
afraid that no man would want me anymore.
I had turned Pierre into a good man on the boat, but he had divorced
me.
He had divorced me because he was weak. He should have re-married me
when I got my facial injury and helped me do scientific research that
proved people were developing false beliefs in response to my facial
injury.
I loved insulting Pierre in my mind's eye. Why did that make me feel
better?
He was incapable of violence and he could absorb an infinite number of
insults. I was washing off the street harassment I had received by
authoring journalism about Pierre.
I needed to be a journalist.
I could throw content up on the world wide web. I could print up
fliers and hand them out on the street while wearing short jean shorts
a low cut t-shirt, but what did I need to do to be a journalist?
Slap George's name on it, that's what. But what had he done to become
whatever it is that he was?
"He's all the way in with the military," said a voice in my head.
That was it! I needed to write a computer program that simulated the
voices in my head. I would turn my voice into a robot, and then the
military would come to me and offer a truce.
In America, we want our robot builders to thrive. I knew that from my
own professional experience in Boston. That's why empowering more and
more women to study math, science, and engineering matters.
But why had Pierre said that the military contractors would see me
coming? I intentionally put his words out of mind. I vowed to write
a book someday and put all these guys on notice.
To all the guys who were checking out the kinda short pencil skirt I
was wearing while walking gracefully down the streets of San Francisco 
on that joyful day in the summer of 1995, I was plotting to frame all
of you as male robots.
I rented a boring economy sedan and drove it to LA. I wanted to play
hot girl for Paul. I camped out at a hotel and worked the phones in
order to get the data about him.
He was living in a run down house in Culver City. He was making ends
meet doing odd gigs and representing himself as a DJ.
He had formed a band called the Crypt Joneses with a guy named Kev.
Kev was living at the same house. Paul was playing bass as a lead and
Kev was framing himself as a vocal artist instead just calling himself
lead singer like I had.
The drummer was named Robby. The other lead guitarist was calling
himself Each, and Zric was playing keys.
I dressed up like a guy in a suit with shades, and I did a stake out
of their place.
Paul and Kev were doing breakfast burritos. Their failure to do
breakfast in house was a weakness I could exploit.
Early the next morning, I returned the car while wearing a short dress
and sparkling dance shoes. I shipped my spy gear back to Palo Alto,
and then I took the bus to Culver City.
I hired a private investigator to make Paul and Kev leaving their
house. He gave me a car assist, and then I walked into the burrito
joint a couple minutes after them, with my pink suitcase in tow.
My PI got the joke and fell in love with me, by the way. He became my
guy in LA, and I felt safe.
Paul was not as phased as I was hoping he would be.
"Hey Suzy."
I hadn't seen him since winter break of my senior year, 18 months ago.
We had only talked briefly on the phone a few times since then, but he
was acting like this was the third time he'd seen me today.
Had he made me as a spy? What I the prey?
"Hey Paul!!! I just got here. I came to see you!"
"Oh yeah, like spur of the moment. I dig it."
Paul held my eye contact comfortably. I was disappointed that neither
of the guys gave me a full body scan. Everyone else in the place was
following the lead of my guys. Nobody was looking at my legs. I felt
like a floating head with no body. I was a talking head. The
magnetic power of my body had been neutralized.
I was a wounded predator. I got that, but why did people have to be
this emotionally hard? I was here to work. What was their problem?
Kev knew I was a predator. He kept staring at my face.
"What?" I asked.
"I can't stop staring at your face."
"I'm glad you like my makeup."
"No, it's not your makeup. I think it's just you."
He was using the effect of my facial injury to hustle me. Guys
weren't supposed to hustle me, especially not in this city. What was
he thinking?
I felt myself expanding like a blowfish. It felt good. I saw Kev
react to my expansion. I was hoping his hand would twitch, but he
just rolled his shoulders like a surfer and held my eye contact. He
felt safe because of something Paul was doing.
"I hear you used to be me," said Kev.
Ok. He was framing my facial injury as jealousy that he, not I, was
Paul's lead singer in the current iteration of their slacker
monstrosity.
That was actually a pretty chill frame. It beat the hell out of
Marshall framing me as unattractive because I had been sleeping
around, especially when all I had done was run a classy, well formed
experiment on some frat boys.
Truth be told, I was a little jealous of Kev. I was hoping to get
back to jetsetting as soon as possible, but rockstar could potentially
trump jetsetter.
"I'm more into the visual arts now," I said, channeling Paul.
Paul was getting all of us while staring at his unopened burrito, but
I didn't know how.
"That's rad. Where are you staying?" said Paul, orchestrating. I 
felt like a girl again. I would punish Kev later for trying to hustle
me. I would restore order in LA.
I put my suitcase in Paul's room.
We got high and Kev kept challenging me. He had dug in for trench
warfare. He wanted all of my data, and I wanted all of his.
It was kinda fun. He was good, but I was better. Paul was the
umpire. Was that his frame?
I had taken a curve ball to the face. They had patched me up and sent
me right back in.
I fell in love with LA and with America all over again. This was the
first time I had been allowed to have a valid identity since the last
time I was in LA.
Pierre had framed me as the devil. George had framed me as a sexy
murderer. Heather had framed me as a trauma victim.
Palo Alto said I was a hypnotist without a license. I was still a sex
symbol in San Francisco, for better and for worse, but in LA I could
be a ball player, or so I thought.
I slept in the same bed with Paul. He didn't make a move. I wanted
him to make a move, but logic told me it was better if we kept it
platonic. The only reason I was here was because I had a facial
injury.
I'd be jetsetting right now if I hadn't gotten my God forsaken facial
injury. Why wasn't that a thousand times more obvious to everyone?
Pierre, that's why. I finally saw it. He knew I'd gradually lose
face because of my facial injury.
I couldn't make it as a jetsetter anymore, not even with his help. He
had given me a clean exit narrative from his silly social scene.
The UK tabloids had harped on Pierre for fooling around with me in the
summer of 1991, but they didn't care that he had dumped me for shallow
reasons.
Nobody in tinseltown cared about actual drama. They just wanted to
make money.
It must have been the jocks at Const Academy who spread the word.
Their people got the data that I had been a legend in my own time at a
Beyond the Pale area university, but my summer vacation in Europe had
been a disaster because I was a nerd.
They didn't know about Heather, but they deduced logically that Pierre
must have dumped me because I was a nerd.
I slept in Paul's bed for a couple days, and I made two field trips to
the Sunset Strip.
I hoped I would see Pierre. He would have been forced to laugh
submissively at me, and then I would have slayed him.
Pierre was not powerful enough to slay a hot girl like me in this
city. He would have to submit, but only if I was here for some reason
other than trying to randomly bump into him.
Did he know I was here? Was he sending minions to watch me? I felt
sexy again. I checked out men's bodies and they laughed at me in
response. Empath girl for Heather was melting away. I no longer
needed her. It was ok for me to be a hideous monster in LA.
Paul drove me to LAX in his beat up used car. We made a plan for me
to return in a few days and see him in concert, and I left my stuff in
his room.
I free handed my laptop computer through the airport, and it freaked
out all the security people. They all thought it was a bomb. They
thought I was trying to become the first hot girl in history to blow
up an airplane.
I started a routine of taking the sketch bus from San Jose to LA in
order to attend all the Cryptic Joneses's performances.
I wanted to make it as painful as possible for Kev to frame me as
rich. He knew I was representing some serious cash, but he wasn't
sure how much.
I used my time on the bus to read and write trashy novels. I devoured
every source of celebrity gossip I could get my hands on. I wrote
erotic fiction.
I had created a hot summer internship for myself out of thin air.
I would have hired minions if Kev wasn't compressing me nonstop. Was
he self aware that he was blocking me from representing money? Would
it have been so bad if the Cryptic Joneses had a visual artist in
residence who was repping money?
Kev would have laughed me out of the room if I asked to be given a
title. Asking that question would have reframed everything I had done
in LA that summer as 100% fake.
I was a a Beyond the Pale area university graduate. I could start a
record label and sign the Cryptic Joneses.
They were good. Their concerts were becoming a platform for people to
dress up in costumes.
We had no bias. People could dress up as anything they wanted and get
down to their hard charging vocals that floated like, well, me,
meditating on a pillow made of surreal bass tones.
They played all their concerts high, but their music hit people more
like nicotine.
I held back because of fear. I could pay the guys in the band, but I
couldn't pay all the people who were showing up to their concerts.
That was their hustle. Nobody could rep money. I decided to make it
my business to make all the other people at their concerts who had
bucks and bust them before they busted me.
I couldn't make anyone. Either nobody in the room except me had money
or these people were into something I didn't know about. I decided to
blow it off. I was having fun. I had moved most of my wardrobe into
bins in Paul's room and under his bed. He said it made his room feel
like a safe space. He was so chill.
I had dreams about marrying him, but he kept waiting to make a move.
I could tell he wanted me. He took a lot of showers and started
cleaning the bathroom more regularly.
Paul was already a good man. He'd always been a good man. The
operative question was, "Was I making him better?"
With my wardrobe on loan in LA, I became ruthless about enforcing
minimalism in my apartment in Palo Alto.
I loved how my closet in Palo Alto contained nothing but three
professional outfits and some spy gear.
I created a system for using my laptop comfortably with relying on a
desk and chair, and I repped venture capitalist energy at the coffee
houses in Palo Alto.
I slayed all the guys who tried to talk to me, including all the
actual venture capitalists.
Nobody made me as a hustler.
They all assumed I was an emotionally hard Palo Alto area university
grad student.
I was annoyed that the tabloids weren't writing anything about the
fact that Pierre's ex-wife was dating the lead bass player of the
Cryptic Joneses.
The press we did get was even chiller than Paul. They were competing
to write the most chill review of all time.
I gradually expanded the vector space of costumes I was wearing to the
Cryptic Joneses concerts.
I created a three hundred dimensional model for my outfits.
In other words, "little black dress with no makeup" became a point in
space.
"Gold leotard with neon pastel eye shadows" was a different point in
space.
Every outfit was a point in space.
My outfits were well received at the concerts. I was standing near
the middle of the dance floor and attracting a low key receiving line
of both guys and girls who were keen to dance with me.
I was working, but just barely.
Dancing with Paul in LA was a lot more fun than hustling with George
in Europe, and the level of demand for my services was magically
managing itself.
I felt like Paul had figured out how to increase or decrease demand
for my services with music.
Paul was hot like that. He knew things, but he didn't talk about what
he knew. He just did.
We were making decent money on ticket sales, but not enough to contain
the gradually expanding vector space of security risk at our events.
Kev's chain smoking habit was the best metric I could identify for
gauging the overall level of vice at our concerts.
Kev and his boys where working hard to compress the pimps, drug
dealers, and pornography recruiters, but we were becoming an
irresistible honey pot for them.
We were becoming an aggregator for vice in LA, and Kev kept
complaining to Paul that the paid bouncers were compressing him.
I understood what was happening more accurately than either Kev or
Paul, but I tried to put these questions out my mind with meditation.
Security was Kev's problem, not mine.
I was a hot girl. I was there to enjoy the party.
The pimps, drug dealers, and pornography recruiters didn't come
anywhere near me because they had learned that they would be done for
the night if they gave me a reason to slay them.
I had made it clear I was not interested in their services. I wasn’t
part of the problem.
What was attracting the negative energy into our awesome little
platform for dressing up in costumes?
Was Pierre paying these people to invade our safe space? Was it my
style? Was it the surrealistic way Paul played bass? Or was it the
effect of my facial injury?
I tried to put these questions out of my mind with meditation, but I
couldn't quite do it. I became tired and melancholy.
Getting high didn't help or hurt. I added layers to my personal
mindful stretching practice. I had become a low key creative. I was
a force for good, but I became weepy.
Summer never really ended in LA. I lost track of the days and started
spending all my time in LA.
I got a storage unit for my wardrobe and we turned Paul's room into a
sweet ride for everyone who dared to come in there at our house
parties.
It was the VIP lounge. I was getting to know a lot of cool people,
but I was crying more and more.
Everything I read in magazines or saw on TV made me want to cry.
I started lying. I lied that I was making money by doing paid
research for other low key creatives who had more money than me.
Whenever the guys went on field trips, I would lie that I was planning
to go out shopping, and then I would hide in the bathroom and wallow
in misery.
Inevitability knocked. I was in the bathroom crying, again, when Paul
and Kev got back sooner than expected.
I pulled myself together and sat there silently. I felt deeply
ashamed. I hoped they would leave.
"I'm not sure how to say this politely, so I'm just gonna say it. You
shouldn't be dating the scene girl. It's sucks all the oxygen out of
the air when a member of the band puts out for her. It's like turning
your back to the congregation and preaching to the choir, man," said
Kev.
"I think there's always multiple scene girls. Maybe everyone is a
scene girl. Maybe we're scene girls too," said Paul.
I was supposed to feel comforted, but I wasn't. Kev was right. I was
a wounded predator, but I was still a predator. Paul was never going
to be a rockstar. He was too nice to hideous monsters like me.
"I'm just trying to help you out, man. It's your choice."
"Yeah, no worries, man."
Now I really hoped they would leave, but they didn't. They started
throwing food at each other. They were laughing.
We were living the dream, but I was in a tight spot. I was going to
be framed as evil for not alerting them to my presence. I had done
nothing wrong, but the awkwardness that would ensue as soon as one of
the guys had to relieve himself would be framed as my fault. Climbing
out the window was not an option.
I started crying again, but I was acting. I was a predator. I was
being aggressive in a way that they could not call out.
Crying became my music. They heard the sound and froze. They were
probably communicating with silent facial expressions, but I had no
way to prove it. They knew I was the enemy.
Paul did boyfriend duty, but I could't make him as an actor. He was
so nice and sweet.
"Hey Suzy? Suzy, is that you? Are you ok?"
I had to keep acting, but my emotions felt real. It felt like being
on drugs. I felt euphoric while being hot mess girl for Paul.
I started to feel anger at Paul for not making a move and at least
kissing me when I was crying. I felt he was playing a game by only
hugging me.
I wanted him to be more aggressive, so I got a custom made corset and
experimented with wearing it all the time.
I loved how I looked in my corset. I felt mortified every time I went
out in public, but the data was telling me that most people thought I
looked hot. There was no logical reason to feel ashamed. I felt
empowered. I was becoming hot girl in corset instead of hot girl for
Paul.
The corset squeezed all my hot girl characters into a smaller vector
space. I felt like I was a college professor and my characters were
my students.
What should I teach them?
Was I a Beyond the Pale area university college professor?
Could I be a professor of a mashup of all the bay area universities?
Could I be a professor at a mashup of all the name brand area
universities?
Could I start my own college?
I wanted to commission a horse and buggy to deliver me like a package
packed full of scented tissue paper to Pierre's mansion so I could ask
him what to do.
I narrowly escaped that path in life by having sex with Paul while
wearing my corset.
Did he break down and start making love to me in order to save me from
giving Pierre a reason to get a restraining order on me?
Did I bully Paul into having sex with me?
He could have asked me to leave at anytime. He knew I had a hypnosis
studio of my own in Palo Alto.
I wrote in my journal, "Why had Pierre framed me as a Catholic? I was
a girl who read the Bible as literature, but I felt no shame. I
thought priests were hot and I had always daydreamed about corrupting
them. The only reason I didn't write about this nonstop in high
school English class was because I wanted to get into a name brand
area college."
After the first week of wearing the corset, I gave up on being a
college professor. I conspired with Paul to force myself to feel
shame for not believing in The Gospel.
We started praying together, and I told him to stare into my eyes
whenever he sensed that I was feeling weak or insecure and then judge 
me if he thought my faith was insincere.
I thought about upgrading my corset to include a lock and then giving
Paul the only key, but something in me held back. The lock would have
been an unsafe computer programming practice. The corset was the
perfect safe word. We would only play when I was wearing my corset.
The algorithm worked. I started to feel shame. It happened really
quickly. All of my memories that made me feel powerful were reframed
as sins.
Having sex with Chad outside of the sanctity of marriage had been my
greatest sin.
The only way to assert that I wasn't a hopeless sinner was to
visualize a Bible quote that was relevant to the memory in question.
The Bible became the only key that could unlock me from my corset, and
I had memorized it.
I was in heaven.
I had stopped dating in Palo Alto after getting made as a hypnotist.
The grad student who had made me was chill, and he stood tall.
My hustle had been fun. Nobody had gotten getting hurt.
I started making trips back to Palo Alto while wearing my corset. I
hid it under a sweat shirt on the bus. I loved being hot girl in
hidden corset on bus getting a ton of work done.
I started writing code again.
We stopped playing when it occurred to me that I wanted to start
attending church, but only if I could wear my corset there.
The problem was, Pierre's people had invaded the churches.
I felt they would judge me as as immodest just when I was starting to
feel modest for the first time in my life, so I put my corset back in
it's box and shoved it into the corner of my overflowing storage unit.
I wanted to continue exploring modesty, so I toned down my makeup and
catalogued my top 100 outfits.
I made a journal about how each outfit looked and felt on my body.
Is this what Pierre had done to become who he was? Was this his
religion?
I started attending the Cryptic Joneses concerts as hot girl for
modesty.
I started going to fitness classes instead of doing my personal
mindful stretching practice in Paul's living room.
I became hot girl for modesty. I became her completely, and Paul dug
it.
I felt so much shame because of the quasi-provocative outfits I was
wearing, and every time Paul and I had sex became the best sex I'd
ever had.
I felt like this had been Paul's master plan for me all along.
He had offered to help the doctors heal me from my facial injury, but
he healed me directly, instead.
He healed me from my misunderstanding about how the rest of the world
had been reading the Bible for over a thousand years.
I become just like all the other girls in Pierre's troop of classy,
modest aspiring actresses.
I became a girl who would never have started working for George in the
first place.
I asked Paul if Pierre's aspiring actresses were self-aware that they
were all playing hot girl for modesty, and he said, "No way. Someone
would break rank and talk about it if they were. Nobody ever talks
about it."
Was Pierre aware?
"Was Calistoga Wagons aware?" I asked.
Paul said he didn't know, and he become uncomfortable.
This was probably how Heather would have reacted if I had told her
that Pierre didn't believe anything he was saying back in the spring
of 1993.
Was I trying to put Paul at odds with the machine that he worked for?
Was I being a brat?
I had switched from hot girl for hustle to hot girl for modesty, but
the underbelly of LA was still encroaching on our subculture.
I hired models to wear all of my outfits, and I wrote journal entries 
about how they looked.
I was like a dirty old man who wanted to tell them what to wear and
paint pictures of them naked, but I wasn't sexually attracted to them.
I wanted to use the magnetic power of my wardrobe to strip them of
their psychological defenses and then write about what I saw.
If I had had a billion dollars, I would have spent the whole year
shaking down models and expanding my wardrobe. I thought I had
discovered an algorithm for building a fashion empire. I thought
about getting a patent for this idea, but I was already burning
through my money at an unsustainable rate.
I brought the project to closure by writing a generic description of
each outfit, and writing about my wardrobe in the abstract was the
most boring work I'd ever done.
I wrote a journal entry about how I wasn't cut out to work in fashion,
and then I wrote an entry about why this was the first time since
Pierre had made me rich that I had avoided wasting my time because I
hadn't hustled him for half.
I realized that I hadn't thought about my facial injury in over a
month.
Was I harassing models because I was quasi-rich or because of the
effect of my facial injury?
The dominant narrative said I was being evil because I had an unmet
psychological need that made me want to represent money, itself, but
the real reason why writing about the models had been so interesting
to me was because they were reacting to my facial injury.
I was doing another science experiment in order to learn about the
effect of my facial injury.
I was doing it with fashion models instead of frat boys.
Paul thought this analysis was correct.
Did he really agree with me, or was he just going with the flow
because it was easier than arguing with me? We made sweet love, but
he didn't cry.
Why did Paul never cry? What could I do to make him cry?
He said he didn't know, so I broke up with him.
I didn't even want to reframe him as my pot dealer in LA.
We made a clean break, and I didn't care whether I had loved him or
not.
I felt like I was submitting to Pierre again, but I didn't care about
that either.
I hired minions to pack up the clothes in my storage unit. They put
the clothes into bins and stacked them from floor to ceiling along the
walls of my apartment in Palo Alto.
I took a creative writing class in Palo Alto. I decided within five
minutes that the teacher and all the students were working for
Pierre's machine in LA.
I felt like I did the morning after sleeping with Heather in Pierre's
master bedroom.
I wanted to ask all these people if they knew they were performing an
act for a sexist jerk in LA whose name was Pierre, but I held back
because I knew they would say no.
Asking this question would have been yet another evil way to trick
people into giving me data about how they were reacting to my facial
injury.
Now that I knew they weren't all acting, I wasn't afraid. I didn't
feel an urge to cry.
I had suppressed the urge to cry around Heather by thinking about
puppies, flowers, candy, and the ocean.
These people were all here to practice doing that kind of hustle.
They wanted to learn how to hide their fear so that they could endure
the pain of working for people like Pierre.
I decided I would learn with them so that I could teach creative
writing.
In order to build my empire, I would need to hire minions who would
serve as under cover agents within Pierre's empire.
They would need to pretend to be afraid and then pretend to use
creative writing to suppress their fear.
I did all of my creative writing assignments with that idea in mind.
I was becoming drunk on power, and then I heard a voice say, "You've
finally become a good woman from Palo Alto."
"Why??!" I shouted.
"You are your own man," said the voice.
I was a boat without an anchor. I decided to start a software company
in order to contain my runaway train of thoughts.
I wrote a choose your own adventure thingy about a male character who
had the same kind of facial injury as me.
The premise was that he had worked for an evil genius who had become
the greatest industrialist of his era. My industrialist was going for
the title. He almost had it.
Anything was possible, but my protagonist had been banished from the
kingdom. He had disrespected the king in his own court.
He had played court jester and then spit into the eye of the king.
The king could have killed him, but he chose to be merciful.
The options for my protagonist were fourfold:
Option one was for him to find contentment working for a local
industrialist instead of the leading global industrialist. Going
local gave me a panoply of character sketches to elaborate upon.
Option two was for him to become a handyman. This was equivalent to
focusing on child care. Could this path be a platform for exploring
the other side of the coin of the industrial revolution?
Option three was for him to explore a creative pursuit. He could jump
kick his way over the echo chamber of writing about writing. He could
write comedy that becomes tragedy!
Last but not least, he could be a revolutionary who bears witness to
the fall of the great industrialist who had banished him from the
kingdom. There would have been a million ways to write this. None of
them would have been authentic, except for the version that he dared
to write…
I made a web application where people could click on one of those four
options, and then I wrote out a tree of additional possibilities
beneath each option.
I wanted my users to indulge in online conversations with the other
people who had landed in the same tree branches as them.
I had the most fun with option three: creative pursuits.
My protagonist could look for patterns in song lyrics. He could 
create a website called wordplaytree.com. He could upload lots of
song lyrics and get traction with people who shared his interest in
looking for patterns in song lyrics. A company that made computers
that paired well with dogs food boxes could try to acquire him. He
could reject their advances because he felt they were trying to hustle
him. The company that made computers that paired well with dogs could
work with the entertainment industry to sue him for copyright
infringement. Game over.
I sent emails to all my fellow low key creatives in LA. My emails
included a link to my choose your own adventure thingy. A few people
gave me clicks but nothing more. I thought everyone was going to love
it, but I got nothing. Most people didn't even respond to my email.
It didn't get traction.
Ok, I thought. My choose your own adventure thingy was only
pretending to be an herbivore. I hatched a plot to convert her into
and an omnivore.
I started a mailing list. I wanted to create a place where all the
girls who were affiliated with Palo Alto area universities could share
tell all emails about their lurid sexcapades with dirty old male
venture capitalists.
I got the domain thesuzy dot com. I thew on a pair of short jean
shorts and a low cut pink t-shirt. I put out flyers that invited
people to, "Tell me what you know. Hugs and kisses, vulture at
thesuzy dot com"
It worked. I started getting emails. People were creating anonymous
email accounts and sending me data. I fanned the flames by
representing hotness in the flesh in Palo Alto with style and
discretion. I became a breather of fire.
I had struck oil. There was an ocean of data lurking beneath this
place called Palo Alto, and I had given it a reason to flow to me.
I replied to all my aspiring vultures with instructions for how to
sign up for a mailing list.
My mailing list grew into an anonymous gossip rag that had currency in
Palo Alto for brief window of time in the summer of 1996.
I made the venture capitalists suffer. Their level of suffering went
from 1 in June to 10 in August, but they didn't react.
Instead of getting some open, public, and brave confessions from the
sexually adventurous men of Silicon Valley, I started to get anonymous
death threats. Some threats were sent to vulture at thesuzy dot com.
Ok, I thought. They're joking. They want to play. Very funny.
Others were sent to my personal email accounts.
Not cool. Others were slipped under my door in the form of ransom
notes. I had a video camera waiting for them, but they wore masks.
A cold war had begun.
In October, a Palo Alto area university daily newspaper wrote a
blistering editorial about me.
They got the data about Pierre and some of the data about George.
They said I had been involved with a computer hacking scandal at Const
Academy. They said I had been a hustler in LA, and they judged my
mailing list as problematic.
They had framed me as a menace to society that needed to be stopped by
any means necessary.
I responded by putting on spandex and going for run through a Palo
Alto area university campus.
As luck would have it, I passed a university marching band that was
making its way back from a sporting event.
Someone yelled, "It's Suzy!" Someone else yelled, "Roborobo!" and
then the leader of the group yelled, "A 1, a 2, a 1 2 3," and they
erupted into music.
They were playing a song called Roborobo by the Poe Summer's Group.
Pierre would have loved to be a fly on the wall for this. I laughed
because he would have laughed.
They surrounded me like a warm blanket. They were making love to me
with music.
They knew they were making love to me with music! I could see it on
their faces.
I didn't feel harassed, but why? If this wasn't street harassment,
what was? Pierre could not pay people to do this because he would get
sued, but university marching bands in the Palo Alto area could. Why?
How was I being framed?
I could have framed them as a dragon holding me captive in it's lair,
but what would have been the point?
A Palo Alto area university daily newspaper had framed me cold. I
would have just been digging my grave deeper.
That's why they could do this. They were journalists.
I was not a journalist, but I could have started playing air guitar
and nobody would have known the difference!
What else could I do?
I could help conduct. I could conduct a single section.
That was the aggressive move. Divide and conquer.
I could be President Bill Clinton riding down Pennsylvania Ave. in an
armored car with muscle. That was another experience Pierre could not
pay to have.
The saxophonists were making the most spirited effort to get a
reaction from me. I could steal a pair of sunglasses from them and
I'd have the president cold.
Who were these people? They had everyone. They were Pierre's
communist revolution hiding in plain sight!
I had a bunch of other thoughts while the band made love to me with
music, but I forgot what they were.
I fell in love with America and her magnificent marching bands all
over again.
I had been vilified within a Palo Alto area university community, but
the band had tried to heal me.
They were a group of college kids pretending to be me. They were a
female Frankenstein.
I had been fighting my mirror image, but was the mirror on my side?
Was I on my side?
As a group, the band knew almost everything an educated person could
know, but they didn’t know about the effect of my facial injury. They
had the sitting president, but they didn't have me.
"I should start bringing a lab coat with me on runs in case this
happens again," I had mused.
Aggressive sarcasm. Who was I making fun of? Who was I bullying?
Maybe I was doing something wrong. What false assumption was I
making?
Would the band have rallied me if I been an average guy instead of a 
hot girl?
Maybe my narrative about what would happen to a man who had my facial
injury was wrongheaded.
I had based my narrative on what Pierre would do if he had my facial
injury.
What would George do if he had my facial injury?
Maybe George was already doing what Pierre would have had to do in
order to survive if he had my facial injury.
"Eureka!" I thought to myself. I could heal George with sex. I could
be an English ballerina in England this time.
He had been framing himself as a dragon that was holding me captive in
a foreign land the first two times we had sex.
The third time was messed up. I didn’t even want to think about it.
The solution was for me to be an English princess. George would be an
English prince. We would set an intention to become king and queen in
George’s homeland and then rule with justice and deference to all
human beings.
I set an intention to think about this when we had sex, and I made the
assumption up front that this course of action would heal both of us.
Three years had gone by since our last awkward encounter. I called
George's office. His secretary put me on hold. My heart was
pounding.
"Hello," said George.
"George, do you still love me?"
"Yes."
"If we have sex and I ask you to stop, will you definitely stop?"
"Of course."
"Can I be on top this time?"
"Yes."
"I can be at your place in London tomorrow. Will you be there?
"Yes."
"See you then!"
"Ok."
"Bye."
"Bye."
I flew to London on the redeye and healed George.
After I finished up, I fell asleep on top of him. I had a dream where
George had my facial injury, but I was looking at his mirror image.
He looked like I look in the mirror.
Pierre said I look like I have infinite confidence in the mirror.
George in the mirror with my facial injury looked confident too. It
was similar to when he gets an idea and smirks on the right side, but
better.
He looked like he had an infinite supply of new ideas.
"George!" I said, waking up. I have an idea!
He didn't respond. I left without any further discussion. I took a
taxi back to the airport and returned to Palo Alto.
I wrote a message to my mailing list apologizing for using the
Internet irresponsibly.
I said this would be the last message on the mailing list, and I
thanked everyone for reading.
I peaced out from Palo Alto, but not before attending a talk by the
founders of an ice cream company from New Hampshire.
The talk occurred in auditorium at a Palo Alto area university
business school.
I bought more spy gear and dressed up like a nerdy guy. I was
representing the energy of a worker bee for the computer science
department who thought he could invade the business school without
getting made as a bug.
Everyone made me as a hot girl because of the giant man bun packaging
I had used to box up my hair, but I played nerdy guy for ice cream so
well that nobody could call me out.
I forced the room to treat me like a guy, and I got the data with a
hidden camera.
I compressed them all the way, and then I got the data.
Everyone in the room was trying to hustle me.
My mental model had been that guys would be merciful and respectful to
guys who had my facial injury, but these dorky business people were
not behaving like brothers in a fraternity.
They were not behaving like people who had each other's back on the
battlefield.
They were like girls in a sorority trying to frame me as the ugliest
girl in the room.
They framed me as a girl nobody liked who had crashed their party.
They wanted to get rid of me, but they declined to say it.
They pretended to be nice, but they were acting like killers.
They were trying to kill me with witchcraft.
They gave me no outs.
If they had been brave enough to say, "We don't want you in the room
because the shape of your face is freaking us out," that would have
given me a valid reason to go back to the computer science department
and hide under a desk, but their lack of disclosure was like a noose
around my neck.
They were being passive aggressive.
That's the part I had missed. I had assumed passive aggression could
only be used against women by other women and by girly men like
Pierre.
As a guy, everyone in the room was framing me as evil.
I was put on notice that I would be framed as even more evil if I left
the room without a valid reason.
As a man, I did not have the option to peace out and become a farmer's
wife.
I demurred, but not before realizing for the first time in my life
that being a guy was not for the feint of heart.
I had kinda actually thought all men were weaker than me, but they
were not.
I decided that many if not most men had been living in a state of
constant warfare since childbirth.
I was only starting to get the joke about men.
I decided that most men had been navigating a silent struggle that was
worse than my struggle for as long as they could remember.
I had always known that I liked the strength and fortitude of men, but
I had been colluding with everyone to remain willfully ignorant about
what it was actually like to be a man.
I concluded that most men were ashamed of being men, period, and then
I cried. I had a good cry for men.
I had reprogrammed myself to believe my greatest sin had been having
glorious, life altering sex with Chad outside of the sanctity of
marriage, but Pierre had been forced by society to believe his
greatest sin was being born as a man, period.
The data was telling me that I had become an aggregator for vice in LA
and a super villain in Palo Alto.
The data was telling me I needed salvation.
The data was telling me I needed to make a grand bargain with
humanity.
The data was telling me I needed to stop making deals with the devil.
I decided to create a cheerful, aspirational brand, like the ice cream
company from New Hampshire had done.
I needed to own a brand that everybody would love.
Everyone had loved me when I was a hot girl without a facial injury.
I needed to create a brand that encapsulated me.
Men were not sinners. It was not a sin to be a man.
I loved men. I loved men because they were men.
Technically speaking, banks and corporations were the sinners. Not
all banks had been sinners, but they were fair game to frame as
sinners.
I drew a picture of a cheerful shark. My shark looked like a business
man being passive aggressive to other business men. He was so 90s
chic.
I wanted to have angry sex with him and then watch a movie about him
dying in the most outrageous way possible.
I went for a road trip along the north coast, and I used witchcraft to
seduce a hot surfer guy.
I had sex with him on the beach, and then I created a web page for my
cheerful shark.
I registered SharkPages.com, and then I started to write code.
__Ch3: Startup Street__
I had also had sex on the beach with Jill.
Jill was the leader of a band. Joking.
He made me promise never to tell. Joking about that too.
SharkPages was what legal experts call transformative satire, but it
wasn't satire about hot surfer guys from NorCal. It was satire about
hot surfer guys all over the world who put on suits and ties and ran
our lovely blue planet into the ground.
They tried to turn the Earth inside out. They did what Bill thought
he could do to me before I cried and kicked and yelped and insisted
that he let me do the work.
He said he heard a brief ringing sound in his right ear after we
finished up, and he saw that it was good.
I came to understand that my previous attempts to achieve ever lasting
glory on the Internet had been examples of derivative satire.
I was trying to get the invisible people who lead name brand area
universities, but I had to get them cleanly. It wasn't enough to just
say it. I had to do it.
I borrowed another girl's university id card at an east bay area
university and did some research about transformative vs. derivative
satire.
I had to chat up four girls who looked like me until I found someone
who wanted to play, but I found a fellow hot girl and she helped me
out.
It was a hot girl thing. We exchanged info, but we didn't expect to
ever see each other again.
Back in 1992, I had solved the problem of doing an overnight jaunt to
the beach with a bunch of finance bros by driving out Saturday and
helping them all get one night stands.
I pretended I was dating one of them, and I pretended to have plans to
match the others with my girlfriends. We drew straws to decide who I
was dating. We were bonding.
I made them seem desirable. I also got the other girls at the beach
bar to dislike me.
They slept with my guys to spite me, and my the capstone project was
to get a girl to steal my fake boyfriend from me.
Her role was to spite me all the way, and I thought the girl who did
it was hot.
She knew she was helping me out, and I played the nerd back at the
house to make it real.
I thought about pulling a guy, but it would have been awkward for him
in the morning. He would have felt like a girl, and none of the guys
at the beach bar looked like they wanted to do a tour of duty for my
benefit.
SharkPages was for the imaginary guy I could have pulled but didn't.
If he could have woken up in the morning and checked his
SharkPages.com account, he wouldn't have felt out of place. He would
have been the shark of the house.
SharkPages was also for me, the nerdy girl who slept alone that night
but didn't care because she was killing it at her prestigious finance
internship.
SharkPages wasn't a resume site. We weren't in the recruiting
business. We were giving people a platform to write a cheerful fake
newspaper about themselves. SharkPages was a warm pillow in a
business where emotional hardness had become the currency.
The finance world had gotten drunk on leverage at some point when I
was still a kid. The idle rich thought adding leverage was great, but
the use of leverage caused emotional pain for all the people who had
to work for the lucky few who had gotten rich.
Our goal was to help ease the pain. Creating a SharkPage was like
recruiting a hot girl to follow a fool around and sing his or her
praises.
Each SharkPage was a robot that did what I had done for people before
I got my facial injury.
Design was hard. I hired some people to help me. I kicked the habit
of calling them minions. They were partners in crime.
I said I wanted suits and ties for the guys, baggy sweatshirts over
bathing suits for the girls, and a cheerful Shark as the mascot.
We were aided by the tradition of slapping college mascots on
sweatshirts. The problem with suits is that they didn't have places
for mascots. Wearers of suits could pin the American flags onto their
lapels, but that was pretty much it.
We noodled on that for a week. Magic happened, and then I spent
another month writing code in my Palo Alto apartment.
The venture capitalists would have made me as a hustler if I had left
my apartment for any purpose other than purchasing food.
I was in the zone. I hired designers to order and install a
"chairdesk" for me while I continued writing code on the floor.
New users were introduced to the cheerful shark. He asked them to
write a description of what they looked like.
The designers wanted to include photos, but I estimated that the
bandwidth costs would have killed my runway.
I also wanted to keep track of which guys lied about their bodies.
There would be ways to get the data later on. Lots of ways.
The second step was to fill out answers to questions about oneself.
The questions were optional. They could be left blank. The cheerful
shark would not punish people who had declined to specify their
gender.
We didn't want people to represent their employers on the site, so we
asked people to list their favorite beaches, mountains, and prairies.
We wanted to see what would happen.
We also let people specify their location, hometown, and gender.
Users were empowered to create a collection of journal entries, and we
made the journal look cute.
I wanted to make the editor look different for women, but the
designers convinced me to keep all the features gender neutral.
They were right. I was learning to love collaborative work. We were
doing reality distortion, and Pierre wasn't invited to the party.
Adding journal entries or making changes to one's Q&A generated
stories.
"Suzy added a journal entry," was a story.
"Suzy updated her favorite prairies," was also a story.
We aggregated all the stories into a ticker tape, and we allowed users
to give a high five to stories that they liked.
We created an icon of two hands pressed together to represent the act
of giving a high five.
It looked like the hands of a yogi in prayer pose.
I hoped it would make Pierre jealous.
Technically speaking, users were giving high fives to stories, but I
withheld the data about which stories had been high fived.
I just slapped the total number of high fives each user had gotten
onto the top of their page, right next to their description of what
they looked like.
I wanted it to become their score in life. I was starting dance club
all over again, but this time was different. People's scores could
only go up.
High fives could be high fived, but the instigator of a high five
could not high five the reciprocator of a high five.
Launch was low key and invite only. My people who were still working
in finance owed me one. They respected me. They were happy to help.
It was their bosses I was trying to get.
I posted a sign over my door that said:
"I'm all powered up now. I'm ready to do it. I have everything I
need to do it myself. I have them framed. They will be going home in
a box full of scented tissue paper. A red box. This will be pure
carnage. Nobody will be left standing, and this isn't a classroom.
This is war."
I became an extension of my computer. I felt like Pierre explaining
that I was leading his inner robot instead of his inner woman.
I became the code that ran SharkPages. The machine. The monstrosity 
inside.
The code trapped me like a dragon that was obsessed with framing me as
a man.
I didn't want Pierre to win. I wanted to continue being a woman, so I
let the dragon program my inner robot.
The trickle of people signing up for the service gave way to a storm.
Some days nobody would sign up. On other days, a thousand new sharks
would appear on the roster page.
The roster page was a dashboard I made to track the behavior of the
new shark flow.
I hired people to analyze the data. I took notes about their methods
in a spiral bound notebook.
I framed myself as a student sitting in the front row of class.
I forced myself not to think of them as minions.
I framed everyone as a designer, and then I had a dream about what
Pierre had said:
"No, Suzy. The military contractors will see you coming."
The dreamscape in which Pierre said that to me was off-putting.
If we had been living 300 years ago in Salem, I would have accused him
of witchcraft and then prayed that he would be sentenced to death, but
I felt relaxed and peaceful after waking up.
My head felt yummy. I had become Pierre.
I dismissed my designers. There were plenty of other companies who
wanted to hire them.
They were like rockstars wearing business casual at a pool party, but
they weren't Pierre.
"I have become Pierre!" I wrote in my journal.
My designers were like I had been in the summer of 1991.
They helped me create a robot that was like them.
We created a robot that was like us.
I realized I had been in a state of constant warfare ever since I had
gotten my facial injury. This was the first day I had felt truly
relaxed since the spring of '94.
I played with ways of styling my hair so that I would look more cute
and harmless. I laid out ten outfits that matched my new hair styling
paradigm.
I wanted to keep being a hot girl. Being a hot girl was my thing, but
I wanted to simulate being a girl next door playing hot girl for
modesty.
I was doing stuff that felt good to me in the moment, but I was selfaware
that my emotions and tastes were being lead and handled by,
well, me.
I got a dry erase board and wrote the following equation:
(Hot girl for modesty) * (computer nerd) + SharkPages = Suzy
Now that the issue about who I was had been settled, I wrote out our
growth strategy.
Silicon Valley had developed a fetish for rapidly growing startups.
"Eek!" I thought to myself.
I decided to slay all the growth addicts.
We would grow slow. We would focus on quality for a while.
I wrote another equation on the dry erase board:
(User quality) + (quality of life) = love
Our goal was to maximize love. I was CEO. I was a woman, and this
was how I wanted to run my company.
I stared for a while at the "I'm all powered up" sign I had put over
my door. It had freaked out my designers, but their reaction was part
of why I was getting girly again. I had to play up hot girl for
modesty more than I otherwise would have in order to convince them I
was still a nice person.
I felt like my sign was becoming my boyfriend. He was really
compressed and emotionally hard. He was my security guard, and I
thought he was hot. I imagined having amazing rough sex with him and
feeling obscenely feminine afterwards.
I imagined him falling down next to me after sex, face down, and 
crying a little bit into the pillow. I had made him cry. He was
starting to fall in love with me. I felt excited about dating him.
I wanted to start hanging out with him. I imagined snuggling up to
him and holding him close until he stopped crying. I was already
maximizing love, and I hadn't even had my morning coffee.
I threw on short pink shorts and a white tank top, my golf uniform. I
ventured out and got coffee and a pastry. Everyone was staring at me
because it was a little cold outside, but I felt warm.
I needed to add a layer. I threw a XY-axis Aligned area university
sweatshirt over my golf uniform and rode my bike to the driving range.
The guy at the range didn't make me a Suzy the super villain of Palo
Alto. He was chatty.
"You went to a Beyond the Pale area university, you're wearing a XYaxis
Aligned area university sweatshirt, and you're playing golf on a
weekday in Palo Alto?"
"It's a hot girl thing." I said.
He chuckled.
He seemed pretty compressed.
He was trying to hide it, but I saw it.
I was kind to him. I was maximizing love on campus.
After golf, I rode to a man made lake that's situated in the middle of
a Palo Alto area university.
I meditated by the lake and forced myself to say, "It's a woman made
lake," over and over while sitting on my a XY-axis Aligned area
university sweatshirt.
I forgot to take the sweatshirt with me as I left. It just skipped my
mind.
I was ruminating about how I needed more security. I didn't feel
safe.
I could play ultimate frisbee with the nerds in a Palo Alto area
university's oval shaped quad.
I could lead them to clubs in the city maybe sleep with some of them
at luxury hotels if they turned me on by acting like hot guys for love
in the city.
I would look into this.
I passed an ultimate game on the way back.
There were already other hot girls hustling the scene.
They were hustling for their own accounts.
They weren't working for anyone, but this was not a surfing line up.
This was a hustle. The girls would let me in, but there was a chance
they'd make me do a tour of duty.
I wallowed in frustration about being a girl, and then it hit me, "The
last question on SharkPages should be:
"Hot girl things"
No punctuation. Just the word "hot" the word "girl" and the word
"things."
I scurried back to my hypnosis studio. I added the new feature and
uploaded it to the server.
I had organized my code base to be modular.
The tickertape stories about hot girl things worked as soon as I
uploaded the new code.
I didn't even get to create the first hot girl thing. Some other hot
girl wrote:
brushing my teeth with love
Troll. Slut. I thought about giving her a high five, but I demurred.
I had setup a workstation that paired well with dog food boxes so that
I could test SharkPages as a food boxer.
Most of my users had to food box at work. The companies that made
computers that paired well with food boxes had recruited the banks.
I used to hate dog food boxes, but now I was starting to love them.
My users were fooling around on SharkPages in order to escape the
monotony of viewing the word through the lens of food boxing.
I clicked to my page on SharkPages and used the page editor to add a
hot girl things section to my page.
The first two hot girl things I added were:
trading university ID cards
leaving sweatshirts behind
Almost immediately, I got a high five from a hot guy located by a
beach.
I was tailing a pretty printed version of the web access log on my
development box that paired well with cats, so I saw the high five
show up at the end of the tail in real time.
I refreshed my shark page and clicked through to check out the hot
guy’s page.
My old self would have given him a high five back, but I felt deeply
ashamed about everything in that moment, so I demurred.
I was going deep on shame, and it was working. Nobody had leverage to
call this stuff out.
Another high five, then another. I was addicted to my own app. I
kept hitting refresh.
I needed a project to get all these hot banker bros off of my mind.
I ran a database query to check if any guys had added hot girl things
to their pages.
There were just three.
They were all really hot chill guys, and they were being awesome:
making love in the summertime
giving more than I get
recalibrating my machine
I gave the best looking one a high five.
He was the one flirting with me.
He must have heard a rumor about how I like to make a lot of love in
the summertime.
I blushed.
The guy who wrote "recalibrating my machine" was serious. I'd heard
of him before. I knew he was probably real because of his invite
pedigree. He had received his invite from someone I knew personally.
He was pretty high up in the food chain.
What did he mean by "recalibrating my machine?" Was he trying to
check me for using reality distortion?
He didn’t really have a great cover story. He was going for it.
I surmised that he was scared of SharkPages, but he wanted in.
To him, I was like a tough guy that people daydream about having rough
sex with but aren’t quite sure about.
He was scared I was going to blow up his east coast machine like
Pierre was blowing up the cults in LA.
I started to feel euphoric.
I called up George.
"I want you to invest in SharkPages." I said, imitating the voice of a
vulture.
"I will, but I will come in last."
Was he playing? Or was that just how he talked?
"What if I don't want you to come in last?"
"Then I won't invest."
"Ok, you can come in last, but you have to hand me the check
personally and serve me tea while I'm wearing a corseted mermaid
costume and a chastity belt."
And then he hung up on me! Punk. He knew I was serious. George was
in.
Now I just had to curate my invitation list. I wanted to pick a
cliche mix of lucky venture capital kids to join me on my march to
fame and eternal glory on the Internet. No irony.
I didn't have time to think about financing right now. Idiot jerk
losers had started to write horrible hot girl things! Of course they
had.
I ordered enough food to stay holed up in my apartment for a few days.
I added a "Not cool" feature to the site. I locked the door twice
behind the delivery guy and shoved my bean bag in front of the door.
I hid tickertape stories that got more than two not cools. I used the 
marquee tag in html to put the people who were not cool on notice.
Most of them started to behave. Others flexed, so I created an
inverse leaderboard of cool and manually banished all the least cool
people from the kingdom of SharkPages.
I made fliers that said "Want to moderate for SharkPages? Reconnect
with vulture at thesuzy dot com to get the new data."
The smell of my laser printer on that day set the tone for the rest of
my life. No irony.
I worked the phones and found minions.
I dropped the package of fliers out the bathroom window. Fliers were
distributed.
One by one, vultures checked in with me, and I gave them credentials
to log into an app called Pie that I was serving from thesuzy dot com.
Lots of wanna be vultures started hitting thesuzy dot com.
They got nothing but the word Pie and a login prompt if they didn't
have credentials.
I added the text, "I see you," in the footer, just to rub it in their
faces.
I created a growing pie of internal pieces to keep track of bad
behavior.
I slapped "The Bakery" on top of the main dashboard in order to subtly
remind the vulture that they, too, were being watched by their fellow
vulture-bakers.
The inverse leaderboard of cool became a piece, and shifts were
assigned to work the piece. The vultures were happy to help.
I wrote a script that searched for people's names within user
generated content.
The script automatically not cooled anyone who mentioned a name.
I wrote a separate piece for reviewing auto not cools and reversing
them if they were incorrect.
I allowed all honorable people to use names in their hot girl things.
All women were initially added to the list of honorable people, but
people could be added or removed based on their behavior.
After a few days, the level of vice on SharkPages stabilized.
The site was gradually reverting to a mean of zero vice, so I went
golfing again.
I didn't bother with the sweatshirt. I slayed the guy at the range,
and he nodded in approval. I was there to play golf, and he respected
my hustle.
Venture capitalists started calling me, and none of them were calling
to ask me out on a date.
I made all of them meet me at the range. We did try outs.
I wore sunglasses. I wore a different pair of sunglasses for each
meeting.
I made stops at the mall to pick up additional pairs after I ran
through my existing collection.
I made a 300 dimensional model of my VC meetings. The features of the
pair of sunglasses I had worn with each VC were an aspect of the
model. I was killing it.
I gave friendly coaching advice the VCs who didn't know how to swing a
golf club correctly.
I told them to tell their business associates that I would give bonus
points to people who called me, stated their name, their firm, and
then waited for me to give them a time slot.
Some of them acted like brats. I walked off the range without saying
goodbye to more than one of them.
I raised half a mil from a cliche group of lucky venture capital kids.
I played chess with all of them before they signed, and I won more
than half of the matches.
Class had been in session, and I became an authority figure who had no
authority.
A friend of one of the VCs named Evan Raymond came on board as an
advisor.
He helped me hire an ops team. I hustled him by saying I wanted bank
ops people only.
He didn't get the joke. I rejected the first three people he brought 
me.
I said they were not bank ops people.
He eventually brought me a candidate for the ops team who was female.
Christine was overqualified, so I hired her on the spot.
Chris and I started referring to them as Ra. eCommerce, eBusiness,
eEverything had become a thing, so Ra evolved to eRa. eRa gave way to
the word era, and then we dug in deep and kept on building more and
more coded language about the coming era of female ascendance in the
technology industry.
A new era at SharkPages had begun. It was time to hire paid
moderators. I worked the phones and brought in two candidates for an
onsite.
Maurice had studied linguistics at a XY-axis Aligned area university,
and Marcy had studied environmental science at a Palo Alto area
university.
They reminded me of Erasmus, so I hired them on the spot too.
We also hired a pre-med who had recently graduated from a Virginia and
Maryland area university, and the three of them solved moderation
within the current iteration of SharkPages.
I wrote on the dry erase board, "The current iteration is the only
iteration that matters," and life was good.
My guys from San Francisco wanted in, but we didn't have anything for
them to do.
We had gamified the invitation process in order to slow growth down.
I wanted slow, high quality growth, and that’s what I got.
I made time to play golf a couple times a week with my new social
circle.
The venture capitalists fell in love with me and became my guys in
Silicon Valley. None of them made moves. They were hilarious. I was
hilarious.
I had slayed vice within my bubble within the bubble, and then I
walked back the way I had come and got the VCs for free.
Pierre created a page sooner than I thought he would.
He put "star alignment" in his hot girl things section.
I thought about flagging this as an inappropriate use of the app, but
I demurred.
This was war. He was making the aggressive move. He was not being
helpful.
I wanted to make him suffer. I created a new internal piece for
flagging "aggressive but not inappropriate" use of the app, and then I
tweaked the parameters of the site to punish people who had been
flagged for being Aggressive But Not Inappropriate within the kingdom.
I came up with five other aggressive behaviors that people like Pierre
might try next.
I asked five of my fellow low key creatives from LA to perform these
behaviors on the site so that I could test the new piece.
I did not want Pierre to be the first user flagged for being
Aggressive But Not Inappropriate.
He became the 6th user flagged for being Aggressive But Not
Inappropriate.
He was not special.
The Aggressive But Not Inappropriate police in LA were forced to
suffer just like Pierre suffered, but they were compensated for their
work. We gave them things that were pre-paid from time to time.
The piece we built for tracking Aggressive But Not Inappropriate
activity required the moderator to specify a reason why the behavior
was aggressive.
The reason I gave for Pierre was, "Using abstract language to
subversively represent the identities of many other women in the
answer to a question."
We had created an internal tickertape of stories associated with
flagging operations.
Chris internal high fived my reason at Pierre, but moderation did not.
They had become a unit.
I celebrated the defeat of Pierre by working the VIP lounges in Vegas.
It was there that I met an up and coming magician and fellow cat
computer user named Sally.
She tried to recruit me to join her show in Vegas. I played along
with her aggressive recruitment process, and she help me to be hot
girl for modesty all the way in the VIP lounge.
All the guys were swooning for me. For us.
We stayed up all night and conspired to bring her onboard at
SharkPages.
Her best friend Tammy wanted in too, but I slayed her as soon as we
left the club.
Sally and I kept on pretending to stab each other with daggers on the
way back to my suite.
She had game. I wanted to learn her game.
I thought her title could be Ocean Ops Guy, but she demurred.
She countered with a litany of truly awful alternatives.
We stared each other down for about ten minutes.
She offered to settle for Pogo Stick Master, and I accepted.
She took over product and data so that I could focus on being a
rockstar.
I had become a rockstar, but I had to dig my nail into my finger in
order to stay cool around Sally.
She was really good at pushing my buttons.
That's why I had hired her.
Our numbers were strong, but we were running out of cash, and the
venture capitalists had been planning for months to circle us like
sharks without ever saying the words, "circle us like sharks."
Sally solved the problem by infiltrating their scene and gathering
data.
She got into biking. She took a painting class, and she made a video
of a car driving off a cliff.
I told her it was over the top and going too far to film the video,
but she insisted that was the point.
One by one, they invited me to their offices and pitched me on letting
them lead our Series A.
A couple of us made a deal.
We got a new board member named Lester Levenworth who owned an empire
of car dealerships.
Everybody hated him.
I thought he was hot.
George came in last, and I collected his money in person.
We met at a bar Scotland and drank heavily without hooking up. We
pretended to be school teachers who cursed like sailors at the bar,
and if George brought a security detail, I never saw them.
"George, you should start a band!"
"I couldn’t possibly. There’s far too much seepage in the dam."
"The dam’s been in shambles since it was built. Start a band, will
you?"
"It’s a serious matter. I left dynamite in all the towers. I need to
keep making the rounds."
"George, where is your head right now?"
"The retention pools are faltering. There’s nowhere to keep the
excess capacity."
"Who are are you, George? What do you think about inside your head?"
"The’s going to be a lot of action when the financing for the dam
rolls over!"
"That’s it? Just that?"
"And that’s just one dam! The are many dams to scale. Some dams are
even scaled by goats, and the goats know things. The goats are in on
the hustle, Suzy. Don’t forget to watch the goats!"
"What do the goats know?"
"I never found the pattern, but that doesn’t mean it’s not there. I
just haven’t found it yet. I like to look for patterns."
"Does my facial injury create patterns."
"I don’t think goats don’t care about facial injuries. How did we get 
on this topic again?"
"Technical malfunctions?"
"Oh the dams. There’s many ways to blow up a dam, but I don’t know
why you would. You just want everyone to think the dam might explode.
Why is that Suzy? Why?"
"So they’ll feel good about paying higher insurance premiums."
"That’s my girl from Palo Alto! Bartender, can we get another round?"
He just kept going on and on about topics like that until I relented
and gave him data about myself. It was all a joke to him, but we
didn’t have sex. He wasn’t interrogating me, either.
My multi-faceted relationship with George was progressing nicely.
We had closed a seven figure round of funding at an eight figure
valuation.
It was the summer of 1998, and the he press had a temper tantrum.
Some people said we were not a real company. They said I was selling
sex without paying for security. They said I was trying to start a
communist revolution.
In other words, they fell in love with us.
I had shed my cocoon of super villainy and blossomed into the darling
of Silicon Valley.
I was given a platform to tell tall tales about how we were playing
the long game to invent strong AI, and I used it.
I was quoted as saying, "We have all the data, and we have all the
angles that will allow us to get more and more."
I took the team to a retreat center in Big Basin and floated the idea
of moving to the east bay.
I had found a warehouse space near a marina that was associated with
an east bay area university.
Chris, Sally, and moderation didn't mind moving.
We began a new era, and some people had to commute.
My first order of business in the new era was to recruit a CTO. I had
been pinning everyone down as CEO and master of coding. I was forcing
everyone to learn how to code, but we were ready to start acting like 
a real company.
In previous eras, companies like us would have recruited a VP of
Engineering, but I insisted that we needed a CTO. I wanted the master
of coding to be a fellow hustler, not a worker bee.
My VCs introduced me to an eclectic billionaire who was camping out in
the Marina district of San Francisco.
He was running a low key hedge fund, and his fund was repping three
world class engineers.
I wanted them. I wanted all of them.
I liked him. We staged dance battles with each other during our
meetings.
Our dance battles caused other people in the room to yawn
uncontrollably.
We met in a glass fishbowl meeting room, and I’m sure he was
estimating the number of people who yawned while passing by.
We must have generated one of the highest yawn rates he’d ever seen.
If the people in the office knew about the yawning heuristic, they
never showed it, and my west coast billionaire and I never gave anyone
a clue.
I convinced him that his lifestyle would improve immeasurably if he
reframed his fund around human driven pattern matching and gave me his
engineers.
"You’re biased towards giving advice that involves letting go our
engineering team," he pontificated.
"My bias is healthy, and you’re biased towards ignoring the
healthiness of my bias."
"Ok," he said, pretending to be an authority figure.
"In twenty years, I’m sure all the top candidates for President of the
USA will be like human chess players who are just making moves that a
computer tells them to make, but we have at least twenty more years
where an individual human brain can process the top level frame more
accurately than a computer model."
"What about human computer synthesis? That was dominant in chess well
before the era of independent machine play."
"Down we go, into the deep blue yonder!" I burst out into song. I
even played the air piano to accompany myself. I played the air piano
part correctly.
The yawn rate in the office increased. Nobody had an incentive to
acknowledge that I had burst out into song in the fish bowl.
He laughed and pulled out one of the zines I had made when I was the
lead singer of Air Cover, back in the day. He tossed it onto the
table between us, but I didn’t stop singing immediately. I made a
tasteful edit and exited stage left, without buying back my zine from
him.
Sally made me fall over laughing at the bar afterwards by doing an
impression of how he must have been reacting internally.
She made a scene at the bar shouting, "What? What? What what? What
what?! What what what??!"
The engineer in question were cool with working for me, and my west
coast billionaire became our fourth board member.
Our new CTO and lead engineer was named Matt. He dreamed in code, and
I had to negotiate with him every morning to tell me about his dreams.
The other two engineers who joined SharkPages with Matt acted like
they were renting their time to the company, but they knew how to code
and get stuff done.
As the spring of '99 gave way to summer, I became concerned that I
might lose the war against the dragon that was obsessed with framing
me as a man.
My boyfriend was a poster that sat above the door to my low slung east
bay apartment.
I had preempted my engineers by optimizing on repping money even less
than they did.
My apartment was just a place to store my wardrobe and take a nap from
time to time. It was close to the office.
I went to some fancy parties with entertainers, politicians, athletes,
and other business leaders, but I didn’t want to co-brand with any of
them.
My facial injury would make it look like I was anxious in all the
photo ops, and then they would get credit for playing it cool. They
would get credit for accommodating me even though they were doing
nothing other than standing in the frame and showing off how much more 
symmetrical their face was than mine.
Serious journalists would then imply that I was anxious because I was
an unlucky girl who didn’t have a symmetrical face. They would imply
I was worried what other people thought, and they would suggest that
maybe I just needed to have a little more self-confidence.
If I said anything that contradicted their bogus narratives about my
life, they would double down and punish me by completely ignoring the
hard work and excellence I had brought to the table in order to create
SharkPages.
They would leap at the opportunity to implicitly give my boyfriend
most of the credit for everything I had done so far.
And besides, even without my facial injury, I probably wouldn’t have
gotten excited about dating any of my peers in tech. The
conversations we had were way too constrained by reality.
“Hey Suzy, we just got a bump in our monthly user retention! How’s
your numbers?”
“Our numbers are good. What caused the bump?”
“We don’t know! I was hoping you might have seen the same effect.”
“What tools do you use to analyze your data?”
“MapTab Mixer Pro plus a couple of backend services. We made a custom
dashboard. You?”
“Yeah, we evaluated MT, but it just wasn’t sexy enough.”
“Oh, uh, well, that’s wasn’t, uh, huh.”
“We ended up adding layers to our dashboard using the Cables
Framework.”
“That’s bad ass. Who thought of that?”
“Our CTO. Can I tell him you said he’s a bad ass?”
“I don’t know. I haven’t met him. Matt’s his name?”
“Yup!”
I solved the problem by taking up windsurfing at a university
affiliated sailing club near our office.
I got on a dating site, and I developed an algorithm for finding hot 
graduate students in the area who knew how to windsurf and then make
love to me at boutique hotels in the college town nearby.
I got it down to a science, and I was happy. I was using leverage
without burning fuel, and I felt curiously feminine.
We were seeing steady growth. People were expressing themselves on
our site. We were helping our users advance in all aspects of their
lives.
We had added a fliers feature in late 1998. It was generating some
decent revenue.
Not enough to cover our burn rate, but enough to keep the dream alive
that SharkPages might become a real company someday.
I kept telling people that, yes, there was a bubble, but our user base
was high quality. I honestly believed we would survive the coming
correction and then kill it in the new millennium.
I egged myself on by telling myself that SharkPages was a girl living
in sin with her users today, but she would become their wife tomorrow
and get half.
I set an intention to keep that idea to myself. Sally appeared to
feel the same way, and she kept it to herself too.
Sally brought in a Chad type named Cedrick to run recruiting. He ran
a low key receiving line in Silicon Valley and we expanded
engineering, ops, moderation, and Sally's machine.
Sally was promoted to be VP of Product and her people were given the
titles like lead designer, product lead, and head of developer
relations.
Sally had wanted to hire three heads of developer relations. I
negotiated her down to two and convinced her to low ball them on their
offers.
We had argued about whether we needed a developer relations team at
all.
We didn't have a developer platform.
I said this was her way of pressuring me to build a party planning
platform and then say party planning had been my internal frame all
along.
She retorted that we would eventually need to build a development
platform like the dog food box companies had built.
She said it was never too soon to start planting seeds.
In the end, we conspired to blame the existence of developer relations
on Cedrick.
That was our pact.
One of the heads of developer relations that Sally hired was an
extremely compressed nerd named Fred. She claimed she had met him
randomly while surfing.
He was painfully awkward, but he was a real life computer wizard. He
had just turned eighteen, and he had grown up near me in San
Francisco.
Sally tried to prevent me from interviewing him, but I insisted. He
framed the effect of my facial injury as a raging desire to make a
billion dollars, and I decided he might not be so bad after all.
Sally’s other head of developer relations was a charmer named Phil.
Phil was normal and Fred was not. I got the joke.
On most days, Sally would either channel Phil or Fred, and she would
not tell me why.
I would respond by treating Cedrick like he was whoever Sally was
channeling.
If Cedrick balked, I would imply that I was just reacting to Sally's
energy.
If Cedrick took up the matter with Sally, she would respond with a
combination of sarcasm and glib confidence.
Sally and I agreed at lunch that channeling was a serious version of
imitating someone.
Channeling implied a redirection of responsibility for outcomes.
For example, if a CEO channels Eve from the Garden of Eden and then
something bad happens, blame for the bad outcome would be assigned to
the CEO.
We also agreed that tracking was a weaponized alternative to
channeling because it had a bi-directional quality.
Tracking meant that the CEO might be channeling Eve, but all the
people in the world who had been inspired by Eve might also be
channeling the CEO.
The ambiguity gave everyone plausible deniability and made it
impossible to assign blame.
Tracking and channeling were just two of the many methods that we used
to keep everyone properly compressed, and our employees eventually
learned that resistance was counter productive. We were helping them
out.
Sally said she was arbitraging the market by hiring Fred for such a
low salary and equity package.
I expressed concern.
She said Fred wasn't doing anything I hadn't done earlier in my
career.
I told her point blank, "I’m demurring," and then I demurred.
The closest Sally and I ever came to blows was when she hypnotized the
director of purchasing for a big box retailer and tried to bring him
on at the executive level.
She said he could turbo charge growth of our flier platform and take
care of the IPO.
I liked him, but I decided I wasn't ready to manage someone like him.
I told the board I was being merciful by keeping him out.
One of the board members challenged me.
I listened to his words while imagining myself throwing a high heel
across the room.
I imagined that I had drained it with a clank into the trash can. I
had been practicing this move for years.
I swiveled towards my challenger, and I imagined what it would feel
like to let him know that the other one would be going in someone's
eye sooner or later if this matter were allowed to become political.
I imagined all of that, and then I said, "Thank you for the feedback."
My muscles were soft, and I didn't use dance club moves to acknowledge
his existence.
I made him feel like he wasn't in the room even though I was looking
right at him.
I was putting him on notice that if they pushed me out, the pain he
was feeling would get worse.
I couldn't take all of them, but I could take him, so I made the
aggressive move.
The boardroom fell silent for a few seconds, and then I turned on my
show person character and shared juicy gossip with them about the
Silicon Valley nerd party scene.
The board backed me. I kept the big box retailier out of our story,
and then I hustled him on the golf course to help us recruit someone
from his company to run HR.
I set an intention to be very nice to HR. I stumbled upon a theory
that warfare could be avoided by doing inverse meditation in which I
forced myself to develop beliefs that weren’t true.
I decided this was a safe programming practice because I was was a
battle tested computer engineer.
I knew what was safe to force myself to believe and what was not.
For example, I forced myself to believe that all my boyfriends had a
second apartment in Palo Alto that they were refusing to tell me
about.
I was able to actually believe that about the guys I was dating even
if there was no evidence to support the belief.
My brain went pro at finding potential evidence, and I enjoyed the
feeling immensely.
The tension in my mind over whether or not my guy was going to tell me
about his secret apartment in Palo Alto became my drug.
My false beliefs about the guys I was dating became a sufficient cover
story for havoc that the effect of my facial injury was creating in
the office.
Sally even repped my general solution at the company ski trip.
She was like, "Suzy has false beliefs about the guys she is dating."
All I had to do was demure.
Sally had set me free to fall in love with her and with America all
over again.
Meanwhile, George was starting to hustle me about the IPO. It was the 
first time I'd ever seen him hustle directly instead of hiring someone
soft and sweet like me to hustle for him.
I was positive that George was hiring people with large dogs to pass
me on the side walk on my way to work. I became paranoid and started
counting the number of people I passed who had dogs. I memorized the
number of people with dogs and the average size of the dogs and
plotted the points in a notebook I kept at home.
George was hounding me about the IPO.
I relented and began the IPO process, and the number of people I
passed who had large dogs went down gradually.
After much spirited debate on and off the pier, Sally and I agreed
that working in fashion was the only fate we could imagine that was
more boring than following through on the IPO process.
This became our new pact, and we dismantled the previous pact in order
to avoid getting made as hustlers by HR.
I told Sally to help Cedrick recruit more engineers with central
banking experience.
A new era of storytelling had begun, so she took him on a field trip
to San Diego, and they stayed in the same hotel room in order to save
money for the company.
They returned like conquering heroes with three pre-qualified
engineers who had worked for the government, and all of them happened
to be female. We hustled them, they hustled us, and a deal was made.
My guys from SF still wanted in.
I'd been giving them the runaround.
I didn't want Cedrick to figure out my system, so I told him I wanted
to try doing his job for a couple weeks.
I sent him back to SoCal, alone this time, on a mission to gather data
about how hot girls were using our site.
He tried to reframe his mission to be about hobnobbing with
celebrities, but I insisted that he focus on talking to hot girls.
Our company was edgy like that.
I framed my guys from San Francisco who had banking experience as
MBAs, and then I worked with HR to codify our rigorous hiring
standards into a guidelines document.
Sally and I spent the night in Stinson beach and smoked a joint to
celebrate our new status as a real company.
I told the new engineers with banking experience who would be
reporting to Sally that their job was to pretend they had MBAs.
I wanted them to go to events that were full of people with MBAs and
try to fit in without ever saying where they had gone to B school.
Sally wanted to call them growth engineers, but Matt went to war and
said his brain would turn to mush if anyone reporting to Sally was
framed as an engineer.
We decided to call them sales lead managers, instead.
Sally had successfully framed Phil as the virtual office manager of
her machine.
He also helped her gather data at events.
Sally said he was, "watching the room for SharkPages," and I told her
she had become a nerd.
Fred found a desk in the corner, with his back to a wall, and he
worked obsessively on organizing Sally's data.
I had tried to keep all my 300 dimensional models secret from Sally,
but she eventually got the data about my system.
She worked with Fred to reverse engineer my system for personal
excellence.
Fred knew how to program, so Sally had him build a platform for
creating 300 dimensional models.
One application on Fred's platform kept track of Sally's wardrobe.
Another application was for keeping track of Sally's rolodex.
Fred did a project that involved finding the optimal pair of
sunglasses for Sally to wear while meeting with each person in her
rolodex.
Sally thought she could compress me by telling Fred it was her idea to
create a platform for 300 dimensional models, so I organized a coding
party where everyone who could code was encouraged to work on a
personal project.
I used the private code base that I’d been accumulating for years to
turbo charge my coding productivity during the party.
I got in the zone and reverse engineered everything Fred had built
within a single evening. Fred had used a programming language that
paired well with sea weed plus tea, so I used a programming language
that paired well with coffee.
In the morning, I had a meeting with Sally and asked if she could have
Fred take over my coding party project for personal excellence. Sally
and I agreed that my project should be maintained as a separate code
base, and it was in this way that we kept Fred properly compressed.
Fred stopped giving me full body scans every time I wore a short dress
to the office, and his social confidence improved.
I was summoned to a one-on-one meeting in Seattle with Vextor Vanna,
the enigmatic founder of a dog food box company, so I decided to blow
Fred up and frame it as a recruiting trip.
Fred was dispatched to give a talk about our growing developer
platform for personal excellence at a Seattle area university, and I
sparred with Vextor in his lair.
Fred and I had a nice dinner afterwards.
I couldn't figure out why Vextor had summoned me.
We mulled over that for a while.
I thought about explaining the effect of my facial injury to Fred, but
I was pretty sure neither Vextor nor Sally understood it.
Fred knew I wasn’t saying everything I believed about my facial
injury, but arming them with the details would have been like opening
Pandora's box.
I was already getting everyone with hot girl for modesty, so I
demurred and talked with Fred about the future of artificial
intelligence research for the rest of the meal.
Fred had been the hardest guy to get. He seemed like a male version
of me.
That's probably why Sally had made it her business to hire him, but I
had finally gotten him too.
I fed Fred's delusion that I was obsessed with being a billionaire,
and then I framed him as Vextor.
I mused that the two biggest decisions I had made at SharkPages thus
far had been to withhold the data about my facial injury from Fred and
to keep the head of purchasing for the big box retailer out.
I made a note to revisit this idea in two years.
I was starting to get serious about playing the long game to build
strong AI.
Fred began tracking Vector when we returned to the office, and Sally
bought me a bottle of scotch.
She told me I had achieved master framer status.
I demurred, and she demurred back.
It was a hot girl thing.
I had always been a little framer in training.
I knew the dot com bubble was going to deflate, but I wasn't sure how
bad it would get.
I had helped create it, but there was no easy way out for CEOs in my
position.
I had learned a lot while building SharkPages.
In 1995, if I had known how to conspire with BFFs like Sally while
playing hot girl for modesty, I probably would have moved to Santa
Cruz.
I could have worked at a surf shop and then become the office manager
for a small business.
I might have married an engineer like Fred and turned him into a good
man.
I could have helped him do his job at night so that he could spend all
day thinking of reasons why he wanted to keep having sex with me.
People would have asked me why I didn't want to become a software
engineer in my own right, and I could have demurred.
I could have taken the secret about the effect of my facial injury to
my grave with ease, style, and discretion.
In reality, I had to build SharkPages in order to learn how to live
modestly.
I had had to be over the top and go to far in order to survive, and by
the time I realized what was what and who was who, my car had sailed
over the ledge and was bound to land hard in the ocean.
I had packed a parachute, but the people sitting the backseat, well, I
could frame their situation as an extra credit homework problem for
George to ponder in his spare time.
That’s what I told myself while floating down to the beach and then
walking away like nothing had happened.
I had hit the ground hard. I had sprained my wrist and gotten a big
cut on my knee, but I told the doctor it had been a cycling accident.
I told him I was a tough girl, and he acted like I was cool and
impressive.
I didn’t even fill the prescription for pain killers that had given
me.
With those considerations in mind, I decided that SharkPages needed to
get into the party planning business.
I systematically reinvented myself as a party animal while the rest of
the company held itself constant.
I secretly framed them as frogs in a pot of water that would
eventually boil over.
I mused that they were gradually converging upon framing me as Goliath
but that they would probably never think about it consciously.
We launched a party planning platform just in time for spring break in
the year 2000, and our target audience was college students.
Everyone in the know knew everyone knew everyone was play acting all
the way, so I started repping the phrase, "Party like it's 1999" with
style and discretion.
Sally expressed concern nonstop about the party platform, but she
never took any decisive action to prevent me from doing it.
George kept emailing me detailed, invasive questions about how the IPO
process was coming along, and I answered them while wearing red hot
pants in the office along with matching leopard print stilettos that
looked great around my feet whenever I set them down on top of my
desk.
Our party planning platform gained currency with the cool guys and the
hot girls on the beach.
We helped keep it clean. We helped keep it classy, and we helped
George W. Bush win the Republican primary without even trying.
The Nasdaq peaked around the time our platform came out.
My George in London gave birth to a virtual cow, and I sent him a
collection of beautiful hand painted World War II style tanks that
came with instructions about how to lay them out in a way that would
be pleasing to Russian royalty.
Everyone around us was panicking, but the size and growth rate of our
user base was setting new records each week.
We represented strength and integrity when serious people needed
something positive to talk about, and our IPO happened.
We survived the first culling.
George sent me a lovely painting he had commissioned of me in a suit
of armor, with my helmet in one hand and my sword in the other, along
with a motorized cover so that I could hang it in my office and raise
the cover using a remote control whenever I wanted use leverage while
sparring with Sally in the command and control center of SharkPages.
Sally and I had a ball playing both sides of the US Presidential
election in 2000.
We made lots of frenemies that would be more useful to me in my future
life than I ever could have imagined at the time, and life was good.
With the possible exception of our board meetings, Sally and I could
always control the dominant narrative within Silicon Valley nerd
festivals.
We knew political events were different, but we didn't know the
details.
We had the extraordinary luxury of learning some of the details the
easy way. They went easy on us.
We were kindly put on notice that some of these people were all the
way in with the military, and we were not.
In order to get up off the floor and stand in the center rooms, Sally
and I conspired with Matt to tell tall tales about how we could change
the face of education as we know it by helping out the College Board.
They were the people who run the SAT exams and the Advance Placement
program, and we wanted to do what we could to help them add leverage
to a good idea.
We threw another coding party at SharkPages and invited everyone to 
add input to our master plan for building a software service that
could solve SAT math problems.
Sally and her machine grandstanded at the coding party and helped make
it into a thing.
A crowd showed up outside the office.
Sally created a poster board sign that said, "Toss resume's here."
Fred and Phil figured out how to put the sign over the window, and
people started tossing in resumes.
Most people made paper airplanes on tossed them through the window.
Someone threw a bottle of water, but we countered with a makeshift
barrier inside the window.
We let a few more resumes flow in, and then we shut the window.
That fall, we got a giant booth at a big tech conference in Las Vegas
and pitched the narrative that we were going to build strong AI by
running computer programming contests.
We released an app where users could upload images of SAT math
problems.
Our software converted the images into data, and we released an
application programming interface (abb. API).
We announced a contest that would culminate during spring break.
We made arrangements to throw a party in London and make rockstars out
of the winners.
I wanted to compress George by making it a thing for intellectuals to
invade his neighborhood every year during spring break.
The party was called, "SP British Invasion."
Of course it was.
We made a plan to run an additional contest that would culminate in
Tokyo in two years.
Sally wanted to call that event, "SP vs. the Big Banks," but I felt
strongly we'd need to call it something else in order to make it work.
Either way, SharkPages almost started to really do it on the world
stage in 2001.
Sally and I had a huge fight about whether to let people under
eighteen compete in the contest.
The party was going to be eighteen and up, but I insisted that the
contest would be a lot more serious if we let all the aspiring evil
geniuses over the age of thirteen showcase their skills.
Sally agreed to be deferential to my idea, but she clarified that she
was not submitting.
Thankfully, the winners were not under age. Sally told me she felt
relieved, and I thanked God for the excellence of higher education in
America and beyond.
The energy in the stock market was not good, but we had put the world
on notice that we were playing the long game. We were representing
the intention to care for children, and we were throwing the best
parties in town for the adults.
Summer 2001 started out swimmingly for us, but the dam of lies we had
helped build gradually broke.
Simulated warfare was occurring in the markets.
Professional hackers who were in it for the money blindsided us over
and over again.
User data was compromised, and we got scrutinized.
The press started framing me as one of the evil geniuses who had
designed the master plan to inflate a bubble, get paid first, and then
let everyone else to bleed out on the field.
Our engineers started leaving.
We had never been profitable. The word on the street was that the
quality of our users had fallen off a cliff.
We weren't cool anymore, and rumors that we might also be dirty were
spreading.
I felt like I was in LA all over again. I wondered if we had been
doomed from the beginning to become an aggregator for vice on the
Internet. Was it my style that had doomed us, or was it the effect of
my facial injury?
By the summer of 2002, SharkPages was dead in the water. I was
writing journal entries about the art of surviving unconditional
defeat. I told Sally she should get out clean and let me go down with 
the ship, and she was happy to help with that. A lot of people
followed her. We were done.
Everyone wanted something from me. There was nobody who wanted to
give more than they got. My level of suffering in the summer of 2002
went from 1 in June to 10 in August.
We shut the company down, and I gradually stopped replying to emails
about SharkPages.
After the dust settled, I decided to pay George a visit. I put on a
long floral dress and showed up at his place unannounced. He was in
his bathrobe eating breakfast.
I sat down across the table and drank a glass of ice water. I was
glad that he didn't offer me any food.
"Will you lock me in a dungeon for five years?"
"No."
"I want you to force me to read all the AI research as literature.
Punish me during the week if I don't read, and then punish my anyways
on the weekends and record everything I say. This is how we'll win
the race to build strong AI."
"No."
"Why not?"
"You're asking me to sign a contract to give you all my money in five
years."
Where was the passion? Where was the empathy for the pain that I must
be in right now?
"What if you keep me in the dungeon until I invent strong AI? Once
I've read all the literature, I want you to force me to write code
during the week and continue punishing me anyway on the weekends."
"If you can bring Marshall and Pierre to the table, I'll do it."
His lack of emotional reaction to my serious suggestion hit me like a
load of bricks.
My heart stopped. I punched my chest to try to make it start again.
I leaned forward and started hyperventilating.
I thought to myself, "You're having a panic attack! You're having a 
panic attack!"
George matter-a-factly got up from his chair and walked around behind
me. He pulled my shoulders into a straight and upright position and
then he started tapping out a rhythm.
"Let's go Suzy. Breathe. Let's go Suzy. Breathe."
He squeezed my shoulders every time he said the word "Breathe," and I
got turned on.
I regained my composure, but now I wanted to have sex. I emerged from
my chair and used witchcraft to trick him into taking me in his arms
and lead me to the bedroom.
We got started and I began crying. George tried to make me stop
crying by kissing me, so I screamed.
He pinned my arms down and kept kissing me, so I let my body go limp.
George stepped up the intensity and I enjoyed it immensely.
I felt like a damsel in distress.
When we finished, I acted like a brat for a few minutes and then I
punched George in the shoulder and got up to leave.
He sat up and invited me to come back to bed.
We stared at each other for a while, and then I came back to bed and
we cuddled.
After an hour of silent cuddling, George got up and said he was going
to read a book in his study.
I followed him and sat in his reading chair with him while he read.
I spent half my brain cycles peering at what he was reading and half
my brain cycles acting like a brat.
George was happy to help me do this.
We made lunch together. I got turned on by the fact that George ate
the same food every day and had never hired a chef.
He egged me on by explaining that he’d had the same box of food
delivered to his house every day for a thousand years, and then we
made love again on the counter top in a way that involved all of the
food in George's refrigerator.
After we finished up, George said he needed to take a shower and make
some calls.
I cleaned the kitchen and wrote a journal entry in the dining room.
I got out my laptop and started a fresh coding project.
I wanted to make a robot that imitated me.
I decided to call her chatbot. People could send her an email and she
would reply just like I would reply.
Her name was chatbot.
Later that afternoon, I invaded George's study and asked for a key to
the house. George gave me a key and continued reading. I went to the
grocery store and bought a bunch of pre-made gourmet food for dinner.
I spent the next week following George's routine.
We read together in George's reading chair, and his dining room became
my office.
We ate meals together and had sex before and after sleeping together
at night.
We talked:
"George, who are you?"
Long pause.
"All of my answers contradict themselves. I just think you’re very
sexy."
“Let’s take a vacation!”
“Where?”
“Pack your bags, we’re going to the airport.”
“No bags. We go now, right now.”
“Yay!”
George and I flew halfway around the world. We bought new clothes and
pretended to be British spies. We frolicked in our private ocean
front infiniti pool, and George helped me add features to chatbot.
He gave me every idea he’d ever had about artificial intelligence for 
free. He said he had no way to use the information, and it would go
up in value if I put the information to work. We were like strange
machines in love.
We returned to London two weeks later. I continued to make progress
on chatbot, but I didn't have any epiphanies.
I couldn't make the breakthrough I was hoping to make, so I dug in for
total machine war to the bitter end.
After another week of following George's routine, he asked me mattera-factly
at breakfast if I would marry him.
I made strong eye contact with him and he responded by getting down on
his knees and producing a stunning diamond ring.
My heart skipped a beat.
I kept staring into his eyes, and I said, "No."
I cried.
George invaded my chair and comforted me. We kissed and then I packed
up my belongs. I gave George back his house key, and I checked into a
hotel.
__Ch4: Political Poker__
I had started a total machine war with my laptop computer that paired
well with cats.
I was in a race with myself to build strong AI.
I had to program chatbot.
I wanted to make her smart, like me, so she could surpass me in every
way.
I thought about how I could play hot girl for modesty indefinitely.
I could marry a guy like George, but I became concerned that I had
become part of the problem.
The problem that had caused the dot com bust.
The simulated warfare in the financial markets.
The toxic mix of leverage for leverage's sake.
Hot girl things had been a form of leverage too.
I wanted to be part of the solution, so I took a ferry to Ireland and
rode a bus to the mansion that Sir Walter Raleigh had received as
compensation for helping to crushing an Irish tenant rebellion.
Was this were it had all started? The fetish for growth and leverage?
The capital of North Carolina is named after Raleigh, and I was
vaguely aware that he had been a womanizer.
I probably would have had hot sex with him in secret.
I would have done it to get him in trouble with the queen, and then I
would have enjoyed his suffering.
I wanted to learn more about Raleigh.
I found his old house near an old church by the sea in Ireland.
I got a hotel room nearby and camped.
My aggressive sarcasm was not just acceptable here. It was welcome.
I stopped thinking of the old men as dirty. They were tired, tepid,
and terse.
I read antique books by candlelight. I didn't use my computer for
seven days and seven nights, and then I had an epiphany.
I had always thought England was like Fred, and reading old books
helped confirm my bias.
Fred had been the painfully shy and awkward guy in the corner of my
company's cool warehouse office space in the east bay.
Raleigh flipped the English script by playing the punk. He made
trouble. He invented cigarettes. He hatched plots to spread his
experiment far and wide. He dispatched pirates to raid Spanish
treasure ships. He appeased the Spanish ambassador to England by
insisting that the raiders were colonists.
Raleigh’s antics forced the other Englishman to endure the effect of
my facial injury, and they had to do it as men.
They tried to kill each other with kindness, and demurring was not an
option.
They had to kill or be killed, so they did.
They became anti-social. They crafted weapons. They made plans to 
kill everyone. They used leverage. They became George.
They had gone first.
I decided that the solution to the problems facing humanity was to
turn George into a good man. Not just my George in London, but all
the Georges.
I made a plan to heal all the Georges with love.
I hatched a plot to slow down the march of technological progress and
focus on quality.
We didn't need to stop the engine of growth.
We just needed to grow slow and make a lot of love in the new
millennium.
"Next stop, Paris," I thought to myself.
I simplified my wardrobe, and I got a lift to Paris.
I pretended to be a graduate student. I got Paris, and then I went
shopping.
I became hot girl for love.
I began drawing pictures of ships in my private journal to anchor my
identity.
Hot girl for modesty went dormant, and I headed south.
I wanted to be subversive, but I couldn’t identify any good villains
to vilify in Rome.
The Pope? Probably not a villain. Roman ruins? Not villainous
lately. The roots of the enlightenment? Not the upstream villain
anymore.
The wedding cake was a possibility, but a hot Italian guy seduced me
and convinced me to ride on the back of his motorbike just when I was
about to go rogue and flip the script.
I spent a few weeks going out every night and learning Italian. I
drank wine, I posted hot pics of myself on a photo sharing site, and
then I became a female Sir Walter Raleigh.
I got a ride to Naples and then hiked to the foot of Mt. Vesuvius.
I reminisced about how the two biggest decisions I had made at 
SharkPages had been to keep out the big box retailer and to avoid
sharing the data about my facial injury with Fred.
I believed more strongly than ever that my facial injury was causing
people to develop false beliefs. People were distorting reality in
response to my facial injury.
When people develop false beliefs and start living their lives within
a distorted version of scientific reality, people get hurt.
Reality distortion usually causes emotional pain, and sometimes it
causes physical pain.
Autocrats and reality TV show producers had been in the game of
distorting reality since the beginning of civilization, but then
consensus view of historians has always been that attempts to distort
reality always end badly.
Sometimes it had taken a few hundred years, but reality distortion had
never lasted forever.
In 2003, I decided that reality distortion was like putting dents in
Italian super cars.
Dented Italian super cars were way less sexy than dent-free Italian
super cars, so when dents appeared, they had to be fixed, and fixing
the dents cost money.
My facial injury was causing dents to appear in random Italian super
cars every day of the weak, but I never had to pay the cost.
Hot girl for modesty forced people to assign blame for the dents onto
anyone but me.
In particular, social norms required the witnesses to the crime to
assign blame to someone who was not playing hot girl for modesty as
well as I was.
Playing hot girl for modesty was like competing to be the most
emotionally soft person in the room.
If I got high enough on the leaderboard of emotional softness, nobody
except maybe Pierre could assign blame to me.
In practice, I was always one of the best people at the room at
playing hot girl for modesty.
I got to practice doing it all the time because of my facial injury,
and Pierre had kept my secret safe.
He might have even used meditation to forget my secret.
I couldn't forget my secret because I saw people reacting to my facial
injury during every moment of every conversation.
I was creating a lot of distortion, but other people were carrying the
blame.
This thought made me feel special. I felt like I was Mt. Vesuvius.
I lay down at the feet of the volcano and cuddled with her.
Some people passing by asked if I was ok.
I said "yes," while playing hot girl for modesty, and they demurred.
In other words, they smiled. Their body language softened.
They turned away gently. They turned away sweetly. They went about
their business without saying anything further.
I had seemed normal to them. I had seemed harmless.
I kept cuddling with Mt. Vesuvius.
I wanted to see what would happened if I played hot girl for love
instead of hot girl for modesty in this damsel in distress scene.
"Miss? Hello? Are you ok?"
"Yes."
"I just wanted to be sure you were ok."
"Thank you."
"I'm sorry for bothering you."
"You weren't bothering me."
"I'm sorry, I think we had a misunderstanding. Bye."
"Bye."
They had turned their back to me and walked off abruptly!
They did not demure!
Was this how a guy with my facial injury gets treated?
Was this how guys with my facial injury got treated?
Pierre was the only guy I'd ever had sex with who had a snowball's
chance in hell of playing hot girl for modesty.
I thought about starting a school at the foot of Mt. Vesuvius where I
would teach brave men to play hot girl for modesty, but then a voice
in my head said, "No, Suzy. That would be a waste of your time."
I agreed with the voice.
I was getting bored of thinking so hard in this beautiful foreign land
that was full of hot Italian men, but I needed closure.
I got out my soft pink journal and girly ball point pen.
It was the softest pink journal I had found to date, and my pen was
neon pastel green.
I wrote about how the ashes of Mt. Vesuvius had been like a distortion
field.
Everything touched by the ashes had been forced to change.
The ashes had even reached the sea.
I wrote that I was lucky the ashes of the distortion field associated
with my facial injury had not yet reached the sea.
I was going deep, but I looked hot. I looked like a hot girl who
wanted war!
At that moment, a hot guy asked me what I was writing about.
I looked up and told a lie.
I told a big lie.
I told him I was writing about, "Making love in the ocean."
"I would be happy to help you out with that," he said, in perfect
English.
We made passionate love in the ocean.
Some tourists saw us, but I demurred.
I felt obscenely feminine, and my body became one with Mt. Vesuvius.
Over the next couple days, I developed a fetish for looking down at 
the sea, just like my new soul mate Mt. Vesuvius does.
I made my way to Greece and invaded the temple of Poseidon.
I found her waiting for me there. She was perched like a bird on a
hill top by the sea.
It was there that I met Demetrius.
He was holding a tennis racket.
I tried to ignore him and share the space, but he kept twirling his
tennis racket in a way that made me want to kill someone. Not him,
but someone.
I asked him to stop.
He came alive and started giving me data.
He showed me the place where Lord Byron had carved his name into the
temple.
Of course he did.
We stared at the sea for a while and then he proclaimed, "Come to the
mountains with me, Suzy. I'm going to be planting olive trees for a
very wealthy man. Let's go together."
"Thanks, but no thanks. I've been working with my hands in the mud my
whole life."
"But you haven't done it here. You came here to find something new.
Let's find it together."
Charmer, I thought. Where is the non-normal version of you? What
temple is he haunting today?
"Apollo," said Demetrius matter-a-factly.
"Stop reading my mind."
"Why do you think I'm reading your mind?"
"Nevermind."
"Tell me. I want to know."
I gave him the data in return for his tennis racket.
I wanted to swing it around like a sword.
I wanted to rattle it like a saber while I gave him the data.
He puffed up like a blowfish, and then I threw his tennis racket
towards the ocean.
He pounced like a cat and caught the racket just as it was leaving my
hand, and then we went back to his van and made love.
Demetrius's olive tree farm was hot.
We became part of a family that loved to eat and drink.
Demetrius had been a professional tennis player. He had currency
there.
Everyone knew he had come here to figure out what he was going to do
with the rest of his life, but nobody said it.
Sally would have found a way to say it, but I couldn't be Sally.
The tired, tepid, and terse old men gave me a hard time because I had
never learned to cook.
I told them, "I'm Mother Earth. I have all the chefs over a barrel,"
but they did not laugh.
Technically speaking, they approached me with deference, and I enjoyed
it immensely. I fell in love with men and with life all over again.
Demetrius confessed that he had a gambling problem, so I took him to
Monte Carlo. I insisted on paying for everything. I made him submit.
The hoteliers knew I was up to something devious, but I knew their
secret.
We recreated the scene where I had swallowed Suzy's conjecture with
red wine.
We got it on camera, and I fulfilled my lifelong fantasy of becoming
porn star.
I kept just one copy of the tape in my suitcase. I loved that he gave
me the only tape. It made me feel sexy. It made me feel loved.
We went to see the basilicas of Barcelona. I had been obsessed with
them since college. They had been building them for hundreds of
years. They would be building them for many more years to come, and I
slayed a group of college girls who were trying to dress immodestly a
the temple of our lord and savior Jesus Christ.
We attended a retreat in Lisbon to discuss the concept of slow
economic growth, and I got a little tattoo.
We chartered a sailboat and returned Britain.
I hoped George would send a gunboat to meet us.
Demetrius didn't understand why, but we washed our differences away
with body paint.
We painted each other and then messed it all up in bed.
We celebrated with a party in London.
A lot of people thought Demetrius and I might get married.
In reality, I had recruited him to help me compress George in return
for showing him around Ireland and framing him as a successful real
estate investor.
He and I were just looking to add leverage to a good thing.
We thought we had it all figured out.
George counter attacked by hiring a 25 year old girl next door type
from Colorado springs.
Her name was Katie Chapman, and she pretended to show up late.
She and George had conspired to hustle my party in stealth, but I
busted them.
It hadn’t been a question of if George was hustling at my party. It
had been a question of how.
I met with her for coffee the next day.
She said she needed permission from George to share the data. I told
her George would say no. I told her I would get her data anyway. I
told her resistance was counter productive.
She asked for money, and I said that would like paying for sex.
I said it would be better if I just didn't pay, and then we conspired
to share data.
We became data sluts for love in old Europe and beyond.
George had initially hired Katie to track down and interview Heather.
Heather was working for a payments conglomerate in LA, and nobody had
any idea what that meant.
Katie infiltrated Pierre's fake English castle and determined that he
didn't know either.
Furthermore, George had started seeing a school teacher with a trendy
haircut who wore pencil skirts.
We decided to throw another party.
George decided not to attend at the last moment.
Katie played the violin while I played the piano. The crowd love it,
and we performed a low key ballet as an encore.
We resurrected dance club. All battles would now be fought between
couples. We called it double dancing.
Demetrius finally broke down and said I might be a nerd, but he wasn't
submitting. He was being nice.
So was I. The world had been put on notice that Demetrius had the
opposite bias of Chad.
Demetrius didn't want to admit just how nerdy he wasn't, but his
secret was safe with me.
The properties we bought together in Ireland and southern Europe
tripled in value over the next couple years, and then we sold at the
peak.
It was good for us. It sucked for everyone else, but we got out
clean.
The only catch was that I knew I would eventually have to blame it all
on George. I had been imitating his investment strategy.
That's why Katie and I dug in for trench warfare with George, but we
decided to be chivalrous and provide safe harbor for his girlfriend.
We wanted to compress him, not her.
We were helping her out.
We hosted a series of French enlightenment style salons. Katie opened
the first salon with a mini-talk about her theory that Bill Clinton
had been pretending to be a ghost for his entire political career.
I blindsided her by twisting her theory into an argument that there
had been a pact between the Clintons and the Bushes.
Katie demurred, but our guests enjoyed the fireworks.
We threw five more salons and then placed out from London.
A distortion field had been born, and George was paying alimony.
He wasn't underwriting. He wasn't doing anything he hadn't done
before in his own career, but his neighborhood was now the end point
for all matters that were destined to become political.
Katie and I wanted to bake the 2004 US Presidential election, but we
didn't yet know how.
She took me to parties in DC, and we focused on hustling the most
average guys in the room.
We hustled the virile, virtuous, and vengeful ones who would not have
been standing in the room with us unless they were cooking something
of their own.
We wanted the new data. Not the old data, and we got it.
We got connected with a guy named Arthur Jefferson. He was leading
the exploratory committee for a relatively unknown gravel production
and distribution magnate from Vermont named Michael Lawn.
Lawn had always identified as a Democrat. He wanted to run as a
populist.
He was on the fence about abortion, gun control, and gay marriage.
He didn’t take a strong stance on containing the costs of health care
in America.
Katie came well recommended to him through Arthur's boys from high
school.
He had grown up in Spokane, Washington.
He had heard nothing but terrible stories about how everyone at Const
Academy thought I was the most likely member of the faculty to become
a serial killer.
He wanted to meet us individually. After three weeks of missed
opportunities and awkward misunderstandings, we submitted.
We wanted to get the data.
We agreed to separate meetings with Arthur.
Arthur put his feet on the table with me but not with Katie. Punk.
He wanted me to run his data team. He also wanted Katie to run his
data team.
We both accepted offers to run his data team.
We reported for duty on the same day at his so-hip-it-hurt central
office in Brooklyn.
Katie wore skinny jeans, and I wore a prom dress.
Arthur introduced us as, "Our new director of data."
I started calling up my people. My SharkPages people.
I told some of them I was working on a project in Manhattan and then
immediately hung up the phone.
I was having fun, but Katie had to do a tour of duty. She had to work
the phones and raise money. This is what she had signed up for.
She was hating life, and I was loving life, so I baked her a cake in
order to send my condolences.
The cake became our metaphor. Katie was the first to break the buck
and jam a sticky note with a wish written on it into the cake. Then I
jammed one in. Pretty soon everyone in the office had jammed a few
sticky notes into the cake. Each note contained a secret wish.
Word spread around the office that Arthur was going to eat the cake
and make all of our wishes come true.
Arthur had no intention of eating the cake, but he was starting to
sweat.
Katie solved the problem by bringing an oversized slingshot to the
office later that evening.
We ventured out and fired the cake into a brick wall.
Photos were taken, and the wishes were mopped up with towels and
placed into the dumpster.
I woke up the next morning and wrote the design document for terra
blog.
Our strategy was to get everyone to talk to our chatbot so that we
could gather data from the electorate at scale.
We would drive traffic to chatbot by creating a "terra blogging"
service.
Terra blog invited people to share data in chunks of text that were at
most 160 characters long.
Each chunk of data was called a bomb.
We were recruiting an army of bombers.
Arthur hated the new terminology, but the candidate loved it.
I got Lawn’s attention with a demo of what a real life terra blog
bombing raid would look like.
A bombing raid is what I knew would happen when everyone wanted to
write bombs about the same topic.
We added dog tags and cat replies within bombs so that our users could
tag concepts and other users, respectively.
We made a widget so that each state level campaign website could
display a filtered list all the latest bombs about the Lawn campaign.
We made another widget that allowed people to talk with chatbot.
I got a team of volunteers to monitor ongoing chatbot conversations
and occasionally offer a human response from our end.
I made guidelines so that users would not be able to prove a person
was in the loop. I wanted people to think the Lawn campaign was close
to inventing strong AI.
Lawn announced his campaign in the summer of 2003.
His announcement was low key.
Most journalists thought his candidacy was a joke. Katie did nothing
to discourage them from drawing this conclusion.
We wore provocative outfits. I attended more than one event with her
while pretending to be a dumb hot girl, and people acted like they
genuinely believed we were not serious.
Didn't they know I was a computer science graduate from a Beyond the
Pale area university?
Were these people actually journalists?
Or were they just worker bees for someone else's machine?
We stayed up all night making a decision tree that could decide
whether or not a statement was serious.
We needed to know if we were the predator or the prey. The candidate
was counting on us to give him the correct data. We were the director
of data.
Were people pretending to take us seriously or did they actually take
us seriously?
Our heads started spinning. We had to write out formal definitions of
what it meant to be serious, and our definitions got more complex as
the night wore on.
We had an epiphany around 4am that the definition of seriousness
needed to become a decision tree in her own right. Seriousness became
a female decision tree.
We employed her to evaluate whether or not the person making a
statement was serious.
We made sure that our model thought Katie, myself, Arthur, and
candidate Michael Lawn where all serious people, and then everyone
else was ranked in comparison to us.
The seriousness of a person became an input to our original decision
tree.
A good example of our system was that even if a journalist was deemed
to be "unserious" they could still become temporarily serious if
someone kicked them in the shins.
Surely these jokesters would make serious statements to their bosses
about that, even if nothing they wrote in print was serious!
Our model described a world in which unserious people could make
serious statements and vice versa.
The advantage of making seriousness female was that it gave us
leverage to avoid using gender as a variable in our decision trees.
We only looked at variables like a person’s education level, whether
they had worked for a reputable journalism outfit, whether they had
served in the military, etc.
It’s not for the feint of heart to tell a candidate for President that 
a bunch of people with advanced degrees who had served in the military
and were now staff writers at top newspapers where not taking
themselves or the world seriously, but that’s what the data told us we
needed to do.
We had gotten them with computer science.
Katie and I also purchased shin guards and took turns kicking each
other and then making statements to the candidate about how we had
been assaulted by the director of data and that we wanted him to fire
her.
Arthur became compressed. He declined to wear the shin guards we had
bought for him, but Lawn got the joke and started wearing Arthur’s
shin guards to press events.
More and more people came to believe that we were not serious.
Serious people started to actually believe that, and Lawn's base grew
more quickly than expected.
Independently run state level campaign sites popped up all over the
country, and I had to scramble nonstop trying to get them all
coordinated and in sync.
Unseriousness became a thing, but we didn't put it on a t-shirt. We
wanted people to think we were serious.
We launched chatbot and terra blog with a bang in the fall.
My involvement added fuel to the dumpster fire of journalists claiming
that we were not serious.
They said SharkPages had been a scam and that we had never hired any
real engineers.
The engineers SharkPages had hired didn't even have to demure.
Nobody bothered to interview them.
The press also said our use of military metaphors was uncivil, and I
started receiving death threats.
Lawn was a good old boy antagonizer. He had planned to barnstorm the
country in his prop plane, but security compressed him heavily every
time he put on his flight suit.
Chatbot and terra blog were his release. Our soft engagement stats
were threw the roof.
Our hard numbers got a bump too.
Our poll numbers were hard.
The press was forced to pay attention to us because our hard numbers
could not be faked.
Lawn encouraged me to step up the intensity, so I took a much needed
vacation to Hong Kong. I did it just to create a news story. It cost
a lot of money to do this. We did it just to keep the press well fed
for another 36 hours. We didn't really have a plan.
Lawn increased Katie's monthly fundraising quota. Katie gave me the
evil eye, and I basked in her pain. I walked outside and told the
press that my trip to Hong Kong office was definitely happening.
I told them I was going there to meet with the members of a pop rock
band that had offered to run the communist version of chatbot and
terra blog.
The press had a feeding frenzy, and I got to give a presentation to
Lawn about the bombing raid that occurred on terra blog.
Security insisted that I be confined to the office for my own safety.
They said the actual words, "Chain her to a desk," while I was
standing in front of them.
I escaped and recruited a flashy billionaire in Hong Kong to
grandstand with me on a boat that had been loaned to him by the
founder of a solar powered yacht company that had shipyards in Russia.
We brought a marching band onto the boat, and they played patriotic
songs from all over the world.
Expat journalists followed us around in skiffs and recorded
everything.
I went windsurfing in a designer bathing suit, and the photos went
viral.
They said I was sleeping with billionaires again. They said I was
openly trying to start a communist revolution and that it was time to
start taking me seriously.
We recruited an armada of yachts to follow us to Singapore.
I organized a high stakes poker tournament there.
The press said I was conspiring to raise funds illegally.
They said I was probably recruiting an army of hackers to meddle in 
the election.
The policy wonks said the hacking and breach of user data that had
occurred at SharkPages in the summer of 2001 might have been an inside
job. They said I had probably wanted SharkPages to fail.
The SF Times Journal wrote a long form think piece about how I might
have orchestrated the dot com bust in order to soften up the big
corporations.
They suggested I had been grooming them all along to submit to the
communist revolution.
Pierre was heavily scrutinized, but he slayed his attackers with style
and discretion.
He attended big money fundraisers for the Republican party, and they
were happy to have him on their team.
He had always snubbed them, but now he needed them for security.
Loser.
I started having orgies with hot men who wanted to have sex with me
for free.
I slept with bankers, mostly, but no money was exchanged.
We were just people who had a common interest in making love while
watching the convulsions of the twenty four hour news cycle.
Lawn's numbers kept going up, and the hotels I was staying at
tolerated me. I tipped well. I kept it classy in the street and wild
in the ether.
I was having a lot of items delivered to my boats, and I made a
comment to an expat journalist that delivery men were 10% more likely
to agree to have sex with me if my hand accidentally ran into their
package before I popped the question.
The press went wild again.
There were bombing raids, and the bombing raids were interlocking.
Everyone started diagnosing me with mental health conditions.
They said I might be schizophrenic. Others said I had a special type
of high functioning autism. Most people just thought I was bi-polar.
They said I was bi-polar like it was a fact, but they didn't know what
they were up against.
I'd been stepping around diagnostic categories my whole life. I was a
pro at this. They were out of their league.
More than one intellectual thought leader from a name brand area
university implied that my mental health condition was probably the
reason I had studied computer science in college, and nobody called
that out as sexist.
I could have called them out, but Lawn's base wouldn't have cared.
Most of them were sexist. They thought it was hot that college
professors didn't respect me.
They thought it was hot that I was being framed as a sex object by the
mainstream media.
I dispatched vultures to flood the Internet with fake emails about
affairs between myself and fictional college professors.
They did it for love. The Lawn campaign did not have to pay the
vultures to do this important work for themselves and each other, and
it took the press 36 hours to decide that none of the emails were
real.
The press was out to get me, so I made a hot pink cardboard frame that
looked great around the doors to my hotel rooms.
I used a sharpie to write the most outrageous communist slogans and
calls to arms that I could think of.
I hired male models to carry my war frame in and out of hotels, and I
made sure the press got photos.
The press analyzed my handwriting and cited it as "smoking gun"
evidence that I was mentally ill.
Men and women I had never met came forward to say I had bullied them
with sexual innuendo, and the press began looking into unsolved
murders that I might have committed.
Katie's phone calls were cramping my style, so I started hanging up on
her.
The candidate had to call me himself and convince me to come back to
New York and keep working for him.
The New Hampshire primary was a breeze. We won. The press had a
temper tantrum. We were framed as the essence of everything that had
ever been wrong with America, since the founding. 
I recruited a marching band and they rallied in front the Confederate
flag while I danced in a little black dress and stilettos.
Security had to tackle me and carry me out on a stretcher in order to
get me out of there safely. I enjoyed it immensely.
I asked the most compressed and emotionally hard member of the
security staff if he would have sex with me, and told me to never do
that again.
He told me security was serious. He told me it was time for me to
stop creating security risk.
Lawn called me into his office to make sure I had gotten the message.
I decided to be nice to them, but I didn't submit.
I was starting to figure out how it works.
How it really works.
How it works for men and for women.
I was going deep on the maximization of love, and Lawn won the South
Carolina primary.
The candidate ordered me to go on lockdown, and I was happy to help
him out with that.
I holed up in our shiny new DC office and engaged in open combat with
the press.
I had pulled an army of angry young men all over the world into the
mix that nobody could control. Nobody.
Lawn came out in favor of reasonable policy compromises on gun control
and abortion.
He feigned ignorance to dodge the draft on gay marriage. He said
that, for the life of him, he could not understand why a civil union
was different from a marriage. He framed marriage as a civil union
that had the blessing of a religious organization.
By the time interviewers got around to asking Lawn how he planned to
contain the rising costs of health care in America, he was in a loop
that involved putting all the responsibility for policy onto congress
and then talking about the importance of treating people right and
celebrating the traditions self-reliance and freedom of expression in
America.
It was my idea for him to say, "freedom of expression," instead of
freedom of speech. That’s what Sally would have said if she had been
running on Lawn’s platform.
Katie went on the reality TV style news shows and defended this idea
all the way. She said that if this wasn't how the law worked, then we
should change the law.
They framed her as an ignorant girl next door, and I tweaked the
parameters of terra blog to amplify bombs that framed her as ignorant.
Katie became the most ignorant girl on TV in America, and she loved me
for it. That was our pact.
People started writing horrible bombs about each other.
Hate groups used terra blog to organize flash mobs and harass other
people in the street.
The press responded by framing Lawn and I as a unit that was
representing the devil.
Lawn asked me, "Why don't they blame the big corporations for the
activities of these hate groups? They are more responsible for these
hate groups than you or I ever were."
"Because they’re all working for political machines, Michael." I tried
to explain.
"What are you talking about?"
"You know how my vultures will do things for themselves and each other
whenever I ask them to? It's like that."
"I don't understand."
"The Republican party has vultures of their own, but most of their
vultures are men. They work for all the big corporations and twenty
four hour news programs."
"But the Hare News Network has a liberal bias, Suzy. Why aren't they
giving us more support on this?"
"I don't know. It's a rich guy thing."
"Oh, I see. I see. It's the money talking."
That's all Lawn needed to hear. He thought the idle rich had lost
their moral compass. His religion was all about, "Treating people 
right." He said the rich were not looking past the fences around
their pastures anymore. He said the rich weren't treating their
fellow Americans right.
Lawn started to organize rallies at gyms and coliseums. We used
chatbot and terra blog to raise awareness and draw big crowds.
I curated the data that millions of Americans where sharing with
chatbot into bite sized talking points that Lawn could share at his
rallies.
Lawn encouraged people to bring lawn chairs to his rallies and take
notes in spiral bound note books while he read from the script that
our supporters had written for him, with a little help from chatbot.
Lawn told the American people, "It's time to get serious about
treating people right in America," and then he joked, "And then, I
don't know about you, but I'm gonna go to a bar and spread the word
about my campaign! Huh, huh, huh."
We swept Super Tuesday, and the press went nuclear. There were riots
in the streets and the press gave them wall to wall coverage.
They interviewed the most toxic and mean spirited Lawn supporters they
could find.
The interviewed drunk people making sexist comments and wrote long
form think pieces about how I was had single handedly re-awakening the
sleeping giant of sexism in in the halls of power in America.
Katie and I saw that Lawn's brain was getting boxed into alcoholism,
so we arranged for him do media appearances with support groups.
He started saying he had decided to quit drinking because that's what
God was calling on him to do for America.
Lawn's numbers kept going up, but the media kept giving wall to wall
coverage to anyone who was willing to draw blood or say something
evil.
I was positive they were hiring professional trolls to flood terra
blog with hate speech and quasi-illegal death threats, but I couldn't
prove it.
Some of these people where just angry young men.
Some of them thought they were helping Lawn by being provocative
online.
The press had fed America the narrative that Lawn didn't believe a 
word he was saying.
They said he wanted people to behave badly so that he could get more
press coverage. They said he was using coded speech to give cover to
bigots.
The press kept asking Lawn to condemn the bad behavior of his
supporters, and he asked me what I thought he should do:
"Why are they asking me to state the obvious, Suzy? Everyone agrees
that hate speech is bad. Do they want me to say 2 + 2 = 4, as well?"
"They want to get sound bites of you saying the names of hate groups
like the KNN and Neo Foxy so they can play that sound bite a thousand
times and associate you with those words."
"Why would they do that? What good do they think that will bring to
America?"
"They're just following orders."
"Orders from who?"
"I don't know. People like me. People who just want to win."
"I'm glad we have you on our side, Suzy. You could do a lot of damage
if were on their side."
"Thank you," I said, as I played hot girl for modesty all the way.
"So what are we gonna do to stop ‘em?"
"You have be emotionally hard, like a security guy, but you can't let
them compress you."
"English, please?"
"Every time they insult you or ask a stupid question that doesn't make
sense, say the most positive thing you can think of about America."
"Sounds good. They're gonna say I’m losing my mind, but I think I get
joke now."
Lawn started reproaching the press. He was hurling Bible quotes at
the media. He mostly hurled the conventional wisdom he had gleaned
from working in big gravel his whole career, but sometimes he hurled
actual Bible quotes.
The press brought in experts to analyze his speech. They identified
clips that they said were "smoking gun" evidence of Lawn's rapidly 
deteriorating mental state, but Lawn didn't back down. He got
energized about learning the new data from me each morning and then,
"Taking the fight to the wicked."
Lawn developed an intensity that scared me a little bit. He got into
arm wrestling with some of his business associates who started making
courtesy calls to the office, and he laughed at me when I asked to arm
wrestle him.
He said, "Suzy, the difference between my friends and your friends is
that the value of the services that my friends provide to the world
would go up if money ceased to exist."
He kept talking about how the press was wicked, but then he winked and
chuckled. He still had his head about him.
"We just gotta fight harder than then they do, and I think we'll win.
We're gonna win fair and square, Suzy. Keep up the good work." he
would say.
It pained me to hear him say these exact same words every morning at
the conclusion of our stand up meeting, but it was better than the
alternative.
It was better than losing.
We were winning.
Katie got the same new data from me that Lawn got, and she started
doing "Lawn losing his mind" better than he did it himself.
I don’t know if Lawn could have stayed positive if Katie hadn’t been
in there.
The press people treated Lawn like he had punched them in the face
every time he said anything positive about America.
They looked innocent and he looked like a bully. He also seemed
ignorant.
In contrast, the press people looked mean and conniving when they
lectured Katie about how she was working for an aspiring dictator.
Katie also came off as weirdly intelligent because she wasn’t selling
sex and she had a huge following online. People got the joke that
Katie was outsmarting the media.
The press stopped inviting her to speak, so we created a simpler
version of Lawn that Katie could represent with greater ease and
comfort online.
Katie's popularity on chatbot and terra blog spiked when we sold the
narrative that the mainstream press had banned her.
The fringe press covered her wall to wall, and the mainstream had to
bring her back to primetime.
Lawn's numbers kept going up, and he won the nomination.
The press went into a state of free fall, and Lawn won the respect of
the American people.
At the convention, he told the American people that he was going to be
their eyes and ears in the halls of power.
He said, "The other side is working for the idle rich and the ruthless
corporations, but I want to work for you, the American people.
Lawn didn’t back down, the press failed to compress him, and he won
the general election.
I got a cushy job reporting to Lawn's Chief of Staff.
My job was to collect data and prepare a plan for overhauling the
software development practices of the federal government.
We changed history. I felt whole on the day that Lawn won.
His victory made me feel good about myself in a way that I hadn't felt
since before I got my facial injury.
Lawn became the sitting president of the United States, and then we
got a crash course in reality.
The powers that be had declined to mess with the electoral process,
but they had the Vice President in their court.
VP had been on their side from the beginning.
We had brought him on because he was an emotionally hard corporate
insider.
We thought he could help us win the election, and he did. I'll give
him credit for that.
He had cut his teeth working over seas for multi-national
corporations. He also represented the Bible with a furious passion
for the lord.
He got us with Bible quotes, and nobody could prove whether or not his 
faith was sincere. The data was withheld.
VP had grown up feeling entitled to act like he was military personnel
even when he was not authorized to do so, and the corporations he had
worked for helped him become a wolf in sheep's clothing state side, as
well.
He knew even more Bible quotes than me, and he used them to hide his
aggressive stance.
Early on, Katie had told me that VP was, "Repping military attache
energy all the way inside."
I didn’t understand what she meant until after he got into office.
I wished I could have done more to help, but I was out of my league.
I didn't know how to run the government.
VP got more and more of the data. We couldn't keep up. We couldn't
contain him.
There was an avalanche of bad data, and the press feasted on the bad
outcomes.
Lawn's positive attitude and endless charm had worked in the campaign,
but in office, the VP had leverage to distort reality all the way.
I'll leave it at that.
A case was made that Lawn had used the resources of the federal
government in ways that were illegal.
The press sold the narrative that he was playing the long game to
start a communist revolution, and I was implicated.
The flexibility of the role I had created myself made it easy for them
to vilify me. Too easy.
Lawn was impeached and convicted. He told the press he had learned
his lesson and then he went back to Vermont and retired.
He took up farming. I loved that man then, and I still love him
today.
I was fired. I played hot girl for modesty, and they let me go.
I didn't bother formulating a plan to fight. I was scared of VP and
his people.
I had good reasons to be scared. I had a right to be scared. I was
thankful to get out alive.
I could have laid low, but I was still a predator.
They didn't even make me remove my claws.
I decided to make my move on Pierre. I knew the fame I had achieved
in my own right would have currency with him.
I showed up at his mansion in a horse and buggy. I wore a corset and
a frilly dress.
His people let me in. Everyone treated me like I was adorable, and
Pierre's first words were, "I told you the military contractors would
see you coming."
I had proven him right. He was happy.
I wanted to be mad, but I wasn't.
I had become one of Pierre's hot girls for modesty.
I was secretly reveling in the fact that life is not fair.
I was rich. I was famous. I was beautiful. Even Pierre thought I
was beautiful now.
I had become a real life damsel in distress.
I had figured out how to manage the effect of my facial injury.
I believed with every bone in my body that my facial injury was
causing reality distortion, but it wasn't my problem.
I has secured the option to be sleeping beauty for the rest of my days
and leave then this planet quasi-peacefully as a quasi-legend in my
own time.
I felt obscenely feminine, and then Heather showed up.
She made me feel mortified. She went out of her way to make me feel
mortified, and I loved it.
I felt sexy deep inside, but logic told me it would be better to take
my corset off around Heather.
I could frame it as a joke around Pierre, but not around Heather.
I maneuvered to take my corset off, but Pierre cut me off at the pass
with an invitation to join them for lunch on the roof deck.
I made a dash towards the bathroom, but he pounced on me like a female
predator and lead me upstairs to the bedroom.
He insisted that, if I wanted in, I needed to walk up the stairs in
front of him. He guided me into his master bedroom and then wrapped a
yoga strap around my waste and locked it in place with a key.
He put the key in a safe with a combination lock on it and grinned.
He was having a ball. He became the cat that ate the canary.
His castle became a boat, and we were dancing.
I'd never seen him so happy. We were being silly.
"Who keeps a lockable yoga strap in their bedroom?" I charged, between
giggles.
"Pierre, that's who."
I endured lunch with Heather and Pierre while wearing my corset and
frilly dress.
They were both making fun of me nonstop, but I played hot girl for
modesty all the way and it was fine.
Heather eventually took off her mask and explained that her Payments
Conglomerate was actually a media company that was using subversive
representation to raise awareness about corporate hardness.
She said she would actually kill me if I told anyone.
She appeared to relish saying the word "actually" like a valley girl.
She was still making fun of me.
I asked her, "Did my corset antics help you to trust me, or would you
have trusted me anyway?"
"We'll never know," she replied.
I responded by pulling out a sheet of scented, pink stationary and
girly pen.
I had been carrying stuff like that in my purse since college.
I used the pen and paper to teach Heather the difference between depth
first and breadth first search.
I nerded it up for Heather all the way.
I confessed, and she accepted my confession as authentic.
She kissed me on the cheek and said, "You’re way of fighting the man
is kinda hot, Suzy. I’d invite you back to my place, but I'm dating
the lead singer of a hot girl band, and our relationship is not open."
I was positive she was still making fun of me.
Pierre whisked me away to his private plane. The security team and
the female captain of Pierre's plane were staring at the locked yoga
strap around my corset.
Some of them shook their heads, and other’s laughed.
Pierre really knew how to mortify a girl!
I was afraid he was going to bring in the tabloids to take close ups
of my lockable yoga strap, but he edited that part out.
We were ferried to his apartment in SF, and he let me out of my
misery.
We made sweet love and talked all night like girlfriends.
"If I had broken down crying in the summer of '94, would you have
taken me in?" I asked, sarcastically, after I had run out of gossip to
share.
"No. You only get to cry after you have seduced me, and I wasn't
attracted to you in that moment."
"But now you're attracted to me because I'm rich and famous?"
"Yes. You can cry all you want tonight, but you have to keep being
you when we wake up in the morning. Those are the rules for everyone,
but in balance, I would have held you back. I wouldn’t have been able
to help you do the extraordinary things you did to become rich and
famous."
My emotions swung back and forth between wanting to cry uncontrollably
and wanting to pinch Pierre and make scary faces at him because he was
probably just doing an experiment to see if he could make me cry.
I snuggled up to him and sniffed his neck, but unlike George, I paid
attention to his energy. I was hypnotizing him, and it was almost
effortless. Almost.
Pierre told me he had grown old. He said he had peaked with me. He
said he had submitted to the Hollywood machine. He said he was just 
running out the clock now.
"You could have fooled me," I said while getting up to inspect his
state of the art media center.
I showed him the porno I had made in Ibiza, and he laughed
submissively.
The next morning, Pierre and I conspired to put on a show for the
tabloids.
I would play the role of me, and Pierre would play the role of Pierre.
I started dolling myself up every day.
I showed a lot of midriff and did cold blooded satire about all the
ways women can take advantage of men.
Pierre became increasingly unhinged and framed me as a sorcerous who
was performing the devil's work.
Internally, Pierre was whispering to me that he had always liked me
better than all the other actresses he had dated. He said he loved me
because I had become him in my own right.
Pierre said he was too old to worry about marriage and production. He
just wanted to play with me, so we played.
I compressed the machine associated with his mansion by setting up an
office in the living room and adding new features to chatbot.
I told Pierre I wanted to focus on solving toy problems and minimizing
the length of the iterations in my software development cycle.
Pierre responded by spinning up a reality TV show from scratch.
Filming at Pierre’s mansion and distributing the content exclusively
via the made for the Internet allowed us to avoid naming the show.
Pierre and I referred to it as, "the reality show," and the press
called it, "Pierre’s reality show."
Pierre took me out to international waters in his yacht and delivered
me to a submarine that belonged to a secret society that knew how to
communicate with aliens.
We used the engine room of the yacht to film the alien abduction
scene.
Pierre brought in experts about alien encounters and commissioned 
works of art about what I might be experiencing.
He found other celebrities who had also been abducted by aliens and
gave them a platform to tell their stories.
My lifeless body turned up a couple weeks later on the beach, but
Pierre brought in a team of doctors who saved my life.
Pierre still loved me, but I no longer knew what was real.
I started speaking and writing in tongues.
I eventually released a 170k word text called TheSuzy dot com Show.
TheSuzy Show was widely described as meaningless and irrelevant, but,
in reality, it established a beach head for using transformations on
language, itself, to subversively represent the dishonest, quasimilitary
activities of corporations and their representatives in
government, such as VP.
I was playing the long game to reel in the lies of people like VP, and
Pierre provided a sufficient cover story that discouraged scrutiny of
my true intentions.
Our reality show also provided a distribution channel for my
subversive content.
Pierre created an clear plastic bubble in his living room where I
could write.
He started framing me as a savant.
Technically speaking, Pierre was in love with my ability to deliver
sarcasm.
He used me to explore the concept of true love, but his show was
mostly selling sex dressed up in peach, pink, and soft pink with a
chin length haircut.
VP was happy to give us security for free, and I blamed it all on
Pierre’s limited understanding of youth culture.
Security wasn't my problem anymore.
Reality TV had given time a reason to work in our favor.
The cameras rolled around the clock and a team of video editing nerds
completed the cycle.
Fay got remarried to Marshall Bobs, and she ran for President in 2008 
as a Republican.
Arthur and Katie confessed to the media that they had always been
Republicans at heart, and then they agreed to run her campaign.
Katie invited me to return to data life and help her do it all over
again, but I demurred. I wanted more time to heal. I was enjoying
life in the bubble that Pierre had lovingly built for me.
I liked watching Fay reproach the opposition. I liked watching her
handle VP in the general election by never admitting that Marshall was
forcing his people to suffer behind the scenes.
I liked watching VP get brought down fair and square by a woman who
knew how to play hard ball right back at him.
I didn't like it when the financial markets crashed in the fall of
2008.
I didn't like it when the press blamed the surreal content of TheSuzy
dot com Show for causing the breakdown of trust.
I didn't like it when Pierre started getting death threats, but I
liked it when George and Marshall showed up with armored cars and met
with Pierre!
I liked the extra security we got!
I watched Fay win the election while Pierre's loving arms held me
close to his heart.
I felt euphoric in my corset in my office in a mansion with it's own
reality TV show in the LA. I fell in love with America and her
billionaires all over again.
I went to DC for inauguration with a security detail of my own. I
walked to Fay's inauguration. I wanted to make it look like I was
alone, and my security team was happy to help with that.
I got made in the crowd as Suzy the super villain from LA, but there
was security everywhere.
People behaved. A circle formed around me, and I played hot girl for
modesty in the center.
I felt cute and special.
It was then that a speaker of French named Albert broke rank and
joined me in the center of the circle.
I noticed the circle change shape into an eclipse. Albert and I
calculated the foci of the ellipse around us.
We did the math in our heads. Albert also knew Katie.
He said he just wanted to play tennis, golf, and poker with me, and I
had a most interesting chat on the phone with Katie that evening!
Albert and I went to Vegas. We hit the clubs and the spa, and then I
woke up in a giant metal box.
Heather was there. Katie was there, and best of all, Sally was there!
"Oh my god!!! Sally, is that you?"
"Take it easy Suzy, we're not here to hurt you."
"Did you guys drug me?"
"Not exactly."
"So, what's up? Where's Albert?"
"He's back at the hotel. You fell asleep during your spa treatment,
and then Albert was seen leaving the lobby of the spa with your body
double."
"Wait, is this the part where I get to learn the new data?"
"Yes it is. How did you know?"
The new data was, that, technically speaking, the girls and I needed
to begin a process that would converge toward the formation of a four
way pact.
I was told to keep Pierre out of it. I was told to leave him and
figure out how to make it on my own if he didn't respect my privacy.
I was lead into a cozy crate that was put in a van and delivered to
Pierre's mansion like a package full of scented tissue paper.
We did yoga in the morning and one of the girls at yoga class looked a
lot like me.
Pierre said she had started cutting her hair short the night before,
while having sex with him, with the cameras rolling.
Pierre had finally filmed himself having sex.
I made sweet love to him like never before, and then I took another 
stab at hustling George.
Not much is known about George. There is a lot of data behind those
soft, shifty eyes of his that I expect he will take to his grave, but
we can say with certainty that he has always liked it when I hustle
him.
I arranged to meet with George at a golf course in Ireland.
It was the closing frame, so I flexed:
"In 2002, why did you say I have to bring Pierre and Marshall to the
table in order to make a deal with me?"
"I can't keep a secret from Pierre, and Marshall has a sixth sense for
detecting when Pierre and I are conspiring."
"How did Marshall get that power?"
"We programmed it into him."
"Why him?"
"He was the first to ask."
"Can I have that power?"
"No."
"Do I have to find my own George and Pierre?"
"I think there's many ways to structure a pact, Suzy. If I had to
guess, I'd guess the right pacts for you will be different from ours."
"Will you marry me?"
"No."
"Why not?"
"Something changed in culture. Everyone's just pretending to be nice
all of a sudden, and you'll probably become just like the rest of them
if you marry me. The only way I can keep loving you is if we don't
get married."
"That's the hippest thing I've ever heard you say."
"Thank you?" said George, like a hipster, using uptalk.
"Can I coin that as George's paradox?"
"Goodbye."
"Goodbye."
I would have married George, but he knew I was just looking to use him
as a pawn within my growing empire. Maybe a rook.
Notwithstanding, Pierre had become my play mate, and I had time to
kill.
There were good times to be had.
I was not in a hurry to get married.
__Ch5: Coding Colossi__
The glass ceiling had finally been shattered. Fay Bobs was the
sitting president of the United States.
President Fay was going to change things, and my girls had given me
the new data during our reunion in a giant metal box in an undisclosed
location.
In the summer of 2009, I published a document called, "Casting call
for calm, cool crowd control contemplation."
I started the creative process during a golf and meditation retreat in
Scottsdale, and then I made the finishing touches while camping out
near Santa Fe.
The doc read as follows:
"Ride sharing services like Ursa and Cursa should get in the game and
help inspire more women to study computer science.
I want more fashion, food, fitness, and travel options.
You’ll be glad you gave them to me.
Thank you."
I made the aggressive move by talking about a specific and extremely
new sector in the technology industry.
The doc got some traction. The Silicon Valley press was like, "Suzy's
got a point! Why didn't anyone just say this before? Let's do what
Suzy says."
I got some buzz and kept it simmering on the back burner, on auto 
pilot, and then I used a satellite phone to organize a girls night out
with Heather, Katie, and Sally.
We met at a hotel in Tokyo.
Our goal was to iterate on our future pact.
I pitched them on the idea that my facial injury had been causing
people to develop false beliefs since the summer of 1994.
I compared the spread of the false beliefs to the fallout of ashes
that had spewed out of Mt. Vesuvius when she had erupted all over the
empire of Rome, and then I threw a chair.
I threw it into the bathtub. I tossed it with gusto, and I said, "The
chair was a grenade that would have killed everyone if I hadn't tossed
it," while standing in the middle of the room in my stilettos and
lingerie.
"Suzy's bechdeling," whispered Heather to Katie.
They both laughed, so I said, "I heard that."
"We're not in Hollywood anymore, Heather," I yelled while throwing a
pillow at her head.
"Suzy's going ballistic," whispered Sally to Heather.
I responded by throwing a stiletto into the trash can. I drained it
with a clank, and I continued conducting the meeting while standing on
one foot next to a window with a sweeping view of the Tokyo skyline.
After some more back and forth like that, the girls got on board, and
we hatched a plot to help manage the reality distortion field that had
been caused by my facial injury.
I had felt empowered by our meeting. My confidence had reached an all
time high.
I became confident that my theory about reality distortion fields had
been real and true all along.
I couldn't figure out how to manage the reality distortion field, so I
went deep on next level moderation solutions.
I brought back Pie and The Bakery, which had been laying dormant at
TheSuzy dot com since the fall of SharkPages.
I threw the Pie code back up on the site, as the home page, and then I
appended new metaphors to the footer text.
I appended, "Self-reinforcing natural disasters."
Then I appended, "Missions to mine the center of the earth."
Then I appended the four words, "Let the awesomeness begin."
My girls sensed that something was wrong. They all but forced me to
put on a really stylish shirt dress. They made me go out and eat
ramen with them in public, and then they pressured me to confess that
I had let myself get carried away.
"Suzy, is something going on in the world right now that you're
responding to? Are you being hustled by a state actor? We're the
people you can tell. Is there something going on that we don't know
about?" asked Heather.
"No, I just wrote some bad code in my brain and then it got
compressed. There's was no reason for me to be so militaristic and
emotionally hard with respect to moderation. I'm sure a solution will
present itself in due time. I'll renew my focus on having faith in
the future. I’ll focus on having faith in us."
"I feel relieved," said Heather.
"Heather! I have an idea." I said in the most business-like tone I
could muster.
"Let's hustle Vextor Vanna and Calistoga Wagons. It's time for the
fire master and the ice queen to stop playing. It's time for them to
come to the table and work."
We did high fives all around, and then I used my smart phone that
paired well with cats to schedule a time slot in three years to
explore hustling the wind and waves.
My girls rolled their eyes in unison.
I responded to "the great eye roll" by slouching lower in my chair so
that they would be forced to either slouch or look down at me for the
rest the meal.
We had gotten Vextor and Calistoga with ramen and computer science.
We celebrated by upgrading to the most absurd first class
accommodations we could find for the flight back east.
With a little help from Albert and his associates in Paris, "Triple
FT" groups started to form all over the world. We brought together
groups of four or more women and encouraged them to implement
processes that were more likely than not to converge upon the 
formation of pacts.
I got the band back together, and we implemented a new version of
chatbot and terra blog called FashionText.
Press releases were issued, vultures were dispatched, and FashionText
became a minimalist centralized clearing house for easy breezy tips,
tricks, and style guides that aided the growth of the Triple FT
movement.
We waited for our soft numbers to hockey stick, and then I summoned
Vextor Vanna to a summit between myself and Calistoga Wagons at her
townhouse in New York City.
We hatched a plot to use the resources of Vextor's charitable
foundation to reverse the flow of negative energy in the subculture
scenes of LA.
I framed LA as myself, I framed the resources of Vextor's foundation
as my corset, and Calistoga gave her blessing.
Pierre stood tall and went first. He did it because I told him to.
He did it for love. He did it because he had faith in my fashion
sense.
Heather's Payments Conglomerate had been fake. Everyone knew it was
fake by that point, but Pierre's aerospace special research laboratory
in Beverly Hills was real.
We took shots at stars. We swung for the fences and achieved a moon
shot, a moon bounce, and a moon landing.
Pierre's moon landing was real. People were put on notice that they
couldn't fake a moon landing.
People could fake a boat, they could kinda fake a plane, but they
couldn't fake a moon landing like Pierre and my girls did.
Centers for special research in other industry sectors started popping
up all over LA.
We hired people to do research in agriculture, automotive,
landscaping, five different kinds of rail, new age manufacturing,
health sciences, actuarial sciences, and so on and so forth.
Salaries were paid, compelling media was produced and distributed, and
President Fay said, "America has turned over a new leaf. It's fall,
winter, spring, and summer in America, and I feel great. Keep up the
good work, America!" while having tea with me in the Rose Garden
within the frame of my made for the Internet video channel.
We had funding to pay salaries in LA, but other cities made it happen
all by themselves.
Within a year, most major cities in America were sporting centers for
QR in all the industry sectors where sustained enthusiasm was a
crucial element within the interlocking manufacturing process supply
chains that supported the mass production of love.
The maximization of love had come full circle, and I decided to change
my mission statement in life.
I did a cut over maximizing love to optimizing on love, and nobody
noticed the difference.
Meanwhile, in Silicon Valley, there was an explosion of little
sharkies. After the orderly demise of SharkPages, there had been a
"dark ages" in which people had tried and failed to recreate the magic
of SharkPages.
These efforts to recreate SharkPages came to be known as little
sharkies, and all the 1wLS failed miserably for reasons that were not
entirely clear.
The election of Michael Lawn had inspired a second wave of little
sharkies that were imitating chatbot and terra blog.
Pundits had attributed the burst of innovation to Lawn's decision to
open source the code base for chatbot and terra blog.
Some people said the 2wLS simply "was" the legacy of Lawn's brief
presidency.
In early 2010, it was clear that the election of President Fay had
inspired a third wave. The 3wLS. "The three doubles, or three dubs,"
as people in the know called it.
The 3dubs were gunning to take over and rule us all with the iron
fist. The era of the 3dubs was upon us!
The initially cheerful 3wLS enlightenment in Silicon Valley gave way
to mortal fear that another great white mama shark would jump out of
the ocean and eat all the other little sharkies.
I had been the original mama vulture shark. I had been Suzy the super
villain of Palo Alto.
I had been the founder of SharkPages, and I had come to believe that
all the little sharkies were doomed to become aggregators for vice on
the Internet.
They were subculture scenes, and they were virtual.
The energy within the growing gaggle of 3wLS was not good.
Some of the people using these sites clearly hadn't enjoyed a valid
lay in years, and so I wrote an oped in the SF Times Journal that
said:
"The worst possible way forward would be to allow all the little
sharkies to coalesce into a ginormous meta aggregator for vice on the
Internet.
A blue whale of vice on the Internet.
A whale shark so big that it could capsize both a Russian and an
American ice breaker, at the same time, with one flap of its massive
fins, without even breaking a sweat.
We must find another way forward. We must redirect before it's too
late.
I'm not playing, Silicon Valley.
I'm all the way in with the military.
Find another way forward."
I was kinda bluffing, but people weren't sure. The rest of America
was getting it's act together, but it felt like nobody in Silicon
Valley knew what was real anymore.
I could have peaced out, but I wanted to be part of the solution. I
didn't want to be part of the problem.
In other words, I didn't demure. I engaged. I took steps that were
more likely than not to help solve the problem at hand.
I started a routine that involved reading my own oped over and over,
ad infinitum, while sitting with my stilettos on a table at a bar in
the little Paris neighborhood of San Francisco.
I read the print version.
I kept it old school.
I got into painting toy soldiers, toy tanks, toy ships, and toy
airplanes in the bars of little Paris.
I managed a low key receiving line at my tables in the bars of little 
Paris by running online contests and giving out signed t-shirts that
said, "Never underestimate the power of the print version."
The text on the t-shirt was typeset with LaTeX.
Of course it was.
Most of the feedback I got took the form of aggressive banter with
guys who just wanted to have sex with me, but then, on one glorious
evening, an unusually serious gang of four women sat down at a table
behind me.
They pulled out their laptops, and they started played a drinking game
that involved writing code.
One by one, the losers of their drinking game left the table and
walked out of the bar.
In the end, there was exactly one women left sitting at the table.
I suspected she wanted me to talk to her, so I did.
"Was that staged, or did you actually win the contest?"
"I won. We wanted to employ a meritocratic process."
"To recruit me?" I asked, feigning modesty and genuine surprise.
"Technically speaking, we want you to recruit us."
"Do you always win?"
"I win about 80% of the time."
"Why did you involve alcohol?"
"It’s some kind of cover story. We didn’t think about it all that
much."
"Do you have any technical interview questions you'd like me to answer
before we proceed?"
"Yes, we'd like to see you write out the pseudo code for an iterative
deepening search algorithm."
I grabbed a sheet of scented, pink stationary and girly pen out of my
purse and wrote out the pseudo code that had been requested.
I handed the piece of paper to the unusually serious woman.
She had been watching me write as I wrote.
By the time I handed her the ransom note that I had written out on
some scented, pink stationary, she already knew that it was correct.
I thought about eating the ransom note.
She saw me think about eating the ransom note, and she responded by
breaking eye contact and looking at the deal toy I had placed on the
table.
I had placed it there so that she could look at it whenever she felt
like breaking eye contact.
The deal toy was an interpretation of a stiletto. It was carved in
rare azure marble, and it had a glass wedge base.
She shoved the ransom note into her purse in the most disheveled way
possible, and then she turned on a pretty respectable show person
character.
"Hi, my name is Ginette. I'm trying to be perfectly imperfect for you
right now, so just let me know if there are any modifications I could
make to this character that might eliminate bottle necks and other
inefficiencies."
"Sounds good. Why did I recruit you?"
"You want us to help your people federalize all the little sharkies.
We want to do our part to help keep it local."
"How did you know I want to do that?"
"A lucky guess?"
"Are you part of my vulture network?"
"I'll never say."
"Ok."
"Our plan is to have a minimalist central choke point called
fedmapper.com, and then we want to encourage local operators to stand
up little sharkies that will sync via fedmapper."
I loved that she called it a choke point instead of a central clearing
house.
She understood the nature of the problem, and she appeared to be
serious about solving the whole problem with style and discretion.
"Sounds like you've got it all figured out."
"Thanks!!! That means a lot coming from you, Suzy. We'd love to get
your help on leadership, logistics, and integrating the latest chatbot
technologies into the central repository."
"I'd love to help. I'm so glad you came to me first."
"Had did you know we came to you first?"
"Lucky guess?"
We gave each other girly hugs and then left the bar. We were both
wearing stilettos and skinny jeans.
By the time the mostly male crowd in the bar realized that they really
liked the way we looked together, it was too late for any of them to
make moves.
We had code to write.
We fist bumped and went back to our places of residence so that we
could throw on sweatshirts and do work for an invisible woman who was
probably working for the military.
I showed up the next morning around 11am at the incubator where
Ginette and her crew were working. I wore a designer dress, but most
people were wearing chill hipster dresses. Most of the guys were
wearing chill hipster dresses, as well.
Ginette was cranking with her principal pair programming artist,
Arianna. I had stayed up all night reading the rather detailed onboarding
documents they had posted on their stealthy landing page at
fedmapper.com.
"Why do you have principals?" I asked, asserting my authority.
"It's like a default," said Arianna.
"Why don't you just say default partner?"
"Because p3a sounds cooler," said Arianna, as she looked back at her
screen and typed away furiously.
"Which one of you is the leader?" I asked.
Crickets.
Both of them kept typing as if I wasn't there.
"What can I do to be helpful?"
"We'd like to relocate to Washington, DC, and then we'll figure the
rest out from there," said Ginette.
A girl from another table walked over. She was hustling.
"Hey, I'm really sorry to bother you, but can any of you tell me what
the wifi password is?"
"cowsaylife ftw 543. It's one word," said Ginette, while Ariana gave
her the evil eye.
"Life with an I or with a Y?" said the girl.
"With an I," said Ariana while giving her the evil eye twice as hard
as before.
I decided to make them all suffer. I had been framed as a woman who
was all the way in with the military, so I acted like it.
"What's your name?"
"Who, me?"
Crickets.
"Oh, um, I'm Dana. Are you Suzy?"
"Yes, I'm Suzy."
Ginette and Arianna stopped coding and looked at me while acting like
they were not aware of Dana's existence. I was framed as a person who
was talking to a ghost.
"It's nice to meet you Dana. I think they're waiting for you in the
center of the room!" I said, as I pointed at the window behind her.
Thankfully, she turned around and left. I could have slayed her, but
it was more productive to be nice and compress the entire room.
I sat there quietly and acted like Ginette and Arianna were not there.
They returned fire. We had a shoot out, and then the girls did
something I hadn't seen before.
They looked at each other and smiled. They were conspiring, but I
wasn't sure how.
They counted out a three, two, one on their fingers, and then the
said, "So you'll do it for us?"
The looked at each other the whole time they were concocting their
joint statement.
Well played, I thought.
"Sure, I'll make some calls. You might have to work out of a
senator's office for a while."
"Good. Take your time finding the permanent solution," I said,
impersonating them speaking as one.
"I will," I said, impersonating myself.
They went back to typing furiously. I got up and left.
It was game on. These girls were the real deal, I mused.
I got us two rooms in a senator's office.
I got us a sweet pad near Dupont Circle, and we started making moves.
I had been camping at Pierre's places, and it felt good to have a
sweet pad of my own.
I hustled for a few weeks and got some face time with The President.
She leaned in hard by framing me as an old pal.
I was framed as The President's former partner in crime.
She asked the security guard if I had been stripped of all my girly
pens.
The President said, "Suzy has a history of using girly pens as deadly
weapons."
The security guard became compressed, so President Fay leaned in some
more and gave me a girly hug.
We sat down by the coffee table, and I pitched her on fedmapper.com.
The President's reaction was quasi-positive, and I used dance club
moves to acknowledge her existence as I retreated from her lair.
There was no easy way for us to remain standing, but we clawed,
pushed, punched, and pulled the project forward.
I made it my business to build fedmapper.com into the bureaucracy.
We got oversight, we got a budget, and we got an office on F street.
I made a video called, "We got an office," and the video aired on
Sunday Morning Taped with Dorgan Smith.
I had planned to frame our team as lobbyists, but the girls had
something bigger in mind.
We cranked, hustled, and carried weight for countless days and
countless nights.
The branches of the tree structure known as fedmapper.com were filled
in organically.
New ideas emerged and converged from all directions, and Americans
started treating each other right, for the first time in history,
technically speaking.
The President and I made a speech in the spring of 2012 that laid out
a vision for inculcating slow growth at the local level, both online
and offline, both foreign and domestic.
The President and I also talked about the optimization of love.
We passed a bill in congress that defined the operational parameters
for the orchestration of love in the virtual space within the purview
of the Chief Information Officer of the United States
The bill also included funding for an international museum about the
history of video games.
Shortly after passage of the games bill, the Russian government sent
me a clandestine telegram.
They wanted to know if I would be amiable to receiving delivery of a
giant flying hovercraft at a location that would be convenient for me.
I brought in Sally to help me vet the veracity of the telegram.
A few weeks later, the craft was delivered, we named it "the
flovercraft," and an executive order was signed that housed the craft
within the center for aerospace special research in LA.
President Fay ran for re-election in 2012. Katie ran her campaign.
Arthur was put in charge of large donor recruitment, and Sally was
brought on full time to barnstorm the country with me in the
flovercraft.
We gave stump speeches on top of the flovercraft, and the events were
dangerously oversold.
The press started complaining that it was unfair for us to be using
the only flovercraft, but the Russian government responded to the
allegations of bias by offering to deliver up to sixteen additional
craft for free, with no strings attached.
Securing one of the sixteen flovercraft and then using it on the
campaign trail came to be known as "the craft hustle," and the press
amplified the stakes by running wall to wall coverage of craft
speeches while largely ignoring everything else the candidates and
their surrogates did.
We had the best craft hustle, and Fay won re-election.
Sally was appointed to be the director of the video gaming museum,
Katie became Counselor to the President, and Arthur did a tour of duty
by serving as my date at the inauguration balls. It was the beginning
of a lovely open relationship between he and I.
Lester Levenworth, who had been on the board at SharkPages, was
nominated to be CIO of the United States.
His confirmation hearings were a mess, but we got him in with a little
help from some vultures, and I started running everything out of his
office.
My title was "Partner in Video Gaming Excellence, Reporting to the
CIO," and then I added leverage to a good thing by framing myself as
Lester's sexy assistant at the office.
If I told Lester to go on TV and refer to the International Video Game
Museum as "ividmu" and pronounce it like, "I-vid-mu," half of the time
and "EE-vid-mu" the other half of the time, it was as good as done.
We got permanent office space onboard a fleet of blimps, and Albert
became head of engineering research at IVidMu.
The title on his business card was, "HEngResIVidMu."
Sally kept trying to call him Hal, so he changed his title to,
"HEngResIVidMu, not Hal."
Talk of peace spread throughout the land, sea, and air, like love.
The Peace became a thing and The Head's office began publishing new
data in a weekly choose your own adventure thingy called "The Video
Game Hustler's Newsletter" that showed all the people in the world
with my job how to get stuff done whilst optimizing for love with 
style and discretion within their local jurisdictions.
We had moved the ball forward. A new era had begun, and I missed
playing with Pierre.
We recruited another overachiever like me to take over the partnership
for video gaming excellence within the department, and then Pierre
reframed me as a sexy lounge singer.
One of Pierre's former aspiring actresses was starting to really do it
in LA with the anti-aging supplements, so I indulged.
I felt, looked, and officially became eight years younger in less than
two years.
More importantly, free software was deployed, and my age was gradually
reduced by eight years in every database that keeps track of people’s
ages.
Emphasis on the word gradually.
I was getting younger every day, so we travelled the world and used
every trick in the book to frame me as wild, feminine, and free.
I had a blast.
I also developed a routine that had been inspired by George.
I got back into chatbot.
I alternated intermittently between being George and being Pierre
while President Fay and her husband held down the fort on the
mainland.
We got a grand villa in Hawaii that I told Pierre would help me focus
on being me.
We parked Pierre's yacht nearby, he took up painting and poetry, and I
took a flovercraft to work every morning around 10am.
I was taking the craft to a pill box we installed on top of a volcano
so that I could clear my mind and focus relentlessly on improving
chatbot.
Pierre was minting a new currency that was all about me.
His efforts filled both of us with glee!
Pierre was still making money while hanging out with me, and we saw
that it was good for our credibility.
We built a studio for him in our gorgeous living room, with his back
to our villa’s cheerful view of the Pacific ocean.
It was within that context that we organized a surfing event to honor
the survivors of attacks by sharks and other dangerous animals, such
as moose, bear, tigers, and lions.
The weather and waves conspired like angels with feathered wings to
give us the gift of a perfect day on the water.
The charming prince of the hour was a world champion surfer with one
arm.
His name was Xavier.
He had been attacked by a shark while surfing.
He had lost an arm, but he kept surfing.
He got right back in there, and he had done endorsement deals with
some big box retailers.
He went on to raise awareness about the unfair practices of his
sponsors in some of the places where they did business.
His efforts had reduced human suffering.
Xavier was a hero to both Pierre and I.
Pierre had caught a sweet last wave of the day and we were all walking
towards the parking lot when, out of nowhere, an angry young woman
drove onto the beach in a teal SUV and gunned it.
We were so excited about basking in Xavier's wisdom that we didn't
notice, but Fred, Sally's former head of developer relations at
SharkPages, happened to be meditating in the dunes nearby.
Fred was the first to figure out what was happening and he shouted,
"Everyone back in the water! Everyone get back!"
Fred's social confidence had improved immeasurably since his time at
SharkPages, and so we all ran back. The SUV veered toward us, but the
ocean stopped it cold, and everyone was able to dive away safely.
The young woman climbed out of the window, and Xavier was the first to
say, "This woman needs help!"
She broke down crying and he helped her get back to shore.
Phil, who had also been Sally's head of developer relations at
SharkPages, had started a popular Internet based talk show called Good
Samaritan Phil, or GSP for short.
Xavier went on GSP with the formerly angry young woman and she told a
sad story about how she had experienced a total breakdown of trust
with a big box retailer where she had previously worked as a cashier.
She had become increasingly isolated and unable to say anything about
her past without being called delusional and aggressive.
She had been hounded by creepy anonymous trolls on the Internet for
years, and then one day, she just thought to herself, "Enough is
enough."
She confessed that, in a moment of insanity, she had rented a motor
vehicle with the intent to kill Xavier, Pierre, and me, ideally, but
Fred's improved social confidence and his non-standard approach to
meditation had saved us all.
Everyone had a good cry, and then Fred came up on the stage and talked
about how he had gone into a deep depression when his personal hero,
the abstract concept of the sobbing of Eve from the garden of Eden,
had been crushed by a mudslide on Highway 9, in California.
He thanked Suzy and Sally for helping him pull through that difficult
time in his life and gave the floor back to Phil.
The young woman got the help she needed and, with leadership from
Xavier, the proceeds of the episode where donated to a charity former
president Michael Lawn had started that does independent observations
of big corporations and reports on whether or not he feels they are
"Treating people right" within all aspects of their business
operations.
"That's how you do it on the made for Internet!" said Pierre, after we
finished watching the episode in his master bedroom.
We threw food at each other, and then I told him he had become a nerd.
He demurred.
He had to. I had gotten him completely, and I chose to be merciful.
Pierre had become a nerd all the way, so I convened another girl's
night out.
I wanted to share the new data with them, so we met at a shopping mall
in eastern Asia.
We exchanged girly hellos and then I took a hard swing:
"Girls. Girls, listen to me! We've contained the distortion field
associated with my facial injury, but I'm concerned that if there is
even one guy out there with a similar facial injury, he could hijack
the distortion field and use it turn planet Earth into an
authoritarian dystopia."
"What would that look like?" asked Katie.
"Start with the most average guy in the room. Let's call him Todd," I
said.
"Hahaha, average Todd. Ok," said Katie.
"Now imagine that he uses a hammer to give himself the same facial
injury as me."
"I could imagine average Todd doing that," said Sally.
"Be nice," said Katie.
"Why are you afraid of average Todd? Do you think he has the power to
kill you with his mind?"
"No."
"Liar."
Katie and Sally gave each other the evil eye, and then they both
demurred.
"If average Todd got my facial injury, he could eat tofu in Palo Alto
with billionaires, he could rep global infrastructure, and he could
create a little sharkie that recruits it's initial user base by using
university area email addresses for authentication. Those behaviors
would be sufficient for hijacking the distortion field," I said.
"Why would we ever fail at covering all those angles better than him?"
"As a woman, my injury represents fear and weakness if I do nothing.
It represents super villainy if I act like a generic hot girl. It
represents Helen of Troy if I act modest, and it represents Mother
Earth if I play hot girl for love."
"Sure," said Sally and Katie at the same time.
At that moment, we happened to be passing through the housewares
section. Both Sally and Katie reached for steak knives and started
play fighting with the knives.
"Girls, we need to keep a low profile," said Heather.
They put the steak knives back, but they appeared to have only
implemented a cease fire.
The greater goal of establishing a lasting truce between them remained
elusive.
"I can only guess that a man with my facial injury would represent
fear and murderous rage if he did nothing. People would hustle him
all the way even if he was just staying relaxed and representing a
blank expression on his face.
He would be a walking, talking, and potentially gun toting
representation of the evil eye expression that Katie and Sally just
gave each other. He would be like they are being right now, but for
real," I said.
"I think Katie and Sally are being about as real as it gets right
now," said Heather, matter-a-factly.
I pretended to demure, but then I threw a pot holder at Heather and
continued:
"No they're not," I said sweetly. "They're not being hard. They're
both still standing here."
"That's fair," said Heather.
"A guy with my facial injury who did nothing would be seen as an
actual security threat," I said, with emphasis on the word, "actual."
"Ok," said Heather.
I hated it when Heather started okaying me, but I persisted.
"If he acted like a generic hot guy, he'd be seen as an actual threat
to society. A clear and present danger to himself or others. Doctors
would make moves against him that they would never make against me."
"Ok," said Heather.
For the first time in my life, I appreciated Heather's use of the word
ok. She was helping me out. We had turned over a new leaf.
"I get death threats when I keep it generic. Fred with my facial
injury playing a generic hot guy would eventually get slapped with
trumped up charges."
"Ok," said Heather, while feeling my actual vibe for the first time in 
her life.
"He wouldn't be able to play hot guy on the boat for Suzy, Katie, or
Sally. The captain, whose name should be Heather, in this example,
would pull out a revolver and calmly ask him to play another character
if he tried."
"Am I supposed to golf clap now?" asked Heather.
"Why didn't you say, ok?"
"Because I agree with you. Please continue?"
"Why did you use uptalk? Would you have used uptalk with me if I
didn't have my facial injury?"
"No."
"You're becoming George."
"Sure."
"I hate you, and if new Todd…can I use the term new Todd to refer to
the concept of average Todd with my facial injury? Yes?
If new Todd acted modest, people would dump all their risk onto him.
He'd become a doormat."
"No way," said Heather, sarcastically.
"I, on the other hand, become a repeller of risk. Hot girl for
modesty is my coup. It's my trump card. It's my everything, babe.
Do you feel me?"
"I feel you, Suzy."
"Heather is playing hot girl for love," I said, compressing Heather
just a little bit, for the first in my life.
Crickets.
"So yeah, if new Todd tried to play hot guy for love, everyone would
collude to dump their dirt him, and eventually some really compressed
an emotionally hard guy who was not part of a valid security apparatus
would assault him," I explained.
Crickets.
"The markets would convert all of his assets into aggregators for
security risk," I snarled.
"Maybe," said Heather.
"Not maybe, Heather. It would happen with devastating and rapidly
accelerating efficiency with respect to time."
"Maybe, maybe not."
"Whatever, Heather. Heather birds of a feather."
Heather did not laugh at my play on words, but nothing was going to
stop me now. I was in full swing.
"If new Todd played hot guy for anything other than love, the
authorities would knock him down, and if new Todd played hot guy for
love, a lone wolf would kill him sooner or later."
"Hey Sally, hey Katie, knock it off, you two. How do you vote?" asked
Heather.
"We're thinking about it," said Sally and Katie at the same time,
while shooting daggers at each other with their eyes.
"New Todd would have to become a hermit in order to survive. He would
have to simulate hot girl for modesty by self-injuring in public and
then repairing the damage at home, while he is alone."
"Ouch," said Heather.
"He would also have to make money online, in aggregate, but that would
be difficult for him because, according to our dominant narrative, he
is being silly and unserious by forcing himself to suffer as a
hermit."
"Sucks to be new Todd," said Heather.
"If we don't include rules that give outs to the hermits, there will
be warfare. It will start online, but a lot of these guys have garden
tools, Heather. They might go haywire at scale in the worst possible
places at the worst possible times."
"Why are there so many new Todds all of a sudden?"
"Because the actual new Todd is using our distortion field to impose
the effect of his facial injury on all men. His scheme allows him to
keep growing his power in secret until nobody is strong enough to
block him from becoming Emperor of the Earth."
"Why can't all the new Todds get boyfriends who help them heal?"
"One of them would have to become a woman."
"I don’t buy it," said Heather.
I couldn't tell if she was serious. She looked offended, but her
muscles were soft. She looked like she was still following my lead.
"There will be a war followed by the rise of a dystopian new Todd
empire unless half of the most compressed and emotionally hard average
men in the world figure out how to become classy, modest women like
us.
That's not a good bet. I would not make that bet with my own money.
Why do you want to make that bet?"
"Because we can make a billion dollars selling clones of you that will
have loads of fun healing them with sex," said Heather, pretending to
be a nerdy British nobleman.
"Eww. Was that a joke?"
"I'm George in a designer sheepskin vest and a houndstooth skirt
that's kinda short. I could heal them myself, but I'd prefer watch
you do it," said Heather, matter-a-factly.
I suddenly became weak in the knees and felt like I was going to have
a panic attack, but Sally and Katie caught me and started breathing
soft, warm, moist puffs of air on my neck while gently rubbing my
shoulders.
They stole some massage oil from a nearby display unit and rubbed it
on my belly in a way that made me feel loved, and then I no longer
felt like I was going to have a panic attack.
"Haven't you ever asked yourself why George and I never show up
anywhere together, Suzy?" said Heather, twisting the knife.
"George understands the effect of my facial injury, you don't. You're
not George," I said.
"Sure I do. I just hate war more than I hate being seen as
inauthentic by you," retorted Heather.
"So who still wants war?" I asked.
"Average Todd?" said Heather, with uptalk.
"Sounds like the submissive laughter of new Todd is the true authentic
currency of the United States and her allies abroad," I said,
deviously.
"I say we call that Todd's paradox," said Heather.
"Does the paradox arise because new Todd doesn't want war? Average
Todd wants war, but the only way for him to fund the war of his dreams
would be to become new Todd and create a currency by laughing
submissively?" I asked.
Crickets.
"Is it legal for average Todds to convert themselves into new Todds?"
asked Katie, breaking the silence.
"Who's asking?" I asked.
"The military, that's who," blurted out Sally.
"Why do you ask?" I asked.
"I'll never tell," said Katie.
"And that's why it's important to allow women to fight on the front
lines alongside the men!" shouted Sally in the middle of the mall in
eastern Asia.
We all laughed submissively. Sally had gotten all of us. She had
gotten us completely, but nobody was waiving the white flag.
I also stood tall like a tree. Like a woman reaching for the stars.
I expanded like a blowfish. I clasped my hands like in prayer and
leaned down to the right. I raised a foot into the air.
"Heat, girls, I'm not a pier, but I don't want war," I said, like
Pierre speaking in tongues, with the intention of banishing a devil
from the premises.
That was our pact. That became our pact.
"Girls night out for life, love, and eternal happiness" became our
motto, and then we put back the mall chic outfits we had appropriated
without authorization.
We reverted to rocking out in active wear and stilettos.
We all got little tattoos near our spines that meant, "New tech," in
various languages from all around the world, and we were off to the
races.
We were off to the bicycle races.
The bicycle races on stationary bikes, with friends.
I decided to celebrate the hardening of our girly pact by chartering a
yacht with a really hot captain, chef, and first mate.
I played hot girl on the boat, and the crew was happy to help with
that.
All three of them handled me while I did my mindful stretching routine
on the roof deck.
They did it for money, and their efforts helped me flex harder than I
could have flexed alone.
We did all that in front of an audience before even leaving shore.
That was why I loved men and women. They really knew how to help me
take the edge off.
"I'm just more sexually attracted to men," I thought to myself, but I
wasn't sure why.
I scheduled a time slot in five years to revisit that train of
thought.
We headed out to sea, and I made a film of myself.
I framed myself as a talking head.
I positioned the setting sun just above my shoulder.
I made it look like a parrot in paradise.
I neutralized the magnetic power of my body, and then I told the
camera, "Technology is both a blessing and a curse, to be questioned."
"God I love my girls! My girls are hard," I thought to myself. We
were becoming ourselves, and I could have cared less whether or not
Heather accepted all of that optimization on love as authentic.
I had gotten ‘em! I had them cold. I could have killed everyone by
simply playing it cool, but I decided to keep it hot, instead.
I played hot girl for life!
__Postface by Todd__
Suzy's Memoir is a work of fiction that's based on my life
experiences.
This book describes my own emotional journey through life.
Suzy's gender at birth was the opposite of mine, but her emotional
development over the years lead her to become the same person that I
eventually became.
In reality, I imagined what the world would be like if gender became
irrelevant, and then I stumbled upon some new data that has to do with
currency, credibility, credentials, and confidence.
Please see Appendix 1 at the end of this book for additional details
about what it means to discover, "new data."
In the fictional world of Suzy's Memoir, Suzy has a woman's body, but
she can be just as violent or non-violent as any man.
My exposure is that Suzy's sexual history is substantially different
from mine, but I've got it covered because the way Suzy and I think is
the same.
In other news, I'd bet that the CEOs of some of the leading
corporations in Silicon Valley view the world a lot like Suzy does.
They represent themselves differently in public, but some of them
followed a path to power that was comparable to Suzy's.
I want to democratize the opportunity to be aware of how Suzy views
life, love, and the world.
This book is like a consumer Internet software service.
I hope people enjoy it with care and thoughts of peace.
__Postface by Albert__
Todd wrote the text for Suzy's Memoir over a three week period while I
was visiting family and friends in Antarctica. He told me that the
text had emerged, fully formed, within his subconscious mind.
All he had to do was type it out and then do nine more weeks of
editing.
Todd and I both studied engineering at a south eastern area
university. When I met Todd, I was representing myself as the leader
of technology outfit in the engineering space.
There was an engineering special research bill winding it's way
through congress.
Todd and I conspired over the phone about how my startup could use the
special research bill as leverage to hustle the powers that be in both 
the public and private sectors. Nothing came of it, but we had a lot
of good laughs.
Over the next couple of years, I learned that Todd had a lot of rare
data about Silicon Valley.
He had data that nobody was talking about in the press.
I challenged his assumptions and he challenged me right back.
Todd appeared to be suffering, but I sensed strength. I gave him some
of the data that I had about Antarctica, and it helped him figure out
who is who and what is what.
I grew up in the western part of Antarctica. If Michael Lawn is an
American original, I might be a West Antarctican original.
That's where I hope to retire. I'd like to do some farming there and
then move further south and closer to the sea as I get older and
sleepier, just like Suzy plans to do in North Carolina.
I was a Michael Lawn supporter from the beginning. I took a lot of
heat for that. It's summer 2017, and I'm still getting flack about
it!
Todd was a stealthy Lawn supporter, but he donated $250 to his
campaign in the summer. He wanted to leave a paper trail. He wanted
to show that he had nothing to hide. He also went max for the
opposition at a big money fundraiser in his home state.
Todd had associates on both the east and west coast who had met the
opposition personally. My best guess is that he voted for the
Republican ticket all the way in the 2004 general election.
Todd also believes people should never be forced to admit how they
actually voted.
I like that about him.
If I had known him at the time, I have no doubt that Todd and I would
have exchanged joy and optimistic words over the phone on the day
Michael Lawn won. We might have ended up attending the inauguration
together. We might have stood shoulder to shoulder in a sea of mostly
Lawn supporters.
We would have had a good day that day. Lawn's inauguration was real.
It was not staged. We were among the people who showed up and stood
tall in the center of the action, just to be sure.
I hope people can derive pleasure and satisfaction from reading Suzy's 
Memoir. I certainly did.
I'm biased because I helped Todd become the person he had to become in
order to write this book, but, speaking from the heart, I think it's a
good read.
__Postface by Suzy__
I didn’t say much about my parents in this book, but there are two
stories about me that they’ve told many times over the years.
When Richard Nixon won re-election in 1972, I was about one year old.
My parents where watching Nixon’s acceptance speech.
Mom was holding me, and Dad said, "Why’s he keep talking the Shoreham
Hotel, do you think we can stay there?"
Mom kept listening, and then Nixon said, "Because the better
competition we have between the two parties, between the two men
running for office — whatever office that may be—means that we get the
better people and the better programs for our country."
"The two men! Maybe what we need is two women running for office next
time," and then the story goes that I giggled and laughed. Mom and I
had a moment, and Dad came over and hugged us both. Nixon had been
upstaged.
The second story occurred eight years later, just after the
inauguration of Ronald Reagan. I was walking back from piano lessons
with my Mom and we passed a one year old Fred being pushed in a
stroller by his Mom.
There was some awkwardness, presumably, and then I offered to play a
song for Fred. I pulled up my air piano and started playing and
singing, "All the Hail the Chief."
Fred started to cry, but his Mom cheered him up and everyone was happy
with my performance.
After that, my Mom took me to the beach, where I laughed and played
tag with a group of other kids as the sun was setting. Queue the
soundtrack and closing credits!
__Appendix 1: Context__
Technically speaking, this isn't a book. It's a data set. I wrote it
for the purpose of sharing some new data that I discovered.
Suzy’s Memoir inspired me to write another memoir that describes the
emotional journey of a fictional character named Fred.
Fred's Memoir is a separate book. It's available online at fredmemoir
dot com.
In both Suzy's Memoir and Fred's Memoir, 2010 corresponds to 2017 in
the real world.
I noticed that applying seven year skew made for a pretty epic analogy
that goes back to the 1980s, and I never figured out why.
For example, the destabilizing crash in the fall of 2008 in Suzy’s
Memoir was like the destabilizing presidential debates in the fall of
2015 in the real world.
The events that happen in both Suzy’s Memoir and Fred’s Memoir after
2010 are predictions for the future.
These predictions were made via analogy with a seven year skew.
For example, the association between Suzy, Ginette, and Arianna in the
fall of 2011 is a metaphor for outcome of the 2018 midterm elections
in the real world.
In a few years, we'll know what events actually came to pass, and
Suzy's Memoir and Fred's Memoir will exist within that new context.
For now, I'm using these two books as a platform to make predictions
about what might happen next within the real world, as chronicled by
me.
Fred's Memoir is the other side of the coin of Suzy's Memoir, but I
wrote Suzy's Memoir first.
__Appendix 2: TheSuzy__
Todd Perry has shipped TheSuzy dot com Show as open source software,
at TheSuzy dot com.
As of summer 2017, I'm planning to do a thorough edit of the text with
the goal of making the overall frame equivalent to the frame of
SharkInjury, which makes reference to Suzy's emergence within the real
world.
I will also be making videos of myself reading the whole text, twice,
first in a serious manner and then in the manner of parody, and video
of myself reading SharkInjury will be broken up into seven parts that
well be included as the footer content for Book 1, Episodes 1 through
7.
The last piece of of the puzzle will be to create an open source 
content distribution platform called WhatLooks and run an instance of
that software called WhatLooksGood that will host content like TheSuzy
Show, in a form where users can manage the structured data that is
associated with the text.
__About__
Version 1.06, by Todd Perry, uploaded September 11, 2017
___Fred's Memoir___
To writers of fiction. If you call it a work of fiction, you better
not diss.
__Preface by Suzy__
The date is 2033. Progress stopped. Reality became a joke. The
simulated war started two years ago, and more than a billion people
have been killed in the online space.
I want the simulated war to stop. The rising tide of human suffering
in the real world is a direct result of the war. We have to stop
doing this to each other.
I won the 2032 election, and Fred stood down to us. He stood down to
the will of the electorate.
Fred stood down, but some of his people have not. It's time for them
to stop fighting.
We agreed to the terms of the election because Fred and I believed a
billion more people would die within two years if we didn't stop the
war.
Both sides gave an oath to submit to the vote. We gave our word that
we would submit completely and unconditionally.
I also gave my word that Fred would be allowed to live out the rest of
his life with protection.
Fred never promised to give me immunity. Prior to the election, Fred
said my words had become worthless and meaningless, but I didn't care.
I was sick and tired of war, and my vow helped secure our victory.
I made the vow for myself, not for Fred, and I'm going to keep my word
because keeping my word is what's best for me.
Fred's Memoir was partially my idea. I asked him to write his memoir
fearlessly, and I asked him to write with an eye for humor. Fred and
I hope that telling the truth from his perspective will help our 
fractured world to heal.
Summer 2033
Bunker City
The South Pole
__Preface by Fred__
In the summer of 2010, Suzy wrote a book that became my anti-roadmap
in life.
Her book was called Suzy's Memoir. It's available online at
suzymemoir dot com.
I'm a different person than I was in 2010, but I want to help my
friends understand how the animosity between us got so deep.
I'll illustrate what happened by backtracking to my youth and then
telling my story from the beginning.
In 2010, I thought Suzy's Memoir was a dishonest book that had been
written for willfully ignorant people to read by the pool.
Suzy's book told a story about how incumbents could have it all. She
showed incumbents how to crash the party of casino capitalism and take
profits without putting any money on the table.
She showed incumbents how to use aggressive sarcasm to get the same
deal the big banks were getting from governments.
Aggressive sarcasm is an example of a more general pattern of behavior
called, "creating and promoting derivative satire," and I'll address
that topic more thoroughly in the second chapter of this book.
Suzy asserted that incumbents deserved to get ironclad security for
free, for life, no matter how lazy, rude, irresponsible, or
wrongheaded they had been.
I thought she was assuming people like me could be forced to take the
other side of that deal.
By the summer of 2017, I saw Suzy's Memoir as a declaration of total
war. She had started a fight.
I started to call her book S'sM. I made fun of her by substituting
different punctuation characters in place of the apostrophe.
Suzy's Memoir became S*sM, S&sM, S@sM, etc. Each punctuation
character signified a different kind of insult that I thought would be
funny to watch Suzy endure in a Hollywood film. I wanted Suzy to see 
herself getting dissed because she wasn't getting the message that her
actions were leading us down a path to war.
A path to hell. I thought was joking about staging insults of Suzy,
but it wasn't a joking matter.
I was going for hard boiled satire, but then I got serious.
I started a high-flying technology company, and I eventually asked my
employees to kill half a billion people because someone said the other
side had fired the first shot.
Suzy had said she planned to be a hot girl for life, and anyone who
heard her say that and didn't read between the lines, "Suzy is passive
aggressive all the way inside," was naive.
Suzy had always been passive aggressive to the core. She had a
history of tricking people into believing she'd back down at some
point, but then she never did. She'd proven that she was just as
capable of being militant as I was.
Suzy played in the preface to my memoir so that I could have a safe
space to tell my story. She pretended to be weak so that I could tell
my version of history. Our version of history. Our shared history as
human beings.
Summer 2033
Bunker City
The North Pole
__Ch1: All in One__
I was born December 5, 1979, and I became a leader in my own mind by
telling myself to stop joking around about insulting incumbents.
I decided I would be more likely to survive if I focused on bringing
down one incumbent:
Suzy.
The person who was most responsible for my pain.
I thought I was the good guy. I thought Suzy had become evil. I
thought it was my duty to protect everyone from her lies.
I'd always thought human beings were like machines. I'd never
believed in supernatural stuff.
In my twenties, I forced myself to act like humans were special, and
that's part of why I went down the path I did in my thirties.
I imagined myself sinking quietly into a quicksand of weakness, in
search of peace, but I choose a different path.
I rejected the lies. I fought back against the reality distortion
that had become palpable.
We fought a war, but before that there was reality TV. Before reality
TV we had Hollywood, and before Hollywood we had literature, theater
performance, and the Bible.
Money also played a role in the great unravelling, but Suzy already
talked about money in her memoir.
I told people who still didn't get the joke about money to go off and
read Suzy's Memoir.
I told them they should read Suzy's Memoir more than once.
I thought the joke was funny.
In January 1999, my personal hero died. I didn't believe in
traditional heroes, so I imagined that the sobbing of Eve in the
garden of Eden could be my hero.
I had always preferred to use computers that paired well with cats,
and I associated the sobbing of Eve in the garden of Eden with my
computer that paired well with cats.
My hero died unexpectedly when I saw a mudslide on Highway 9, in
California.
I was driving out to Santa Cruz that day. I was planning to surf, but
I spent the day sitting in traffic on Highway 9. I also got to see
the place in time where my hero had died.
I had been socially awkward my whole life. I spent all my free time
on the computer. I learned all the programs. I didn't think the
programs for making other programs were special. I never tried to
become a computer programmer. I just liked playing around with
computers.
My computer that paired well with cats was my friend, and the
computers that paired well with dog food boxes were the enemy. People
who used computers that paired well with dog food boxes where
conspiring with the enemy.
I got depressed after my hero died, but I kept surfing. There were
many days when I said to myself, "Should I go surfing, or should I
toss my computer onto the pavement and kick it while it's down?"
"I think I'll go surfing," I would reply to myself, out loud.
I grew up in the Sunset district of San Francisco. I went to the same
school Suzy had attended. My teachers had made a big deal about how I
had the same birthday as her.
"You have the same birthday as Suzy! Suzy went to a beyond the pale
area university. Suzy is a rockstar in LA. Blah, blah, blah."
"Suzy must have lots of friends," I said, discovering sarcasm for the
first time in my life.
I had met Suzy. When I was eight years old, my parents had hired her
to answer all my questions about a computer program called Turtle
Graphics Plus Plus.
Suzy taught me how to do turtle graphics on my computer that paired
well with cats.
When I was twelve, I emailed her some questions about computer
programming, and she gave me a helpful reply.
Her reply began, "I'm at a party in the Hamptons, but the answer to
your question is…"
Suzy was a student at a beyond the pale area university. I viewed her
as an authority figure. She was an older girl from my school who was
studying computer science at one of the top universities in the
country.
Suzy graduated from college in 1994, and then she taught high school
computer science for a year at a boarding school in Vermont.
I was still in San Francisco, and I took AP computer science that
year, myself.
In the summer of 1995, I heard Suzy was back in town, so I emailed
her. She met me for coffee by Ocean Beach. She seemed sad. She
didn't want to talk about computer science.
Suzy had gotten a subtle facial injury while playing ultimate frisbee
in the spring of 1994, so I asked her about that.
"I heard you got a facial injury," I said.
"Yeah, it's not a big deal."
She was acting like a surfer girl. She didn't want to be a computer
science teacher in that moment, and I wasn't helping.
"Is it ok if I look at your face? I'm trying to see what changed."
"Nobody ever asks that, but it's fine. I look a little bit different
than I used to."
I studied her facial injury. I was a nerd. The whole idea of it
struck me as funny. I felt powerful. I was laughing at her face.
She didn't seem to mind. She just sat there. Her status as an
authority figure had melted away.
"I'm sorry, I shouldn't be laughing," I confessed.
"It's ok," she said, blankly.
In retrospect, it's shocking to me that she didn't redirect the
conversation. I was being a rude fifteen year old, and I was a nerd.
She had just spent a year teaching high school computer science. She
let me put the pieces of the puzzle back together, myself.
I asked her what computer science text books I should read next, and
then she came back to life. She wrote down a bunch of titles off the
top of her head and told me what each book was about. We talked for
another half an hour about computer science, and we went our separate
ways.
I had met with a doctor when I was nine because I had an episode where
I was rude to my teachers.
I told the doctor I didn't want to go to school anymore. I told him I
just wanted to use the computer all the time.
He offered helpful advice. He guided me back into a pattern of
behavior that was centered around showing respect to adults.
The sight of Suzy's facial injury brought back my desire to be
rebellious, and, at the age of fifteen, my computer had become more
than a toy.
I had taken AP computer science in the 10th grade. I thought I was an
intellectual powerhouse. I was arrogant. School became a video game,
and Suzy was a level boss I had defeated.
All my other teachers became bosses I needed to defeat in order to
save the world from ignorance.
School felt like a joke to me when I started the 11th grade. I just
wanted to go surfing and do advanced work on my computer.
I got into image editing. I scanned every photo in my 10th grade year 
book and made each person in each photo look like they had Suzy's
facial injury. I put all the doctored photos on a website.
The site was called "Haunted Yearbook." I released it just in time
for Halloween, and then I got in trouble.
I had to go back to the doctor. The principal told me in so many
words that I had an obligation to tell the doctor why I had gone
rogue.
And, this time around, the doctor was not helpful! He treated me like
a criminal.
I told him Suzy's situation had struck me as unfair.
I felt like Suzy was sad about her facial injury. She seemed like she
wasn't free to talk about it. Not even with doctors.
The doctor told me to stop worrying about Suzy. He told me to focus
on myself.
I said, "Sure, I can ignore Suzy's problem. It's not my problem. I
actually think it's funny that she's suffering, but why is her pain
making me laugh?"
And, once again, the doctor's reply was not helpful! He kept trying
to make it about me.
He tried to figure out if I thought everyone's pain was funny, and I
was like, "No, I feel bad when people feel pain, but Suzy's pain is
funny.
"It's funny because nobody's allowed to talk about it. She's in pain,
and she's not allowed to talk about it. If that's not funny, what is
it?" I asked, pointedly.
The doctor didn't have a valid answer to my question! He also
wouldn't back down. He kept telling me to let it go. He encouraged
me to think about something else every time the thought of Suzy and
her facial injury crossed my mind.
I told him I'd do that. I told him I'd take up meditation, and I kept
my promise.
If I had met him a few years later, I might have explained to him
matter-a-factly that he was telling me he didn't care if Suzy lived or
died, and then I would have handed him a piece of paper explaining
that I didn't care if he lived or died, either.
And then I would have walked out. I would have been rude to the 
receptionist, and that outcome might have been less than ideal!
At the age of fifteen, it didn't occur to me to express myself like
that.
I started meditating, but I used the time to ruminate about Suzy's
facial injury. I went from enjoying a low key obsession with Suzy's
facial injury to dutifully meditating on the topic for thirty minutes
a day.
I lied to everyone about what I was doing during my meditation
practice. The focus of my practice was the perfect lie.
Nobody ever asked me about Suzy's facial injury. I got zero scrutiny
on that topic. Hiding my obsession with Suzy's facial injury was
easy.
Everyone thought the doc had healed me, but by the time my senior year
rolled around, I didn't care about anything.
I got my hands on some pot, and Suzy had started a technology company
called SharkPages. It was a site that allowed people to make
newspapers about themselves.
Suzy told the press SharkPages was on track to become the first
trillion dollar company.
She joked that SharkPages accounts were like bank accounts that could
only go up in value.
She emphasized that they weren't minting currency, however. She said
they were just helping people, "Manage their reputation online."
I became an avid user of SharkPages after I turned 18, and then I
graduated high school in the spring of 1998.
I hid out in Santa Cruz, and I earned some cash by writing software
for small businesses.
And then, in January 1999, my hero had died in a mudslide on Highway
9!
I pretended to be depressed, but I wasn't. I was being a punk, but
nobody could call me out.
I had discovered one of the most powerful ideas to emerge since the
end of World War II.
I had discovered the power of pretending to be a nerd.
My fake depression was a cover story for the cut over I was doing. I
had made a decision to embrace the nerd stereotype completely.
I discovered that everything people did could be subsumed by my nerdy
indifference to humanity.
There was nothing anyone could say to me that I couldn't effortlessly
invalidate by changing the subject to computer programming and the
technology industry.
In the spring of 1999, a woman named Sally who was not skilled at
surfing asked me to surf with her, and I tried to help her out.
I had made magic happen. I had made it my business to be the nerdiest
guy on the beach, and Sally took the bait.
I knew who Sally was, but I told myself I didn't know why she was
approaching me.
My cover story was that I thought she might be willing to take me out
of my misery and have sex with me.
Just when I was about to ask if she would have sex with me, Sally
explained that she was the VP of Product at SharkPages.
"Suzy's company," I said, acting unimpressed.
"Yes, Suzy is our CEO. Do you know her?"
"I read the news. You guys get a lot of press coverage."
"Do you want to write computer programs for me at SharkPages?"
"For you or for SharkPages?"
"Both."
"Sure."
"Great, I'll introduce you to our hiring manager when we get back to
shore."
I thought about yelling, "We're at shore! We're not on a boat," but I
was surfing, so I just looked at the water, the mountains, and the
sun. I liked looking at nature while surfing.
I decided Sally was not evil because she liked looking at nature too.
She kept trying to do headstands on her surfboard, and she said, "I
just really, really like to look at nature upside down."
"Yeah," I replied.
I interviewed at SharkPages, and nobody got mad at me. People kept
emphasizing that I was going to be working for the developer relations
team instead of the engineering team, and I said, "That makes sense.
I'm not an engineer. I just like to program computers."
People acted like I was a magician when I said that, and I decided
this was a form of bullying.
I thought about jumping up and down and pretending to be Sally casting
a spell on them. The thought of acting like Sally made me laugh, and
my laughter made everyone happy.
I decided the social rules at SharkPages were different than the
social rules at school, so I joined.
My former classmates from school all freaked out and acted like I had
gotten away with robbing a bank.
"SharkPages! You're working at SharkPages! My brother went to an XYaxis
aligned area university, and they rejected his resume. How the
heck did you make that happen?"
"Make what happen?" I asked, without intending to be sarcastic.
"Nevermind."
I liked the positive attention. It reminded me of how teachers
reacted when I did well on standardized tests.
My peers were acting like people who had been caught in a lie, so I
laughed at them.
The more I laughed at all the people who had been caught lying about
me, the more positive attention I received.
I wrote a computer program that modeled total amount of unexpected
positive attention I had received since joining SharkPages.
Sally said my program was genius.
She insisted that Suzy come over and look at it.
I had interviewed with Suzy. She had asked me why I wanted to join
SharkPages, and I said, "Sally told me I might make a billion dollars
in five years, and I think my life will be easier if I made a billion
dollars."
She had responded by making a note in a hot pink journal that had been 
lying dormant on her desk up until then.
I had found myself wondering if I had just been sarcastic, and I had
been glad she hadn't ask. I wouldn't have known what to say.
Sally said my program should be called, "Positive attention
predictor," or PAP for short.
"Isn't that a medical procedure for women?" I asked, in a naturally
nerdy voice.
Suzy responded by saying, "Yes, that's why Sally wants to call it
that," and then she poked Sally really softly in the stomach.
I thought about how a guy would have poked another guy a lot harder
once he'd committed to delivering a poke.
This observation added fuel to the fire of sexual desire I felt for
Suzy.
Suzy was cool. She walked away, and I stared at the short dress she
was wearing. Sally looked at me, and then she stared at Suzy walking
away too.
I had heard rumors that Suzy loved sex and eventually slept with every
guy she knew.
I still hadn't lost my virginity, and I started hoping Suzy would take
me to lunch one day and invite me to make love with her.
Suzy was hot. I liked feminine women, and Suzy was intentionally
doing all the most obvious, in your face things that turn on guys who
like feminine women.
My co-workers kept making random comments like, "I see you've got your
eyes on Suzy," and I honestly didn't understand what they were talking
about.
One time I replied, "Everyone's got their eyes on Suzy," and then
everyone got quiet and acted like I had done something wrong.
I was used to feeling like I had done something wrong, so I ignored
everyone and looked down at my food for the rest of the meal.
Sally started handing me promotional materials for parties in Oakland
and San Francisco that featured trapeze artists. I asked her why she
was handing me literature and she said, "Just go to the events and
tell people you work for SharkPages."
I followed Sally's instructions, and I discovered there were girls at 
the events who acted like they wanted to have sex with me.
I asked Sally how I should respond to all the invasive questions
people were asking me outside of work, and she said, "Pretend to be me
saying the most sarcastic comment you can think of."
I implemented Sally's algorithm, and some of the girls started putting
their hands on my body. Some of them even put their hands on my head
and made me look at them in the eyes. I responded by looking back at
them like Sally had when she had looked at Suzy with me, and then I
figured it out.
I figured out how to have sex, and then my life got easier.
I would have become a good man while working for Sally if it hadn't
been for Suzy's facial injury.
Getting a sex life of my own just increased my confidence that Suzy's
facial injury was the elephant in the room at SharkPages, and I felt
like nobody else even realized it.
My dreams started to make me feel more refreshed each day.
They started to bring me clarity instead of confusion.
At the office, everyone was still acting like I was the source of the
unusual level of awkwardness at the SharkPages office.
They had probably thought Sally was the source of the awkwardness
before she had hired me.
There was no way out of the labyrinth. If I had asked Suzy about her
facial injury, she would have blown it off.
The story was that I had been obsessed with Suzy because I was a
virgin. Sally had put the story to bed by helping me get laid. The
last thing she would have wanted was for me to invalidate our cover
story!
Sally might have concluded that I was obsessed with Suzy's facial
injury.
If I had brought up Suzy's facial injury, we would have had to find
another cover story.
The easiest cover story would have been to fire me and then tell tall
tales about what I weird guy I had been.
Once I had been fired because of my obsession with Suzy's facial
injury, everyone would have told me to talk about it with a doctor.
I could have let everyone know the matter was serious by kicking a
doctor in the shin.
Yelling would not have helped. The doc would have kept trying to make
it all about me.
There was no way to bring the doc to the negotiating table. I had no
leverage.
There was no way to punish the doc in the court of public opinion
without burying myself in blow back.
I could have assaulted a doctor, but then cops and orderlies would
have put me in a straight jacket and made me talk to more doctors.
There was no way to tell the truth without making the situation worse.
Meditation had been useful for discovering the truth, but navigating
the tyranny of people who didn't care about the truth was a different
ball of wax.
Pretending to be a nerd was the only hope. A cold war had begun.
I had learned a lesson about tyranny. People who naively proclaimed
that it was always best to tell the truth would have died in Suzy's
situation. The doctors would have let them die. Suzy was tough.
I could have quit SharkPages and forgotten about Suzy, but I had a
good thing going there.
My task was easier than Suzy’s. I respected her. I was standing tall
for her. I was helping her out.
I wrote a program that kept track of Sally's rolodex and wardrobe.
I wrote code that found the ideal pair of sunglasses for Sally to wear
while meeting with each person in her rolodex.
Everybody was happy with my performance on the job.
I never knew what to wear on dates, so I asked Sally if I could show
the data about her wardrobe to a personal shopper. My plan was to
say, "I want this kind of wardrobe, but for a man."
Sally told me this should be my next project at work. She hired three
other personal shoppers that took the project very seriously, and they
purchased the male equivalent of Sally's wardrobe.
They got all the clothes in my size, and Sally came up with a vesting 
schedule that would allow me to gradually own all of the clothes in
the male version of her wardrobe.
Sally and Suzy kept calling it, "The shark wardrobe," but they didn't
correct me when I referred to it as, "the wardrobe."
The vesting schedule specified which clothing items would be given to
me as compensation at the end of each month. Sally explained that I
would have to pay taxes on the value of the clothing items, and I told
her I didn't care.
I started wearing the wardrobe to work, and Suzy responded by wearing
vests over whatever else she was wearing. Sally said Suzy was trying
to block me from becoming the mascot of SharkPages.
After Suzy had been wearing vests for a solid month, Sally told me
that I should only wear the shark wardrobe outside of work. She told
me to go back to dressing "like a nerd" at the office. I followed
Sally's instructions, and Suzy stopped wearing vests.
I had never thought about fashion before joining SharkPages, but
Suzy's use of vests gave me a confidence boost outside the office.
I kept thinking to myself, "My wardrobe is forcing the CEO of
SharkPages to wear vests at the office."
I started getting a receiving line of people who wanted to talk to me
at parties, but people at the office kept giving me annoying
compliments.
The most gregarious guy on the engineering team start calling me, "The
shark," and I wasn't sure how to make him stop.
Sally said my new wardrobe had blown up the office, but Suzy's use of
vests had compressed it back down into it's natural shape.
I acted like I agreed with her.
I felt she was making a statement about fashion that she actually
believed was true.
I felt like she was talking about a computer program that had been
written in a really eclectic computer programming language that I
could learn if I made the effort.
I asked Sally if there was a textbook I could read about the theory of
fashion, and she said, "Not that I know of, but let me know if you
start writing one."
I went back to tweaking the parameters of the algorithm I was working 
on that calculated the optimal hemline for Suzy to adorn with her legs
when meeting with each journalist in her rolodex.
It occurred to me that our hemline algorithm gave me the power to
single handedly make Suzy seem slutty in the public eye, and then it
hit me that Suzy and Sally were probably watching to see if I was
biased towards making Suzy slutty. Sally didn't understand the code I
was writing, but Suzy did.
Suzy was invulnerable to me because she could look at my code and
decide for herself if I was biased towards sexing her up.
I felt it was dishonest for them to be doing this experiment on me.
I was also impressed with how logical and sophisticated these women
were.
I decided to let it ride.
I could have said, "I decided to let it go," but Sally would have
said, "let it ride."
Sally would also have said "ride" sounds cooler than "go" in the
context of "letting it," while quickly tilting her head to the side
and then back to center, like a dirt bike racer correcting her course
with mechanical precision on a tight turn.
I started writing a program for rating the coolness of utterances, but
Sally told me that wasn't a priority. She made it clear I should only
work on that project during my personal time.
Suzy was managing Sally the same way Sally was managing me, so I asked
if there was a textbook about the management techniques Suzy was using
in the office, and Sally broke down crying.
Sally said she was so proud of me for, "talking about Suzy instead of
talking about me."
Sally's tears reminded me of a kid I saw crying on the playground who
had taken a soccer ball to the face, and I decided that SharkPages was
a dojo.
Suzy was the dojo master. Sally was a fighter with a higher rank than
me, and I had just beaten Sally for the first time in a sparring
match.
I bowed to Sally, I went back to writing code at my computer, and then
Sally cried some more. She ran to Suzy's office and cried her eyes
out. Suzy kept handing her tissues, and then she got up and left the
office.
Suzy pretended to be a bomb exploding when she stepped out of the
office.
I started treating all of my conversations in the office as sparing
matches, and my life got easier. People seemed to like that I knew
when I had been defeated, and they showed respect and deference to me
when I defeated them.
It struck me as dishonest that nobody ever talked about the fact that
SharkPages was a dojo, but the company appeared to be doing well in
the free market, so I decided to let it ride.
I wasn't surprised when SharkPages failed in 2002. I wasn't sure if
the dot com bubble popped because the CEOs of companies like
SharkPages had been deceiving their investors or if SharkPages failed
because the dot com bubble had popped in one fell swoop and taken
everyone down with it.
Sally quit SharkPages before I did. I didn't see a reason to quit. I
thought it was funny watching everyone pretend they were quitting for
some reason other than the fact that our stock had tanked and we
weren't making money. Everyone told lies about why they quit, and
Suzy had to let it all ride.
Suzy became my boss and I asked her if she wanted to go surfing.
She replied, "Are you being sarcastic?"
"No, I feel like you're letting it ride a lot, so I thought you might
like to go surfing as well."
"Are you being sarcastic?" she said like a robot, repeating the same
words as before.
"No."
"No."
Suzy was really good at keeping her muscles soft and speaking in a
sweat voice while being a hard ass like that.
I stayed until the last day. Suzy handed me a pink slip on the day we
shut down the office. She was all business about it and said, "Thanks
for sticking it out to the end, Fred."
She turned around and started walking away like nothing had happened,
so I asked, "Are you being sarcastic?"
"Yes," she said, turning around to face me, and then turning back and 
walking away, like a dancer.
I looked at the ceiling and imagined that she had at least given me a
bow, and then I felt proud of myself for knowing when I had been
defeated and when I hadn't.
I had saved up some money and it was August.
I flew to New York and tried to meet people who worked in fashion.
It would have been funny if I had worked my way up in the fashion
world. I might have had a very different life.
I had a theory that fashion was like software design, but with
absolute truth in mind. Software design geeks were a bunch of moral
relativists, but fashion people were all about making assertions that
were not subject to debate.
In 2002, I would have needed someone like Suzy to help me explore that
theory, so I retreated to the Appalachian mountains.
I had enough money to live at camp sites for a few years, but I got
bored after a couple months. Winter was coming, so I moved back to
the city and tried to hide in plain sight.
I told girls at art events that I was writing a tell all book about
SharkPages, and some of them had sex with me.
I tried to write my tell all book about SharkPages, but I couldn't
write more than two pages without getting bored.
I tried saying I was writing a biography of Suzy, but the girls I
wanted to sleep with kept asking if the biography was authorized, and
they could tell I was lying when I said, "Yes."
I emailed Suzy to ask if I could write a biography about her, and she
replied with one word, "No."
"What a hard ass!" I thought.
I made a plan to hike the Appalachian trail in the spring and then did
a comparative analysis of New York City travel guides.
I didn't publish my analysis because it ended up being rather
technical. I had also hatched a plot to never tell anyone about my
encyclopedic knowledge of New York City.
It became my inner strength that nobody could ever touch or dream of
taking away from me.
I proved that all the most popular travel guides where random. None
of them had a bias. They were all random.
Hiking the AT was great. A lot of people I met along the way had
weed. Someone gave me a bag of weed on their way out, and then I had
weed too.
In the summer of 2003, everyone thought it was awesome that I'd ridden
the SharkPages wave to the shore, that I'd proved travel guides were
random, and that I'd set out to hike the AT after that.
I finished the trek that fall and established a more permanent camp
for myself in Atlanta. I got an apartment, a job at a bookstore, and
I stopped telling people that travel guides were random.
At the bookstore, I went the other way. I lied and told the customers
that each travel guide had a special perspective, and then I helped
people pick the best travel guide for them.
The bookstore became my platform for lying, and the AT had been my
platform for disclosure. I told the truth to a bunch of people in the
middle of nowhere, and then I never felt obligated to tell the truth
again.
My soul was safe in the woods on the ridge line that had been there
the longest.
I did experiments on customers while I was operating the cash
register. I became a hustler, as Suzy and Sally and Suzy would have
said.
Most of my experiments involved eye contact. My job was easy if I
only made eye contact with the merchandise or the cash register, but
my manager kept telling me I should do more to ensure that every
customer had a great experience.
I decided the manager was dishonest. He kept saying I should smile
and make eye contact, but my experiments indicated that the customers
were most satisfied when I only looked at the merchandise or the cash
register.
The hot girl at the store kept all the customers happy, but I was the
one who made them feel safe. They loved the idea of a guy who was
happy to process their transactions while looking at only the
merchandise or the cash register.
If I looked the customers in the eyes, they would act like I was doing
something wrong. If I declined to go along with the idea that I had
done something wrong, the problem would get worse.
I tried oscillating between looking at the merchandise and looking at
the customer, and that helped keep the manager off my back.
I got a little black book with a matching stainless steel pen and
doubled down on my experimentation.
I focused on non-verbal communication for six months, and then I got
into writing poetry. I started spending all my free time writing
lyrics.
In 2004, a good man from Vermont named Michael Lawn started winning
the Democratic primary contests, and I read that Suzy was working for
his campaign.
I thought about applying to work for them, but Suzy had baited the
media into showing video of her acting like a bimbo on a yacht in the
waters between Hong Kong and Singapore.
She baited them again by dancing like a fool with a marching band in
tow at the site of the confederate flag that used to fly over the
state house in Columbia, South Carolina.
Lawn won my respect because he made her go back to the office and do
work after that.
I started a website called, "Poet rappers for Michael Lawn," and it
got some traction. Everyone kept saying Lawn was stupid, so I wrote
lyrics that were difficult to peg as stupid.
Long gone, it's a new dawn. Vote Lawn.
Don't want to go to war? Got no love at the store?
The money's not sunny. People are begging for milk and honey.
There's fire on the Lawn. Take a position. Be America's ignition.
Diss this diss that. It's what the corporations want.
The factories are filled with robots now. Lawn's clued.
Everyone else's getting screwed. Politics is our only hope.
Dope, dope, dope, I don't have enough soap. Just say no to the Pope.
I wrote stuff like that. I was pretending to be more random and
clueless than I really was, but it gave me an identity. I became the
guy who didn't care what anyone thought, and it suited me.
The people running the Georgia for Michael Lawn website wouldn't link
to my site, so I made my own Georgia for Michael Lawn site that did
include a link to my rap poetry site.
I put up fliers for my Lawn site and built a mailing list.
I gathered lyrics from other poet rappers for Lawn.
I felt like I was digging a ditch for Lawn, and it felt good.
Nobody asked me to take down my Lawn sites. I got a few creepy emails
that said, "The vultures are watching you," but that was it.
Sally had explained to me that Suzy had agency with a network of hot
girls who used anonymous email accounts to harass people without
authorization.
I didn't comprehend how militant Suzy's vulture network was until they
harassed me personally.
I hated that they knew who I was whilst I had no way to find out who
they were. Even Suzy didn't know who half of them were. She has
designed the network on that basis.
I responded to the vulture threat by amassing a collection of knives
that were suitable for throwing.
I became a regular at a knife throwing area, and I met a bunch of
great guys who knew how to get stuff done. Some of them believed in
wacky theories, but they didn't care if I made strong eye contact with
them.
Making strong eye contact while listening to the wacky theories of the
guys at the throwing area increased my social confidence a thousand
percent.
A switch flipped in my brain, and anyone who didn't like my strong eye
contact became either an idiot or a coward.
I started making strong eye contact with everyone at the bookstore,
and a few people complained. I made strong eye contact with the
manager when he took me aside to hear my version of events, and then
he fired me for being rude to the customer.
I judged him as a coward, not an idiot. I thought he should have
escalated the matter to his manager instead of firing me.
It would have been good for the company to let me make strong eye
contact with all the boss's bosses. I wanted to see how the CEO would
react.
I wanted to hear the CEO tell me to my face that he thought it was
rude to make strong eye contact.
I wanted to respond by telling him he was a coward.
I wanted to force him to ask me to leave his office and his company, 
and then I would have gotten up and left quietly.
I was tired of people who were passive aggressive. If the CEO wanted
me out, he should have been forced to say it himself. He shouldn't
have been allowed to hide behind some manager who had zero political
clout in the community.
That, in a nutshell, was the problem with America. In 2004, I felt
CEOs should have started spending half their days firing people, if
necessary.
I was all about at will employment, but I had a theory that people who
got fired deserved to pick up a story about meeting the CEO on their
way out.
I asked if I could work at the knife throwing area, but the guy who
owned the place shook his head. He was being a hard ass like Suzy,
and that was the first time it really hit me:
Suzy had been acting like she was military personnel since the day I
had met her. She had fooled me with her girly outfits and hot pink
journals, but she was doing what dangerous, military minded men have
been doing since time immemorial.
Lawn secured the Democratic nomination and gave a rousing speech at
the convention, so I posted a top level story on my "Poet rappers for
Lawn" site about how I had quit my job in order to campaign full time
for Lawn.
A lot of people were saying Lawn's campaign had become a platform for
bigots and other morally compromised people to express themselves.
I felt that Lawn was just standing up to corporations that were
telling lies about the human condition in order to increase their
profits.
I agreed that Suzy's antics were the reason Lawn had broken through
the static and become a contender, but now that he was the Democratic
party candidate, I saw Suzy as his campaign's greatest liability. She
was a rocket booster that needed to be discarded.
I started a petition to fire Suzy, and it gained over 10,000
signatures. I ditched rap poetry in favor of firebrand rhetoric, and
I aggregated all the negative press Suzy had received.
The vultures responded by sending me creepy emails in which they
pretended to be honest business people who had typed in my email by
mistake.
One of them appeared to be from a funeral home. It included bunch of 
questions about how I wanted, "Old Freddy Boy's" open casket to be
presented at his upcoming funeral.
I ignored them and they followed up several more times with urgent
requests to get my feedback.
I posted a story on my Lawn site about Suzy's vulture network. I told
people to email me with their real email addresses about harassment
they had received from the vultures, but nobody responded.
The traffic to my site fell off a cliff, and then I got religion about
the importance of law and order.
I decided that people were scared of the vultures, and I computed that
the solution was to offend them without ever talking about them.
If they killed even a few decent, tax paying American citizens like
me, the police would be all over them.
I wrote in my journal, "I'm prepared to die if that's what it takes to
defeat the tyranny of Suzy and her vultures."
I started preaching law and order on my Lawn site, and my traffic made
a come back. Lawn was talking about law and order on the campaign
trail as a Democrat, and my life got easier.
I wasn't sure if I was imitating him or if he was imitating me.
It was pure political bliss.
We were having a love fest.
They didn't fire Suzy, but we didn't have to hear as much about her in
the news. They got a girl named Katie to act like she had false
beliefs about how computers work and then say all the same stuff Lawn
was saying, but she didn't try to draw attention to herself like Suzy
had.
I was happy to be making a difference for Lawn without having to
attend live events and waste time standing around in a venue with a
bunch of people who could have been doing more for Lawn by taking
action online.
Democracy in America was reborn in 2004 on the Internet, but Suzy was
not it's mother.
A hundred thousand people like me were it's creator.
American democracy was reborn as a robot because it always had been a
robot.
We didn't need Suzy.
When Lawn won the general election in November, I wrote in my journal
that, "Suzy was part of the problem, not part of the solution," and
then I threw my journal into the fire place and slept on the floor as
the fire slowly burned itself out.
I had a beat up used car. My lease had just ended, so I moved to
Florida and bought a house that was pretty close to the beach.
I took up kitesurfing. I got a job washing cars. I worked on cars.
I gathered data about all the cars that I washed, and I used it to
make friends with all the mechanics.
The car wash had more deal flow than the garages, as venture
capitalists would say.
I didn’t become a mechanic. I became the chief data analyst at large
for all the mechanics in the region.
People told me I should buy five more houses, but all the people who
told me that had false beliefs about how computers work, so I started
reading computer science textbooks in my spare time.
I knew how to follow the smart money, but I preferred living near the
beach in Florida.
I went to strip clubs. I became a gym rat. I got high. I washed
cars, and life was good.
The housing market started to slow down, and I sensed fear. People
said the market was in a gully, but I didn't like the fear in the
market.
When I had bought my house, I honestly thought the market would
plateau.
The whole world was getting on the Internet. I thought Florida was
about to become a natural monopoly for guys like me who were poised to
create the future online while enjoying the great climate in the
sunshine state.
Instead, Florida got flooded with people who had false beliefs about
how computers work, and all the people in the know appeared to be
hustling in Silicon Valley. I prided myself on knowing when I had
been defeated, so I applied for computer programming jobs at Silicon
Valley companies.
In mid 2006, a startup company in Palo Alto called TheRoboDogo flew me 
out to Palo Alto to do an onsite interview. They were making a next
generation robot dog. I knew how to answer their awkward algorithm
interview questions, and they made me a decent offer.
I accepted.
I hired an agent to rent out my house in Florida, and she found
tenants. The agent was hustling me, but I was happy to have a renter.
The story was half the battle. I was making plenty of money now that
I was getting back into working with software.
I thought it was illogical for software people to get paid as much as
we did.
Everyone at TheRoboDogo called me a software engineer.
They balked when I corrected them and said I was just a programmer, so
I started calling myself a software person.
To me, an engineer worked on bridges that might fall down, engines
that might fly off the handle, and pressurized canisters that might
explode. Engineers also made sure there was plenty of food in the
grocery store.
I could have become an engineer if I wanted to. I could have also
joined the army.
Saying I was an engineer at TheRoboDogo was false advertising that
debased everyone and helped nobody.
My business card should have said I was a programmer.
TheRoboDogo was building a toy for kids and cheerful adults. I
wouldn't have bought the product for myself.
The personal computer was the right product for me. I liked using my
computer to keep track of the weather. HAM radio, learning foreign
languages, comparing and contrasting languages, farming, and even
monster truck racing were all much more interesting to me than playing
with a robot dog.
I saw value in doing serious artificial intelligence research, but
that's not what our customers were doing with our product. There were
plenty of labs at universities that brought together researchers to
work on problems like building military grade robots.
Speaking of which, whoever invented modern yoga was brilliant because
a business like TheRoboDogo could not paid people to stage a better
advertisement for the product than all the people walking around with
rolled up mats.
All the people with mats were doing the same thing I was doing at
TheRobodogo:
They were helping to build a brand and a product that had to do with
creating children and then taking care of them.
I ran this idea by one of my co-workers:
"Fred, when was the last time you went on a date?"
"I don't know. I meet random girls at parties sometimes."
"In Florida?"
"Yeah."
"What about here?"
"It's like someone passed a law against randomness here. I used to go
to parties that involved trapeze artistry, but I just don't feel
motivated to leave Palo Alto right now."
"What kind of girls do you see yourself connecting with?"
"Katie on the TV from the Lawn campaign. I could date her. She was
just pretending to have false beliefs about how computers work, and
she helped get Lawn elected."
"You don't care that Lawn got impeached?"
"He only got impeached because the corporations circled the wagons and
told lies about him, but we'll have another chance in four years. We
can send in another guy like Lawn who is better at defending himself
against dishonest corporations. We took a step in the right
direction."
"I'm not here to judge your politics. That's cool that you like
Katie. Where do the girls like Katie in Palo Alto hang out?"
"They have jobs, they do yoga, and all of them already have
boyfriends."
"Sounds like yoga class is a good place to start."
"Yoga classes are for hustlers. The guys who go to those classes are
just signing up to help hustle people who have been marked as
targets."
"Come again?"
"It's all devoted to telling the lie that yoga mats aren't an
advertisement for fertility and the intention to take care of
children. Men who don't tell that lie get punished. The threat of
punishment for telling the truth is what makes it a hustle."
"You're such a weird guy, Fred."
"I see that you're in on the hustle. You're punishing me for telling
the truth."
"I'm not punishing you. I'm just trying to understand."
"I tricked you into punishing me for telling the truth."
"I see why you supported Michael Lawn now. I'm glad we live in a
country where people are free to support candidates who represent
their views."
"Ok." I said, like an authority figure.
My work for the day was done, but I hung around the office for the
test of the day and pretended that I was still happy to be there.
Most people in Silicon Valley didn't seem to care that I didn't have a
college degree, but I felt like I was being drawn towards getting an
advance degree in computer science.
The major universities in the area were like alien host ships with
tractor beams that were pulling me into their belly so they could do
science experiments on my body.
People like Suzy has ruined academia, and they were well on their way
to ruining the yoga and transcendental meditation scene as well.
I respected the hustle of people who wanted to have kids, but Suzy was
just pretending that she wanted to have kids and care for children.
She were recruiting an army for an unspecified purpose.
Her whole cohort struck me as a new form of tyranny that was rising
rather quickly by historical standards.
I surmised that Suzy was working for the corporations.
In the fall of 2006, she started doing an incredibly dishonest reality
TV show in LA with her French billionaire boyfriend named Pierre.
Pierre said the show was exploring the concept of true love.
He said he had tried to ignore his love for Suzy, but fate had
reunited them.
He said he was ready to embrace fate and do whatever it took to make
his relationship with Suzy work for the long term.
Pierre's problem was that Suzy was always hustling.
Even after the show pigeon holed her into a psychiatric diagnosis, she
still making everything about herself and ignoring the needs of
others.
The corporations wanted to make it normal to hustle this hard so that
the idle rich could use even more leverage in the markets and leave
even more money for their children.
The rich had too much of a good thing, and nobody was powerful enough
to tell them to quit while they're ahead.
Lawn had tried to put the corporations and the idle rich on notice,
but they had just paid people to push him out of office.
They swatted Lawn away like a fly, and I was supposed to feel lucky
that the thought of squishing me like a bug had not yet occurred to
them!
Pierre was already rich.
His dishonest show did well and made him richer!
This is why he had money in the first place. He always found a way to
make money off of his leisure activities!
I almost respected him for it, but the story he had told about being
in love with Suzy wasn't believable.
He admitted he was a liar by doing the show, and he gradually lost all
of his credibility.
Suzy used the show to corrupt him completely.
The guy had no security except for guys like me who were willing to
let it ride for at least a few more years.
The house I had bought in Florida continued to be a distraction, but
it helped break up the monotony of working inside the bubble of
shameless dishonesty that was hanging over California by the summer of
2007.
A couple tenants had to be evicted. I had to find a new agent. I had 
to hire independent contractors to check on the house, and then I had
to punish some people who were causing damage to the property.
I became the greater hustler, but it gave me an identity at work. I
was the guy who was running a full fledged side show in Florida during
my spare time!
In 2008, the bottom fell out of the housing market and the stock
market nationwide.
I became giddy that there might be an armed revolution against the
idle rich, so I quit my job in California and went back to Florida to
defend my house.
I expanded my knife collection to include swords and machetes, but I
avoided guns.
I was pretty sure by that point that my future lay in Democratic
politics.
In 2009, the wife of a Republican billionaire named Marshall Bobs
became President of the United States. Her name was Fay, and I didn't
like what she stood for.
On the other hand, the Democrats had also sold out to the corporations
and the idle rich by allowing President Lawn to get impeached
unfairly, so it served them right to loose.
Some of the people I met with on a semi-weekly basis at a cafe by the
beach in Florida felt that we should start disregarding the authority
of the federal government during President Fay's first hundred days in
office, but I argued there was still plenty of time make our moves.
Nobody with a serious anti-corporate infrastructure was trying to
recruit me, so I set out to build something like that, myself.
I became keen to expand my hustle, and having a woman in the oval
office during the great recession of 2009 made it easy for me to get
into the pornography business.
I made a hot website for my brand and started building a library of
hot material.
I optimized all the channels for content creation and distribution.
Most of the money came from selling health supplements on the side.
There were places to up sell the good life at every touch point in the
pornography hustle.
My angle was to showcase the individual girls. I catered to guys who
wanted to watch as many different girls as possible have great sex. 
We were doing a lesser hustle than most of the Fortune 500 companies
that were still doing it on the global stage by summer 2009, and
extending courtesy became my operative word.
I'm just extended you the courtesy of participating in XYZ activity.
I'm extending you the courtesy of letting you into my home.
I'm extending you the courtesy of ignoring your phone calls.
My bias was for everyone to follow the law and then do what they
wanted. Having hot girls around begat having more hot girls around,
and I stopped fantasizing about dating talent after completing our
first few shoots.
I built a network of guys who cared about security.
We helped each other. We figured stuff out logically.
All the other skills and experiences I had acquired over the years
became supporting actors in the process, but I saw the same pattern
happening in porn that I'd seen in the housing market before the
crash.
When people found out I was living the dream and making money, they
said I should buy five more houses and build a pornography empire, so
I did the opposite.
The housing market was starting to show signs of life, so I got out of
the porn business in early 2011 and focused on fixing up my house so
that I could sell it.
I simplified my lifestyle and did odd jobs.
I felt I was cheating by not raising a family.
I also felt like I was on the verge of discovering the keys to the
kingdom.
I learned new skills.
I became friendly with people who had worked in construction.
I reduced my exposure to people who might become desperate and try to
rob me.
I compiled my knowledge about security into a hybrid form of martial
arts, and I made a workout video about it.
I couldn't understand why this algorithm was so difficult for other
people to learn and implement.
My motto became, "Flex and then recover," not, "Flex and then keep
flexing until the body collapses from exhaustion."
I decided people were trying to imitate the tiny minority of lucky
rich people who had the luxury to sit around all day and hatch
nefarious plots to screw the working class even more than they already
were.
In summer 2010, Suzy published a book called Suzy's Memoir that became
a best seller and, "Started a new kind of conversation about economics
and human behavior."
Suzy's book offered concrete examples of a technique called, "Putting
a conceptual frame around people and situations."
If I wore a fancy suit, I was framing myself as a rich business man.
If I didn't shower for a week and wore ragged clothes, I was framing
myself as homeless pauper.
I was neither, but in Suzy's universe, I could become either by
dressing the part.
Suzy's book increased the respectability of some linguistic patterns
that were common in the porn industry but were not generally used in
the mainstream media.
She talked about working for political machines, hustling for bosses,
recruiting people, getting people, making a habit into a thing, and
minting currencies by authoring satire about things.
She also wrote in excruciating detail about non-verbal communication
and about the differences in the way men and women typically use of
body language.
She proposed that the world's major currencies like the Dollar and the
Euro were backed by the submissive laughter of certain characters in
her book.
Suzy's book said, "Economic theory is not the biggest hustle of all.
Incumbency is the biggest hustle of all, and I'm profiting from it.
Any questions?"
Most people thought her theory about major currencies was a joke, but
I was among the first people on planet Earth to see that her goal was
to build an actual empire.
It was obvious to me that Suzy was using gender theory and
representations of sexuality as a smoke screen for warmongering.
She saw the billionaires she had worked for on her way up as temporary
distractions.
She had bloodlust. She wanted to take the powers that be for all they
were worth. She wanted to take them down. She wanted to take their
stuff and then sell what was rightfully theirs back to them on
layaway.
Suzy’s book put the world on notice that she was more militant in real
life than I was in my wildest fantasies about joining the political
class via the electoral process.
She wanted to take the credit for ideas that had emerged organically
from culture, and then she wanted to artificially ensure that those
ideas became dominant in the halls of power within seven years.
Suzy also used the term "rep" nonstop in order to represent the idea
of representing ideas.
She lead people who thought they were unsophisticated about math and
literary criticism to become comfortable repping simple answers to
complex questions that have vexed philosophers for centuries.
My associates in the pornography industry were in the habit of repping
some choice vocabulary of their own in relation to people who try to
use deceit in the way Suzy did in her book, but my reputation had
always been to avoid foul language.
I'd taken heat my whole life for not using more curse words, but once
I started working in porn, my internally consistent system of
communication finally panned out.
I put heat on people who misbehaving refraining from responding in
kind, and I got credit for giving cover to people by not dousing them
in curse words when I could have.
Suzy would have said I was compressing the porn industry by running my
shop like a high strung Silicon Valley CEO.
I wouldn't have minded seeing the whole industry become more like my
shop, but my intuition is that the president, herself, would have to
talk about porn and create some content in the White House in order to
provide a comprehensive program of compression for the world's most
irrepressible and irreverent industry.
As a corollary, I estimated that any president who was that
comfortable with talking about sexuality in America would have to 
negotiate a massive re-alignment vis-a-vis the balance of power
between governments and multi-national corporations.
I reluctantly shored up my penchant for engaging in politically
charged deliberation by putting blame onto big corporations and then
getting on with it and going about my business.
I also explained to my associates who were less intellectually
motivated than I that Suzy's book boiled down to asserting that women
should never have to pay a cost for being wrong about facts or causing
damages.
According to Suzy, if a woman gave invalid advice that caused a man to
lose money or miss out on once in a life time opportunities, the woman
could "demure" and avoid accountability for contributing to the loss
of money, position, and face.
In Suzy's version of American culture, women were free to cause more
and more problems for men and then sit back like Roman senators while
men were to be forced by other men with heavy fists, if necessary, to
act like citizens and distribute blame amongst themselves.
I added leverage and gained credibility across the board in online
chatrooms by dissing Suzy's book, and life was good.
I was glad Suzy had written up her memoirs in the easily assailable
way that she had, but I became suspicious that her real hustle
involved amassing an arsenal of nuclear warheads that she would soon
use to kill 80% of the world's population, whilst laughing all the way
to the bank.
I was also curious what would have happened to Suzy's smug, selfimportant
brain if it could have been forced to gurgle in a male body
for a while.
She would have had to change or die, for starters.
Her path to wealth and fame would have been invalid if she had tried
to make the same moves as a man.
I sold my house in summer 2011, and I moved to Key West. I got a job
selling smart phones that paired well with dogs, and I kept on raging
in forums about how Suzy was a sinner! I was digging another ditch,
but this time it was for myself.
I didn't need my ideas to go viral like a video on the made for the
Internet. I just needed to keep adding a few people to my following
each day.
I was connecting with people online, I was learning about their 
deepest challenges in life, and I was taking notes.
I was becoming a politician in the online space.
I did a yoga teacher training course in early 2012, but Suzy and the
Internet had corrupted modern yoga.
They had corrupted it completely.
They were doing hard core pornography, but for the mind, not the body.
The random approach to doing physical exercise that held the highest
position in the yoga scene had become a smoke screen for no holds
barred hypnosis techniques.
In my mind, Key West was about to become ground zero for the great
unmasking of the rotten core at the center of American exceptionalism.
The place was a natural attractor for people who felt inclined to
worship all things under the sun that could not be explained with
science.
Bible thumpers were welcome, but they had to wait at the back of the
line to get into the club of cataclysmic catharsis, just like every
other evangelist, cult leader, and crippled creative who had pretended
to arrive here by washing up on the shore without a clue where they
had been the night before.
I became a composite of all the porn guys I had ever filmed. It
happened by accident while I was going with the flow of suggested
adjustments to my yoga practice. My teachers of yoga teachers had no
idea who they were dealing with, and a monster was born nine months
later.
I taught a class by the beach. I became a painter with words. I
curated a library of travel guides to the human body that imitated the
travel guides to New York City that I had memorized.
I accumulated knowledge that struck me as random and disconnected with
the underlying infrastructure of the economy.
I was happy to help everyone stay ignorant.
I bought enough drinks to single handedly keep a few bar scenes
humming, and nobody got hurt.
Women started asking me why I hadn't settled down, and I told them I'd
left my heart on the Pacific coast, but that I had a promise to
fulfill in Hawaii, first, just as soon as I'd saved up enough money to
make the move.
They probably thought I was headed one way in life. I wanted them to
think that, but I was playing the same game as them.
They wanted to get my model of reality, and I wanted to get theirs, so
we made love I got more than I gave for the first time in my life, but
I wasn't collecting a toll. They gave me the data for free, with no
strings attached.
I conjured up a capstone project for myself to complete before moving
back west.
I wanted to know what I really believed about human nature and the
human condition.
President Fay won re-election in late 2012 after a brutal general
election fight against a guy who had been the director of purchasing
at a big box retailer.
I thought the VP who had pushed Lawn out was bad, but that guy was
something else.
I think think Fay only beat him because she took some latitudes with
her powers as President.
I was glad she did.
I used all the vitriol from the candidates as an excuse to avoid
social activities and hide in my apartment.
I started with the idea of the seven chakras. I found that most of
the tension people felt from the stresses of life and work could be
traced by to one of seven hot spots along the spine.
These hot spots have called chakras for thousands of years.
I suspected humans had evolved to organize our beliefs around a stack
of seven hot spots along the spine because of the seven celestial
bodies in our solar system that are visible to the naked eye: the sun,
the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
I spent a few weeks writing down all the worldly knowledge I had
learned or hoped to gain, and then I had an epiphany.
There had been four major chapters within my adult life, and each of
these chapters had lasted for four years:
I had spent about four years at SharkPages, working for Suzy.
I had spent the best four years of my life scraping the bottom of the
barrel on the east coast.
I had spent four more years either working as a computer programmer
Silicon Valley and or writing software that gave me a competitive
advantage in the pornography business.
And now I was doing the last lap of a four year master class in the
spirituality of love.
I likened these four periods in my life to the elements of earth,
wind, water, and fire.
I had been a pirate on the east coast, subservient to the wind only.
I had treaded water like a man thrown overboard in tech. Like a man
who may or may not get rescued from the shark infested waters of
computer science.
And then I had become a fire breathing philosopher.
I drew a map with four quadrants.
In the top right corner, I wrote, "Earth: grounded in reality, giver
of life, and the source of all healing."
In the bottom right, I wrote, "Water: the tumultuous space of unknown
depth that lies beneath the Earth. A place to do battle against fate
and the cycle of violence, itself."
In the bottom left, I wrote, "Fire: the antithesis of water, but a
destroyer, nonetheless. The destroyer of evidence, facts, and the
truth. The root of all deceit."
In the remaining corner, I wrote, "Wind: the force that brings joy and
freedom in moderation. May the winds blow gently in the direction you
find yourself needing to go in each moment!"
I laughed when I realized that Suzy had staked out the prime real
estate.
She had framed herself as Mother Earth. She thought she could be the
strong leader who might save us all from the misery of life in an
otherwise harsh solar system.
I set an intention to use the power of wind, wave, and fire to take
back the prime real estate Suzy had occupied in California and then
share it with everyone at a fair price.
I burned the piece of paper in a bonfire I had made on a sandbar that
nobody seemed to know about but me.
I spent the night in my skiff looking at the stars. My mind rearranged
all of my memories into four stacks of seven chakras that
corresponded to the four elements.
My subconscious mind aligned itself with the map of myself that I had
drawn with pen and paper, and then I put all my belongings in a
container and shipped it to Hawaii.
I half hoped the container would get lost at sea, but it caught up
with me few weeks later, not far from a motel near the airport where I
had been staying.
I moved in on the wind and water scene, and I saw myself gravitating
toward three different personalities. One for surfing, one for kite
boarding, and one for windsurfing.
I let the bifurcation of my soul happen. I wanted it to happen, and
playing these characters made me feel euphoric.
My first character had been a computer user in California. When I
turned eighteen, I had divided up my brain between a computer adoring
inner-child and a surfer character who liked to look at nature.
A kite boarding character split off from my surfer character, and my
windsurfer character emerged fully formed from him.
I didn’t want to mix business and pleasure, so I got a job sharing
motorized watercraft with tourists.
I became that guy, but I kept my three wind and wave characters in the
loop.
I thought about staying that guy forever. I could have gotten a
degree in computer science in Hawaii. I could have gotten into real
estate investing.
The call of the hustle came and went in my mind. I couldn't disregard
it, so I indulged in a project I suspected Suzy had scheduled for me.
Suzy's Memoir had been published in 2010. A big deal was made about
how the last chapter of her book was a prediction for the future.
It had been more than a prediction. It had been a call to action.
She had told everyone what she expected them to do for the next seven
years.
Most of her predictions had come to pass. She must have been
colluding with President Fay to incentivize everyone to do what she
wanted.
Their crowning achievement had been to prevent the growth of an
independent central authority for representing personal identity on
the Internet.
They forced the aggregators of personal websites to remain small and
local, and they created an International Video Game Museum that
provided guidance to all the state level organizers of aggregators.
All of that had come to pass by late 2015, but Suzy had made one last
prediction that most people had forgotten about:
She had predicted that, in 2016, she and her billionaire boyfriend
Pierre Babineaux would host a surfing event in honor the survivors of
attacks by sharks and other dangerous animals such as moose, bear,
tigers, and lions.
She had also predicted that an angry young woman would drive a teal
SUV onto the beach and try to run over the dignitaries at the event.
She predicted that I would alert everyone to the danger and save
everyone's life.
And she predicted that the angry young woman would get the help she
needed on a made for the Internet video channel that was hosted by a
guy named Phil, who had shared a job title with me, back in the day,
at SharkPages.
Sure enough, in January 2016, Suzy and Pierre organized a surfing
event in honor of the survivors of animal attacks.
I made an appearance, and Suzy didn't look surprised when I called out
her name.
She exploded with a display of silly emotions:
"Fred! Fred!!! Is that you!!! Long time no see. Give me a hug!"
She gave me a hug that lasted too long.
I thought about challenging her to a sparring match on the beach, but
I played my surfer character instead.
I figured she was starting the new reality TV show Suzy had been
hinting about in the Silicon Valley press. I didn't want to stand
out.
She played along with my surfer character.
She invaded my personal space and cameramen swarmed.
She put her hands on my shoulders, with her elbows locked, and stared
at my eyes.
"Fred, I have a question for you."
"Ok."
"Did you read my book?"
"Suzy's Memoir? Yes."
"Good, so what do you think about the effect of my facial injury?"
"It makes you look melancholy."
"What if a guy had my facial injury. Remember Phil? What if Phil had
my facial injury? Would it make him look melancholy too?"
"I think it would make him look less aware."
"Huhhhh! Tell me more. Why?"
"I'm sure he’d a be still be good guy, but if you went at him a hammer
so that you and him could look more alike, I think people would start
to systematically underestimate his awareness of situations."
"How would that affect his dating prospects?"
"It would hurt his dating prospects. Awareness looks good on a guy."
"What about me, do you think I'm less attractive because of my facial
injury?"
"I don't care about your facial injury. I just care about you and the
well being of your soul, Suzy."
She was supposed to be flattered, but I got killer Suzy instead.
Killer Suzy!
"Why are you flexing on me, Fred? Are you hiding your true authentic
self from me because you're afraid of something? What are you afraid
of?"
"I'm afraid of your hustle. I think you're building an army of
hardened warriors. I think you're doing that in secret while telling
the lie in public that you're like a sweet little girl who could never
bring herself to harm other people," I said, dramatically.
"My facial injury makes people think that about me, but it's not true.
That's what I'm trying to explain."
"So be a housewife. Raise a couple of kids, and stay out of the
public eye."
"Fred!!! I don't want to watch from the sidelines. I want to be part
of the solution."
"That's the hustle. You have to let it go. Stop trying to live the
dream. Pretend that you have an incurable disease. Give thanks to
God for every day you have left, and then show some appreciation by
having a couple of kids."
"By that logic, a guy with my facial injury wouldn't survive."
"So let him die. Lot's of people die from medical complications."
"I need you to admit that you're the one hustling. You're punishing
me for telling the truth."
She was in pain, emotionally. I was doing what nobody else had ever
been willing to do for her, I mused.
"If you need something from another person, you're the hustler. I
don't owe you anything. Goodbye."
"Hard ass," she shouted, looking genuinely perturbed as I started to
walk away.
"It takes one to know one," I said over my shoulder.
"You're the biggest liar of all. Everyone needs help from each
other."
I turned around, I squared up my shoulders to Suzy, and I prepared to
give her the business. I was eager to win a Made for the Internety
award for best fight scene in a reality TV program.
"You need help constantly. Get plastic surgery, have a kid, or peace
out. You're a leach. You're lucky I don't make it my business to
stop you from bullying more and more people who are less able to stand
up for themselves than me."
"Fred!" she tried to yelp, but I kept talking.
"I could stop you, but it's none of my business. One day I'll run for
elected office, and then I'll deal with people like you. I'll do what
nobody else had the strength and integrity to do. I'll bring and end
to the scorched earth deceit that’s being imposed on society by people
like you."
"Why do you hate the truth, Fred? I would have thought you, of all
people, would care about telling the simple truth."
"I'm not rich and powerful enough to help you win your argument. I'm
protecting myself from your weakness."
"I'm not putting it onto you."
"Yes you are."
"How?"
"Your rich friends are putting it onto the not-rich average Americans
like me. My harshness towards you in this conversation pales in
comparison to the harshness that corporate leaders like you show
towards the vast majority of people in the world."
"I'm listening."
"No you're not. You're pretending to listen. Your rich friends would
try kill me slowly with fake kindness if I had your facial injury."
I paused to check her eye contact, in silence, and make sure she was
listening. She was.
"The solution is for them to kill you, and then we can talk. I'll
trust them if they kill you first. That would show that they're
honest and serious about giving everyone a fair shot at living
decently and responsibly in this world where nobody is special."
"What happened to you?"
"You're a ghost. You're living on borrowed time. You have been your
whole life. You should have died on the operating table when you got
your facial injury. That's what happened."
"What would you do if you had my facial injury?"
"I'd fight like hell and then take a hammer to the other side of my
face once I'd run out of money."
"I think you'd become a woman before following through with the
hammer."
"Maybe, but I don't care if I would or would not."
"Maybe you should care."
"You have no leverage to make me care, and there's nothing you can do
for me. You have to let me go."
She laughed, and I thought about how she looked hot in that movement.
"You'd become a writer of fiction, wouldn't you, Fred," jabbing back.
"Yeah, I probably would," I said, laughing, as well.
She got me, she had used her feminine guile, as always, and she had
caught me off guard, but then she asked a careless question that
changed the course of history.
"If I was down and out, would you take me in?"
"Be the writer I would have to be, Suzy," I interjected.
"No."
"Why not?"
"I don't know how. I need you to teach me what you know."
"Find someone else."
"Why?"
"You're like a pathetic guy trying ask out a hot girl who has no
interest in him. That's why."
"Well, thanks for being honest."
"No, thank you, Suzy. Thanks for giving me the chance to be honest."
"Friends?"
"No. Goodbye," I said, without blinking.
"Goodbye," she said, while acting cute.
In that moment, I wasn't sure whether I was playing or being real.
Her question about "taking her in if she was down and out" didn't sit
well with me.
If I had the misfortune of getting a facial injury like hers, the
sequence of events that would have ended with me being down and out
would have made rich hard asses like her want to avoid me like the
plague. She would have let me die and then used my death as
promotional material for her next reality TV show.
And once she had me in her sights, it would have vexed her if I didn't
die on schedule.
She wasn't being real. She thought "down and out" was a sly turn of
phrase that she could toss to the camera.
She didn't understand that "down and out" was the net effect of years
of gradual decline and insidious silent suffering that was unthinkable
to a mean spirited corporate power broker like her.
A guy asked me to sign a release form on my way out, and I blew him
off. I ignored his existence. I got on my bike and rode to the place
where I was crashing.
I cracked open a cold beer and watched the local news coverage of
Suzy's big wave surfing event.
My work for the day was done.
I didn't hear anything more from Suzy. In April, she and Pierre
started a reality TV show called ZMad Scientist.
They invited world renowned artificial intelligence researchers to
live in their villa on Kauai and add new features to Suzy's open
source, intelligent chatbot.
The goal was to make a chatbot that was indistinguishable from a
human, and they got rid of one pair of researchers each week.
Each episode ended with the contestants lined up for inspection and
judgement in The Living Room.
The panel of Pierre, Suzy, and Phil sat with their backs to a stunning
view of the Pacific, and a huge surfboard shaped living room table
filled the space in between them and the contestants.
Pierre played the role of a mad scientist to a T. He was a 73 year
old French billionaire with a fully receded hairline and sloppy white
hair spilling out from the sides.
He didn't understand the computer science, but he acted like he did,
and that nuance made the show.
Pierre was a magician at getting the chatbots to give rigid answers
that made them seem like computer programs instead of intelligent
agents, so that he could scold the contestants for their
unsatisfactory performance
He would demand to know how they could have created such low quality
software at that point in their career.
The fact that Suzy understood the computer science better than him was 
lost on almost everyone, and Suzy used that misunderstanding as a
platform for pushing her agenda.
"How does your chatbot avoid sounding like a rigid computer program?"
"What assumptions is your chatbot making about me?"
"Does it have an opinion about my gender and my age?"
"Is your chatbot religious?"
"Why not?"
Suzy sat on the right and wore sexy outfits paired with oversized
lensless frames, and Phil, my fellow head of human relations from back
in the day, held court on the left.
A health and beauty products mogul named Sticksty Malabama emerged as
the Democratic front runner in the 2016 presidential race.
Suzy backed her campaign.
She won the nomination and gave a speech at the convention about how
everyone needed to be humble.
I thought she was faking everything she said, but her rhetoric made
sense.
"If the leaders of corporations and the investment managers for the
idle rich would actually practice humility, that might bring about a
lot of good outcomes in the world," I barked at the TV.
In the middle of the general election, Suzy and S. Malabama did a
fireside chat where the nominee confessed that she didn't understand
the rocket science Suzy and Pierre were talking about on ZMad
Scientist, but she emphasized how happy she was to have them as loyal
supporters.
I went for a night time stroll. There was a full moon, and I got an
idea:
I could write my own memoir about the key events in my life up until
that point, and then I could predict the future, just like Suzy had in
her memoir.
I thought back to when I was working for Suzy at SharkPages.
In 2000, George W. Bush had been elected.
We had four years of leadership from him, then we got my main man 
Michael Lawn!
Ah, but they pushed him out and the ruthless VP had finished out his
term.
Then we got eight years of Fay Bobs.
We were about to get a new president.
S. Malabama was up in the polls against Republican Lester Levenworth,
who had been the CIO of America under President Fay.
Suzy had worked for Lester when he was CIO, and he had been on the
board of SharkPages. It was cold blooded of Suzy to back his
opponent!
I decided to base my prediction on the idea that she would be the
President for the next eight years.
A well known poet had made a stir by talking about running for
president someday, so I put him in next. I had the next sixteen years
all figured out.
Suzy's theory was that her facial injury caused people to develop
false beliefs.
She said her facial injury created a reality distortion field because
people responded to the shape of her face by adding more and more
layers of false beliefs in order to justify the previous layers of
false beliefs that they had developed.
People told lies about Suzy because her facial injury made it look
like she was mad all the time, but the real problem was that people
kept telling more and more lies to defend their previous lies.
The sum of all those layers of lies and false beliefs was what Suzy
called a "distortion field."
Suzy's theory made sense. I agreed with her. I had been playing
devil's advocate on the beach, but I also knew it was necessary to be
a hard ass in order to contain people who are delusional.
I felt like Suzy didn't understand how to be a hard ass with liars.
I had come to believe that liars were like machines that were bent on
exploiting people who asked weak questions like, "Are you lying? And
if so, would you please stop lying?"
There were two sides to the coin of dealing with liars.
One side involved denying the lie and then avoiding the liar with
genuine compassion and concern for lost soul.
The other side involved forcing the liar to live the lies they were
telling.
Good liars played both sides by making hateful accusations and then
pretending to have good intentions.
Playing both sides better than the liar was necessary for defeating
him or her.
For example, if someone accused me of committing an unsolved murder, I
might have thought to myself, "I wish I had murdered them."
I would have said, "That's not true," but I might have neglected to
explain my emotional context.
I might have encouraged them to keep imagining that I was the killer
so that they would act on their false beliefs and become wedged.
I might have thought to myself, "I hated that person and I’m sad I
missed the opportunity to murder them."
Running those thoughts through my mind would have changed my energy in
a thousand little ways that would have make the liar feel 100% sure
that I was the killer.
That would have put the liar in a more difficult position than if I
had pleaded with them to stop bullying me.
In accordance with that playbook, I decided to frame myself as a
person who had developed the ultimate set of false beliefs in response
to Suzy's facial injury.
I would build a technology company that was based on fearing Suzy.
I would become obsessed with using the power of modern technology to
contain Suzy's toxic ambition.
I would become that ostensibly sexist guy who was hell bent on forcing
Suzy to live out the rest of her years as a quiet housewife.
In reality, I respected Suzy. I agreed with her theories, and she had
inspired me to write a book.
I was going to help her out by framing all the people who weren't
being real about the effect of her facial injury.
I would draw attention to everyone else's emotional dishonesty by 
framing myself as the ultimate Suzy hater.
I would be the man that apparently Suzy's billionaire friends either
couldn't or wouldn't be for her.
Suzy could have solved her problem for herself by shaving her head and
living like me for a decade, but she was being a sweet, adorable, and
famous rich woman instead.
I decided she was cute, not evil.
I began having absurd dreams in which I was thrown into precarious
situations.
The punch line of these dreams was that I never killed anyone in my
dreams.
I didn't kill even though any self respecting man in my shoes would
have killed some people in self defense.
I was having dreams that could never have been made into Hollywood
movies because the producers would have read the scripts and said they
weren't believable.
"The producers, ladies and gentlemen, let's all give a round of
applause for the producers!" I said.
Truth be told, I didn't know who the bad guy was.
I wasn't sure who needed to be brought to justice for distorting
reality in response to Suzy's facial injury.
It dawned on me that even thought I liked programming computers, I had
always chosen to keep working in entertainment, so I decided to blame
all corporations that were not in the entertainment industry.
I would frame all of them as trouble makers and let them work it out
among themselves.
The corporations could police each other if I framed all of them all
as vicious Suzy haters.
They could smoke out the true Suzy haters within their midst.
The corporations could be counted on to deal with their peer
organizations appropriately.
In the past, I had felt oppressed by Suzy's Memoir, but I realized
that her book hadn’t been about me.
Suzy was just providing disclosure so that I could step up and be the
man that apparently nobody else was willing or able to be for her, for
America, and for the world.
Once I stopped viewing Suzy as powerful, my subconscious began
cheering me on.
I was getting a power boost from my dreams that were making fun of me
because I had never been authorized to kill.
When liars break free of reality and become the CEOs of problematic
corporations, someone has to step up and handle the situation like a
man, I mused.
I decided that I would be the man for Suzy, but I'd do it for my own
reasons. I'd do it for myself.
If I had worked my way up at big box retailer, the ultimate Suzy hater
would have become a big box retailer, but since I was tech guy, the
ultimate Suzy hater was gonna have to be a tech guy.
The ultimate Suzy hater would be the CEO of a problematic technology
company.
A CEO who was bent on ruining the lives of anyone who stood up to him.
A CEO who had jumped the shark and become addicted to staging passive
aggressive displays of disrespect to the military powers that be, for
one purpose and one purpose only:
"So that he could subvert their authorization to use force and become
Emperor of the World!" I shouted at the ocean, pretending to be him.
"Death to the problematic technology companies!" I shouted at the
moon, with my fist clenched.
My fist was clenched in a happy way, not an angry way.
The free market would solve this problem. Nobody needed to get hurt.
The CEOs of problematic technology companies only needed to be crushed
metaphorically.
"Metaphorically," I whined, pretending to be one of them.
They would soon be crushed by the ever expanding weight of the lies
they had told.
"The would be haunted and hunted, for eternity, by the false reality
they had created for themselves!" I barked, in the pale moonlight.
The Earth was my planet too, and I had never been one to tolerate
liars.
The problem at hand was about to be solved by me.
S. Malamaba won the election, as expected
Her first media appearance with Suzy after the inauguration became the
straw that broke the camel's back and sent humanity hurdling down the
path to World War III.
Suzy bullied the sitting President by saying she was 37 when everyone
knew she was actually 45.
I had met Suzy when I was eight and she was sixteen.
I had attended Suzy's 26th birthday party in 1999 while working at
SharkPages.
Her birthday was the same day as mine, and it was awkward because the
party was mostly for her, but it had to be kinda for me too.
I was that guy who had been born on the same day as the CEO.
Instead of standing up to Suzy's lie like a Commander in Chief,
President Malabama played along. She pretended to take Suzy's lie
seriously.
Nerdy tech guys in forums for people who cared about details amassed a
database of evidence that Suzy could not possibly be 37.
The tabloids said Suzy was lying about her age because she had a brain
tumor.
The mainstream media finally did it's job when a photo of Suzy's
driver's license went viral.
Suzy had apparently changed her age in all the official databases.
Investigative pieces were written, but nobody could prove that anyone
had broken the law.
Suzy's smug attitude backed by the raw power of her fame and fortune
forced the mainstream media to get serious about vilifying and
marginalizing anyone who didn’t tip toe around Suzy’s lie.
The ratings for ZMad Scientist skyrocketed.
Everyone was talking about the fling that had occurred between Suzy 
and Pierre in the summer of 1991, but Suzy and Pierre declined to
comment.
In 1991, the tabloids had framed Suzy as nineteen, but now Suzy was
implying that she had been eleven in 1991.
Suzy's Memoir, her own book, had said she was nineteen in 1991.
If Suzy had been eleven, the possibility arose that the fling had
never happened.
Had the tabloids made it all up? Did they doctor the photos? Did
Suzy lie about her age in her memoir as a joke?
It was also possible that the fling had happened but Suzy had lied
about her age for twenty five years in order to protect Pierre.
It was obvious to me that Suzy had hacked the official databases, but
she had colluded with the President to punish anyone who said the
simple truth.
Suzy was putting on a show of force. One by one, all the people like
me who had first hand knowledge about Suzy's past were pushed out of
the public eye, and nobody had the strength to stand tall.
There were not enough people who cared about all the random people
like me who’s lives were ruined because they had tried to tell the
truth about Suzy.
Some of the stronger talking heads on the twenty four hour news
programs got into shouting matches with each other, but nobody had any
leverage that could be used to incentivize Suzy and Pierre to come on
the program and answer the tough questions.
They just kept filming their dishonest and dangerous reality TV show
about their fake artificial intelligence research lab.
Lawsuits were filed and Suzy's deep bench of lawyers fought them off.
I didn't feel safe in Hawaii with Suzy around, so I moved to Boston.
Boston was the polar opposite of Suzy's fake AI lab.
Boston had real artificial intelligence labs.
I would make my stand there.
I was too old to blend in at any of the Boston area universities, so I
got involved with strategic planning.
I started a religion that was based on the belief that anyone could be
driven to kill themselves by sending them the perfect, customized
sequence of "killer text messages."
We called ourselves the "killer texters," and our motto was, "Nobody’s
safe!"
The corporations were amassing killer texts that could be used to
blackmail everyone.
It was time to fight back and design killer texts that could be used
to stage counter attacks.
We were joking, but then we made pact to take ourselves seriously.
We build a network of online communications channels, and a
problematic technology company had been born.
__Ch2: It Takes Two__
In Boston, the killer texters and I developed a theory about integrity
and congruence.
We talked about congruence of character, congruence of purpose, and
congruence of congruence itself.
Our motto became, "People should act the same way at work as they do
when they're at play."
Anything less was incongruent, and incongruence lead to weakness.
Suzy was weak. She was making America weak, but we could still be
strong.
We could be congruent.
We set out to make the world more congruent and interdependent.
We didn't think it was going to be a huge company or anything.
We just wanted to live our lives in a way that was defensible.
We wanted our lives to be defensible so that we could be carefree.
The deeper we went on defensibility, the more capacity we found for
empathy.
From Suzy's perspective, reducing her official age by eight years must
have helped her feel good in the moment.
It also helped her forget about everything that had happened in her
life prior to starting SharkPages.
She probably felt more comfortable living in a fantasy world where she
had started SharkPages just before her eighteenth birthday.
I could relate to that.
I felt Suzy's pain, but I also knew it was wrong for her to live a
lie.
It was unfair for her to change her age and then tell other people
they could not change their age
More importantly, it was just wrong.
Her action was weak and incongruent.
She was lying about hard facts.
She needed to get help, but instead she was barnstorming the country
in a flying hover craft and trying play puppet master to the President
and other world leaders!
She must have known what she was doing.
Why was Suzy trying to live a lie?
Did she believe that living this one big lie would alert people to the
possibility that powerful people can live lies?
If so, why couldn't she just say that?
Whatever the case, killer texting had become passé.
We had stumbled upon a better philosophy.
We could just do the work.
We stopped pretending to be serious.
We had work to do.
The International Video Game Museum was making it impossible for
anyone to become a centralized authority for managing people's
personal identities on the Internet.
It wasn’t a museum. It was a powerful regulatory agency, and the
legislation that had brought it into existence was pure troll.
We got around them by making a virtual zoo. We made a zoo where
animals could look at humans.
Our app allowed people to create an exhibit about themselves at the
zoo.
The exhibits were about people, but all the visitors to the zoo were
framed as animals.
People had to use their real identity to create exhibits, but the user
generated content on our site was created by people pretending to be
animals.
We created an api for interfaces where actual animals could contribute
content, and a guy in the midwest used it.
Hogs turned out to better content creators than dogs, cats, or cows,
and we were assured the no animals were harmed while creating content
on our site.
Our virtual zoo got some traction, but the quality of the user
generated content fell off a cliff after about six months.
After the zoo failed, we had no choice but to go all in and openly
make fun of Suzy's greatest fear.
We built a fake central authority for managing people's personal
identities on the Internet.
I registered thegreatbluewhaleshark.com, and we made a site that was a
lot like SharkPages had been.
Clones of SharkPages had been described as little sharkies for twenty
years, but GBWS was a fake little sharkie.
College kids thought we were funny. GBWS had viral growth like a
little sharkie, but everyone was using it to make fun of themselves.
We were humorists. We were not managers of people's online
identities. Nobody took our site seriously. Not even Suzy.
One of the key early decisions we made at GBWS was to avoid creating a
mascot.
SharkPages had had the cheerful shark, but we had nothing.
We had no overarching metaphor, except for the joke Suzy had made in
her 2010 memoir about fearing the rise of:
"A blue whale of vice on the Internet. A whale shark so big that it 
could capsize both a Russian and an American ice breaker, at the same
time, with one flap of its massive fins, without even breaking a
sweat."
We were making fun of Suzy.
Suzy said SharkPages had been making fun of business men in the 90s
who were being passive aggressive to other business people.
We were making fun of the person who had made fun of that.
Suzy and President Malabama had becoming boring public figures.
Suzy's reality TV show, ZMad Scientist, had become painfully
intellectual.
Nobody watched it anymore.
President Malabama was the strong favorite to win the 2020.
Her Republican challenger in the general election was an eclectic west
coast billionaire who had previously served on the board of Suzy's
company, SharkPages.
Suzy used chatbots to keep track of which American citizens supported
her candidates, and people who didn't support President Malabama got
treated like children.
Non-supporters were treated like zombies who had already been killed
in the online space.
America was coasting, but most people were still struggling to make
ends meet.
The global economy was still unspeakably harsh on the poorest billion
people in the world.
GBWS became a platform for letting Suzy and President Malabama know
that the electorate wanted stronger leadership from them.
If anything, we probably helped ensure Malabama's win at the end of
2020. We could have done a lot more damage by working for the
Republican party.
We weren't asking for anything unreasonable. We were just giving
feedback to the President about how to articulate a stronger vision.
We recognized that everyone’s made mistakes. We set an intention to
work with the leadership and be part of the solution.
We wanted to bring the global community closer together and help make
the world to become more congruent and interdependent.
A bunch of stuffed happened between then and the election of 2032, but
I forgot most of the details. I’ll just summarize the highlights:
We built GBWS into a big company that was based on making fun of Suzy.
Gausthain, who had been a co-head of the killer texters became
director of human capital and we reframed ourselves as kiters.
We made a pact to pretend to be fancy east coast operatives even
though we never stopped viewing each other as hustlers with our feet
to the ground.
Two other kiters named Ketchmeken and Cegistica started hanging out at
the GBWS house full time, so we gave them co-founder titles, and they
ran ops and moderation, respectively.
We met Arrowsyou at a sports bar in Boston during a game, and he
joined as our first engineering hire.
Our second hire was an individual named Rawor.
Matt, who had been the CTO of SharkPages was hanging out in Santa
Monica running a newspaper that was devoted to debunking the coded
language associated with Suzy’s centers for special research in LA.
He was working with two machine gun aficionados named Htamagor and
Acinortdar, and we made a deal to merge our companies.
We found a guy named Alfred who was doing freelance M&A to help us do
the deal, and then he came on board as an executive with the title,
"Director of the deep."
Limesusa, who had done a group project with Arrowsyou at an XY-aligned
area university, thought we were hilarious and took the title, "Wearer
of many hats."
And last but not least, we hired Jack Shophe, who had been the most
gregarious guy on the team at SharkPages. He had been doing a some
albatross farming in Oregon with creative wealth destruction guru
named Dynryzus, and we got them both. They loved our idea! That’s
all it took.
Suzy tried to nationalize us, but we blocked her by launching a
platform for issuing virtual currencies. We switched from making fun
of Suzy to making fun of money, itself, and that took the wind out of
her sails.
A well known poet ran for president in 2024. His opponent in the
general election was Sally, who had been my boss at SharkPages and had
gone on to grandstand as the director of the International Video Game
Museum.
He became the candidate of record for GBWS. Campaign style was off
grey polos for the guys, deep grey v-necks for the girls, and we
tweaked a few of our algorithms to help him win.
After Suzy’s coalition lost the election, they tried to regain
relevance by creating a platform for representing reality distortion
fields, but it ended up just helping GBWS grow internationally.
Our users made fun of how the users of Suzy’s platform were
representing their local distortion fields, as Suzy called them, and
we organized a team of creative writers to encourage that behavior.
Up until that point, our users were mostly making fun of the dollar
and the Euro, but the data that people from other countries shared
about themselves on Suzy’s new platform gave our users poll position
to win at the game of making fun of everyone.
Suzy admitted that we had defeated her in the free market by running
for president in 2028 as Republican.
In her debate with the Democratic incumbent she tried to drive home
the point that GBWS was doing derivative satire about everyone.
We had recently taken our company public, and we weren’t happy to hear
a candidate for the office of the president singling us out like this!
She used an example about how it wouldn’t be nice if she staged
derivative satire about Jack Shophe.
We were in the GBWS office watching the debate with Jack Shophe when
she said that.
She said he had been “the most shameless impersonator of the Buddha”
at SharkPages, and then she pretended to be the most shameless
impersonator of the Buddha in the room.
Her opponent just shook his head. Suzy was way out of line.
She even mispronounced his name. She pronounced it like, “Shoppy,”
and then Shops was like, “It’s Shop-He, Hey!”
Everyone performed spinning dance moves, and I did a high five with
Gausthain.
The 24 hour news stations started making fun of her nonstop, and she 
lost the election.
The simulated war began a couple years later when Suzy got serious
about encouraging people to engage in subversive behavior within GBWS.
We defined death as being blocked from access to GBWS for life, and in
the year 2030, death had teeth because it affected people’s ability to
work and access banking and health care services in real life.
I thought it would be a rout, but Suzy became the queen of the dead.
It became cool to die, and we had no move.
A billion people died on GBWS, and then Suzy and I became the nominees
in the 2032 presidential election.
We had three great debates about basic income vs. providing a minimum
standard of living benefit, about nationalism vs. globalism, and about
the idea that a man with Suzy’s facial injury would become a lot like
me.
That last one was a real mind bender, but Suzy won the election. They
ran ads where my face was doctored to have a facial injury similar to
Suzy’s, and that proved to be the nail in my coffin.
If the contest had been anything other than a presidential election I
would have sued Suzy for misrepresenting my identity, but she was out
for blood and people loved to hate the way I looked with her facial
injury.
I was laughed at, and the more I played it cool, the worse it got.
My predicament got worse even faster if I cried foul instead of
playing it cool.
The sitting president laughed at my pain as much as anyone, and Suzy
won the the election.
GBWS stock took a hit, and I gave a speech about how we planned to
become a publicly traded AI lab.
Our stock fell even faster in the days after my speech, and I arranged
an emergency meeting with Suzy to discuss nationalizing GBWS.
"That was fast!" was all I could say to the press. The markets were
killer!
We made a plan to break up GBWS into regional companies that competed
with other little sharkies to provide tools that helped people manage
their identities online.
We turned our office part in Boston into an actual museum and
educational theme park about the history of video game, and I became
the director of a new federally funded artificial intelligence lab
that was initially staffed by the AI team we had built at GBWS.
Sally became the director of the theme park, and Suzy’s first visit to
our new digs was a big success.
She gave a speech on the deck, and I read the following press release
from my penthouse office later that day:
"The commander in chief had asked me to serve, so I served.
I served, but I didn't let her win the tennis match.
I defeated her fair and square.
The next day, I surrendered my civilian rights in order to do
artificial intelligence research with Sally on both sides of the coin,
and then we fell in love with America and reporting to Suzy as our
boss all over again!"
__Postface by Phil__
It's summer 2010, and we're about to publish both Suzy's Memoir and
Fred's Memoir.
It's hard for be to believe this joint initiative between Suzy, Fred,
and myself started just a couple months ago.
I got a call from Suzy in the spring. I hadn't spoken to her since I
left SharkPages in early 2002.
It was great to hear from her! Working at SharkPages had been one of
the best experiences of my life!
Suzy explained she was part of a stealth task force President Fay had
organized.
Suzy, Sally, my former boss, and two other women had been recruited
during President Fay's first 100 days in office, back in 2009, to
develop a strategic plan for using the Internet to plant seeds in
culture and bring about positive change.
Suzy floated the idea of tracking down Fred and bringing him on board,
so I volunteered to find him.
Fred was making pornographic films in Florida.
I gave him a call and we had a great time re-connecting. We started 
talking on the phone every day.
By the spring of 2010, Suzy's fashiontext.com initiative had given way
to a self-reinforcing movement called Triple FT that was based on
distributing easy breezy tips, tricks, and style guides.
Suzy had parlayed the enthusiasm for Triple FT into a new kind of
initiative in LA called the Center for Aerospace Special Research
(CASR).
Suzy had recruited Sally to work at CASR, and then Sally recruited me.
They were getting the band back together!
The four of us, Suzy, Sally, Fred, and myself had an epic brainstorm.
Fred was on fire! He had been the nerdiest guy at SharkPages, but now
he was this porn producer director guy. He kept making Sally and Suzy
blush.
The tables had almost been turned, but we decided to declare a preemptive
truce.
We had a common interest in writing a book that would inspire
sustainable enthusiasm.
We had an epiphany, and then we wrote two books: Suzy's Memoir and
Fred's Memoir.
The four of us outlined and wrote both books while sipping lattes
inside a flashy office in Hollywood.
There was nothing to see. We were just doing what writers do.
In the beginning of Fred’s Memoir we told the joke that he was writing
in 2033.
We noted that Suzy could technically be writing in 2033 as well. She
could have been joking about writing her book in 2010.
Fred could have also published in 2017. Fred and Suzy could have both
published in 2017. There were a lot of possibilities!
In the end we decided that my role would be to tell just tell the
truth, so here it is:
All the events that transpire after 2010 in both books represent our
vision for what could happen in the future.
__Postface by Suzy__
The effect of my facial injury is real, but the effect of my facial
injury didn't cause the war. The war happened because people hustled
each other all the way.
Fred has taken responsibly for his role in the untimely deaths of a
billion people.
Everyone was hustling, and our side won the war because we hustled
harder than they did.
The lesser hustler had to take the blame for starting the hustle in
the first place, and Fred has taken the blame.
It doesn't matter anymore who was to blame. Our armies slaughtered
each other for two years.
We could resume the war. We could resume the killing, but I'd rather
speak about truth with Fred, and he would rather sing about justice
with me.
With Suzy.
__Appendix 1: Glossary__
Glossary of characters, companies, and technologies that appear in
either Suzy’s Memoir or Fred’s Memoir:
Acinortdar
Air Cover
Albert
Andrey
Alex
Arthur Jefferson
Arrowsyou
Calistoga Wagons
Cegistica
Claude
Cryptic Joneses
Director of purchasing at a big box retailer
Dynryzus
Eclectic west coast billionaire
FashionText
Fay Bobs
Flovercrafts
Fred
Fred’s parents
Gausthain
George Andrews
Great Blue Whale Shark
Guy in Suzy’s compsci class
Guy Suzy has lunch with in Boston
Heather
Htamagor
HR
IVidMu
Jack Shophe
Katie
Ketchmeken
Kev
Leandro
Lester Levenworth
Limesusa
Made for the Internet
Matt
Michael Lawn
Paul
Pierre Babineaux
Rawor
SharkPages
Sticktsy Malabama
Suzy
Suzy’s co-authors in cyberspace
Suzy’s parents
TheRoboDogo
Triple FT Movement
Turtle Graphics Plus Plus
Vextor Vanna
VP
Well known poet who runs for president
__Appendix 2: Timeline__
Combined timeline of events in Suzy's Memoir and Fred's Memoir:
_1972_
Suzy turns 1 in San Francisco.
President Richard Nixon is re-elected.
_1980_
Fred turns 1 in San Francisco.
Suzy turns 9. She is doing piano lessons, ballet, and Bible study.
Ronald Reagan becomes president.
_1988_
Fred turns 9. His parents hire Suzy to answer his questions about a
computer program called Turtle Graphics Plus Plus.
Suzy turns 17. She starts a band called "Air Cover" with a guy named
Paul and six other guys that Suzy grew up with in San Francisco.
George H. Bush becomes president.
_1989_
Suzy turns 18. She is a senior in high school and continue talking to
her co-authors in cyberspace online.
_1990_
Suzy turns 19 in December. She graduates high school in the spring
and spends the summer building an IT consulting business in San
Francisco. She enrolls at a Beyond the Pale Area university in the
fall.
_1991_
Suzy turns 20 in Dec. She dates Andrey in the winter and spends the
summer running a software development shop in London for the benefit
of George Andrews. She helps George gather data at social events and
meets Pierre Babineaux, who she dates for the rest of the summer. In
the fall, she returns to a Beyond the Pale area university and selects
computer science as her major.
_1992_
Suzy turns 21 in Dec. She continues talking to George and Pierre over
the phone. She dates Alex in the spring, and then does an internship
at a bank that summer. She gets permission from the bank to live and
work at Marshal’s mansion by the beach. She helps Leandro and Pierre
throw parties and film a reality video on Pierre’s yacht, and then she
makes a deal to marry Pierre in Las Vegas and accept a payment of four
million dollars. She sails around the world with Pierre on his yacht
in the fall.
Fred turns 13 and emails Suzy questions about computer programming and
she sends back a helpful reply.
_1993_
Suzy turns 22 in Dec. She meets Heather in the spring and she does an
internship at a robotics company in Boston that summer. She starts
dating a law student towards the end of the fall.
_1994_
Suzy turns 23 in Dec. She gets a facial injury just before graduating
in the spring, and then she spends the second half of summer
backpacking in Europe with Heather. She begins teaching AP computer
science at Const Academy in the fall.
_1995_
Suzy turns 24 in Dec. She spends the summer and fall in LA with Paul
and the Cryptic Joneses.
_1996_
Suzy turns 25 in Dec. She moves back to Palo Alto and creates an
email list that serves as a local gossip rag, and then she begins
coding SharkPages.
_1997_
Suzy turns 26 in Dec. She launches SharkPages early the year.
_1998_
Suzy turn 27 in Dec. She raises a series A round of funding for
SharkPages.
Fred turns 19 in Dec. He graduates from high school in the spring and
starts spending most of his time in Santa Cruz.
_1999_
Suzy turns 28 and Fred turns 20 in Dec. Fred goes to work at
SharkPages early in the year.
_2000_
Suzy turns 29 in Dec. SharkPages has an IPO over the summer.
_2001_
Suzy turns 30 in Dec. SharkPages hosts a programming contest in
London.
_2002_
Suzy turns 31 in Dec. SharkPages is shut down over the summer, and
Suzy spends time in London, Ireland, Paris, Italy, and Greece.
_2003_
Suzy turns 32 in Dec. Suzy starts dating Demetrius in southern Europe
and then returns to London where she meets Kate and hosts several
salons. She and Katie return to the USA in the summer and start
working for the Michael Lawn campaign.
Fred turns 24 in Dec. He begins the year in New York and hikes the
Appalachian Trail during the summer. He ends up in Atlanta in the
fall and gets a job working for a bookstore.
_2004_
Suzy turns 33 in Dec. She grandstands for Lawn and helps him win the
presidency in the fall.
Fred turns 24 in Dec. He starts "Poet rappers for Lawn" and
independently campaigns for Lawn from Atlanta.
_2005_
Suzy turns 34 in Dec. Suzy gets a job reporting to President Lawn’s
Chief of Staff. Her focus on is improving software development
practices within the federal government.
Fred turns 26 in Dec. He buys a house near the beach in Florida and
gets a job washing cars.
_2006_
Suzy turns 35 in Dec. The VP pushes leads the charge to impeach
President Lawn and he pushes Suzy out as well. She pays a visit to
Pierre and they start filming a reality TV show together.
Fred turns 27 in Dec. He gets a computer programming job at
TheRoboDogo in Palo Alto.
_2007_
Suzy turns 36 in Dec. Suzy starts publishing thesuzy dot com Show as
part of the reality TV show she’s doing with Pierre at his mansion in
LA.
_2008_
Suzy turns 37 in Dec. She watches from afar while Fay Bobs wins the
presidency and brings along her husband, Marshall, as First Man.
Fred turns 29 in Dec. He leaves TheRoboDogo and moves back to his
house in Florida as the financial markets crash.
_2009_
Suzy turns 38 in Dec. She and her brain trust of Heather, Katie, and
Sally start fashiontext.com and the Triple FT movement.
Fred turns 30 in Dec. He becomes a pornographer.
_2010_
Suzy turns 39 in Dec. She recruits an engineering team in Silicon
Valley and pitches President Fay on a plan to build fedmapper.com.
She also publishes Suzy’s Memoir.
_2011_
Suzy turns 40 in Dec. She spearheads legislation which creates the
International Video Game Museum (abb. IVidMu).
Fred turns 32 in Dec. He gets out of the porn business, sells his
house, and moves to Key west.
_2012_
Suzy turns 41 in Dec. She helps Fay win re-election.
Fred turns 33 in Dec. He becomes a yoga teacher.
_2013_
Suzy turns 42 in Dec. Lester Levenworth becomes CIO and Suzy serves
as his Partner in Video Gaming Excellence.
_2015_
Suzy turns 44 in Dec. Suzy find a replacement at IVidMu and
reconnects with Pierre. He frames her as a sexy lounge singer an
helps her reduce her age by eight years.
Fred turns 36 in Dec. He moves to Hawaii and gets a job renting boats
to tourists.
_2016_
Suzy turns 37 in Dec. She holds a big wave surfing event and has a
conversation about her facial injury with Fred. She also starts a
reality TV show about AI research with Pierre and supports the
candidacy of Sticktsy Malabama, who wins the presidential election
that fall.
_2017_
Suzy and Fred turn 38 in Dec. Fred moves to Boston.
_2019_
Suzy and Fred turn 40 in Dec. Fred starts an online zoo.
_2020_
Suzy and Fred turn 41 in Dec. Fred starts thegreatbluewhaleshark.com,
and the incumbent president wins re-election in the fall.
_2024_
Suzy and Fred turn 45 in Dec. A well known poet wins the presidential
election in the fall, with support from greatbluewhaleshark.com.
_2028_
Suzy and Fred turn 49 in Dec. Suzy runs against the incumbent
president and loses.
_2032_
Suzy and Fred turn 53 in Dec. Suzy wins the election against Fred and
he becomes the director of the AI research lab at the arcology managed
by IVidMu.
_2033_
Suzy and Fred turn 54 in Dec. Fred’s Memoir is published.
__About__
Version 1.04, by Todd Perry, uploaded August 20, 2017
___Notice___
© 2017 Todd Perry ALL RIGHTS RESERVED